The Project Gutenberg EBook of Some Phases of Sexual Morality and Church
Discipline in Colonial New England, by Charles Francis Adams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Some Phases of Sexual Morality and Church Discipline in Colonial New England

Author: Charles Francis Adams

Release Date: August 6, 2011 [EBook #36989]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME PHASES OF SEXUAL ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  SOME PHASES OF
  SEXUAL MORALITY AND CHURCH DISCIPLINE
  IN COLONIAL NEW ENGLAND.


  BY CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS.


  [REPRINTED FROM THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS
  HISTORICAL SOCIETY, JUNE, 1891.]


  CAMBRIDGE:
  JOHN WILSON AND SON.
  University Press.
  1891.




SOME PHASES OF SEXUAL MORALITY IN COLONIAL NEW ENGLAND.


In the year 1883 I prepared a somewhat detailed sketch of the history of
the North Precinct of the original town of Braintree, subsequently
incorporated as Quincy, which was published and can now be found in the
large volume entitled "History of Norfolk County, Massachusetts." In the
preparation of that sketch I had at my command a quantity of material of
more or less historical value,--including printed and manuscript records,
letters, journals, traditions both oral and written, etc.,--bearing on
social customs, and political and religious questions or conditions. The
study of this material caused me to use in my sketch the following
language:--

    "That the earlier generations of Massachusetts were either more
    law-abiding or more self-restrained than the later, is a proposition
    which accords neither with tradition nor with the reason of things.
    The habits of those days were simpler than those of the present; they
    were also essentially grosser. The community was small; and it hardly
    needs to be said that where the eyes of all are upon each, the general
    scrutiny is a safeguard to morals. It is in cities, not in villages,
    that laxity is to be looked for." But "now and again, especially in
    the relations between the sexes, we get glimpses of incidents in the
    dim past which are as dark as they are suggestive. Some such are
    connected with Quincy.... The illegitimate child was more commonly met
    with in the last than in the present century, and bastardy cases
    furnished a class of business with which country lawyers seem to have
    been as familiar then as they are with liquor cases now."[1]

Being now engaged in the work of revising and rewriting the sketch in
which this extract occurs, I have recently had occasion to examine again
the material to which I have alluded; and I find that, though the topic to
which it relates in part is one which cannot be fully and freely treated
in a work intended for general reading, yet the material itself contains
much of value and interest. Neither is the topic I have referred to in
itself one which can be ignored in an historical view, though, as I have
reason to believe, there has been practised in New England an almost
systematic suppression of evidence in regard to it; for not only are we
disposed always to look upon the past as a somewhat Arcadian period,--a
period in which life and manners were simpler, better and more genuine
than they now are,--not only, I say, are we disposed to look upon the past
as a sort of golden era when compared with the present, but there is also
a sense of filial piety connected with it. Like Shem and Japhet,
approaching it with averted eyes we are disposed to cover up with a
garment the nakedness of the progenitors; and the severe looker after
truth, who wants to have things appear exactly as they were, and does not
believe in the suppression of evidence,--the investigator of this sort is
apt to be looked upon as a personage of no discretion and doubtful
utility,--as, in a word, a species of modern Ham, who, having
unfortunately seen what ought to have been covered up, is eager, out of
mere levity or prurience, to tell his "brethren without" all about it.

On this subject I concur entirely in the sentiments of our orator, Colonel
Higginson, as expressed in his address at the Society's recent centennial.
The truth of history is a sacred thing,--a thing of far more importance
than its dignity,--and the truth of history should not be sacrificed to
sentiment, patriotism or filial piety. Neither, in like manner, when it
comes to scientific historical research, can propriety, whether of subject
or, in the case of original material, of language, be regarded. To this
last principle the published pages of Winthrop and Bradford bear evidence;
and, in my judgment, the Massachusetts Historical Society has, in a career
now both long and creditable, done nothing more creditable to itself than
in once for all, through the editorial action of Mr. Savage and Mr. Deane,
settling this principle in the publications referred to. I am, of course,
well aware that Mr. Savage did not edit Winthrop's History for this
Society, but nevertheless he is so identified with the Society that his
work may fairly be considered part of its record. Whether part of its
record or not, Mr. Savage and Mr. Deane,--than whom no higher authorities
are here recognized,--in the publications referred to, did settle the
principle that mawkishness is just as much out of place in scientific
historical research as prurience would be, or as sentiment, piety and
patriotism are. These last-named attributes of our nature, indeed,--most
noble, elevating and attractive in their proper spheres,--always have
been, now are, and I think I may safely say will long continue to be, the
bane of thorough historical research, and ubiquitous stumbling-blocks in
the way of scientific results.

But in the case of history, as with medicine and many other branches of
science and learning, there are, as I have already said, many matters
which cannot be treated freely in works intended for general
circulation,--matters which none the less may be, and often are, important
and deserving of thorough mention. Certainly they should not be ignored or
suppressed. And this is exactly one of the uses to which historical
societies are best adapted. Like medical and other similar associations,
historical societies are scientific bodies in which all subjects relating
to their department of learning both can and should be treated with
freedom, so that reference may be made, in books intended for popular
reading, to historical-society collections as pure scientific
depositories. It is this course I propose to pursue in the present case;
and such material at my disposal as I cannot well use freely in the work
upon which I am now engaged, will be incorporated in the present paper,
and made accessible in the printed Proceedings of the Society for such
general reference as may be desirable.

Among the unpublished material to which I have referred are the records of
the First Church of Quincy,--originally and for more than a century and a
half (1639-1792) the Braintree North Precinct Church. The volume of these
records covering the earliest period of the history of the Society cannot
now be found. It was in the possession of the church in 1739, for it was
then used and referred to by the Rev. John Hancock, father of the patriot,
and fifth pastor of the church, in the preparation of two centennial
sermons preached by him at that time; but eighty-five years later, when,
in 1824, the parish was separated from the town, the earliest book of
regular records then transferred from the town to the parish clerk went
no farther back than Jan. 17, 1708.

There is, however, another volume of records still in existence,
apparently not kept by the regular precinct clerk, the entries in which,
all relating to the period between 1673 and 1773, seem to have been made
by five successive pastors. Small and bound in leather, the paper of which
this volume is made up is of that rough, parchment character in such
common use during the last century, and the entries in it, in five
different handwritings, are in many cases scarcely legible, and frequently
of the most confidential character. In the main they are records of
births, baptisms, marriages and deaths; but some of them relate to matters
of church discipline, and these throw a curious light on the social habits
of a period now singularly remote. In view of what this volume contains,
the loss of the previous volume containing the record of the church's
spiritual life from the time it was organized to 1673, a period of
thirty-four years, becomes truly an _hiatus valde deflendus_.[2]

For a full understanding of the situation it is merely necessary further
to say that, during the period to which all the entries in the volume from
which I am about to quote relate, Braintree was a Massachusetts sea-board
town of the ordinary character. It numbered a population ranging from
some seven hundred souls in 1673, to about twenty-five hundred a century
later; the majority of whom during the first half of the eighteenth
century lived in the North Precinct of the original town, now Quincy. The
meeting-house, about which clustered the colonial village, stood on the
old Plymouth road, between the tenth and the eleventh mile-posts south of
Boston. The people were chiefly agriculturists, living on holdings
somewhat widely scattered; the place had no especial trade or leading
industry, and no commerce; so that, when describing the country a few
years before, in 1660,--and since then the conditions had not greatly
changed,--Samuel Maverick said of Braintree,--"It subsists by raising
provisions, and furnishing Boston with wood."[3] In reading the following
extracts from the records, it is also necessary to bear in mind that
during the eighteenth century the whole social and intellectual as well as
religious life of the Massachusetts towns not only centred about the
church, but was concentrated in it. The church was practically a club as
well as a religious organization. An inhabitant of the town excluded from
it or under its ban became an outcast and a pariah.

The following entry is in the handwriting of the Rev. Moses Fiske, pastor
of the church during thirty-six years, from 1672 to 1708, and it bears
date March 2, 1683:--

    "Temperance, the daughter of Brother F----, now the wife of John
    B----, having been guilty of the sin of Fornication with him that is
    now her husband, was called forth in the open Congregation, and
    presented a paper containing a full acknowledgment of her great sin
    and wickedness,--publickly bewayled her disobedience to parents,
    pride, unprofitableness under the means of grace, as the cause that
    might provoke God to punish her with sin, and warning all to take heed
    of such sins, begging the church's prayers, that God would humble her,
    and give a sound repentance, &c. Which confession being read, after
    some debate, the brethren did generally if not unanimously judge that
    she ought to be admonished; and accordingly she was solemnly
    admonished of her great sin, which was spread before her in divers
    particulars, and charged to search her own heart wayes and to make
    thorough work in her Repentance, &c. from which she was released by
    the church vote unanimously on April 11{th} 1698."

The next entry of a case of church discipline is of a wholly different
character. The individual subjected to it bore the same family name as
the earliest minister of the town, the Rev. William Tompson, who was the
first to subscribe the original covenant of Sept. 16, 1639, but was not
descended from him. Neither must this Samuel Tomson, or Tompson, be
confounded with Deacon Samuel Tompson, who, born in 1630, lived in
Braintree, and whose name is met with on nearly every page of the earlier
records. The Samuel Tompson referred to in the following entry seems to
have been the son of the deacon, and was born Nov. 6, 1662. His name
frequently appears in the town records, and usually (pp. 29, 35, 39, 40),
as dissenting from some vote providing for the minister's salary or the
maintenance of the town school. He was, though the son of a deacon,
evidently a man otherwise-minded. This entry, like the previous one, is in
the handwriting of Mr. Fiske.

    "Samuel Tomson, a prodigie of pride, malice and arrogance, being
    called before the church in the Meeting-house 28, July, 1697, for his
    absenting himselfe from the Publike Worshipe, unlesse when any
    strangers preached; his carriage being before the Church proud and
    insolent, reviling and vilifying their Pastor, at an horrible rate,
    and stileing him their priest, and them a nest of wasps; and they
    unanimously voated an admonition, which was accordingly solemnly and
    in the name of Christ, applyed to him, wherein his sin and wickedness
    was laid open by divers Scriptures for his conviction, and was warned
    to repent, and after prayer to God this poor man goes to the tavern to
    drink it down immediately, as he said, &c."

Then, under date of August 27, 1697, a month later, Mr. Fiske proceeds:--

    "He delivered to me an acknowledgment in a bit of paper at my house in
    the presence of Leif't Marsh and Ensign Penniman, who he brought.
    'Twas read before the Church at a meeting appointed 12. 8. They being
    not willing to meet before. Leif't Col. Quinsey gave his testimony
    against it, and said that his conversation did not agree therewith."

The next entry, also in the same handwriting, is dated Dec. 25, 1697:--

    "At the church meeting further testimony came in against him: the
    church generally by vote and voice declared him impenitent, and I was
    to proceed to an ejection of him, by a silent vote in Public. But I
    deferred it, partly because of the severity of the winter, but
    chiefly for that his pretended offence was originally against myself,
    and [he] had said I would take all advantages against him, I deferred
    the same, and because 4 or 5 of the brethren did desire that he might
    be called before the church to see if he would own what they asserted:
    and having ________ the church, 1 April, 98, he came, brought an
    additional acknowledgment. Of 15 about 9 or 10 voted to accept of it,
    &c."

This occurred on the 11th of April, 1698; and on the 17th Mr. Fiske
proceeds:--

    "After the end of the public worship his confession was read
    publickly, and the major part of the Church voted his absolution."

The next case of discipline in order of the entries relates to an earlier
period, 1677. It records the excommunication of one Joseph Belcher. The
proceedings took place at meetings held on the 7th of October and the 11th
of November.

    "Joseph Belcher, a member of this Church though not in full communion,
    being sent for by the Church, after they had resolved to inquire into
    the matter of scandall, so notoriously infamous both in Court and
    Country, by Deacon Basse and Samuel Tompson, to give an account of
    these things; they returning with this answer from him, that he would
    consider of it and send the church word the next Sabbath, whether he
    would come or no; on which return by a script, whereunto his name was
    subscribed, which he also owned to the elder, in private the weeke
    after, wherein he scornfully and impudently reflected upon the officer
    and church, and rudely refused to have anything to doe with us; so
    after considerable waiting, he persisting in his impenitence and
    obstinacy, (the Elders met at Boston unanimously advising thereto) the
    Church voted his not hearing of them, some few brethren not acting,
    doubting of his membership but silent. He was proceeded against
    according to Matthew 18, 17,[4] and rejected."

The next entry also records a case of excommunication, under date of May
4, 1683:--

    "Isaac Theer, (the son of Brother Thomas Theer) being a member of this
    Church but not in full communion, having been convicted of notorious
    scandalous thefts multiplied, as stealing pewter from Johanna
    Livingstone, stealing from John Penniman cheese, &c., and others, and
    stealing an horse at Bridgewater, for which he suffered the law, after
    much laboring with him in private and especially by the officers of
    the church, to bring [him] to a thorough sight and free and ingenuous
    confession of his sin; as also for his abominably lying, changing his
    name, &c., was called forth in public, moved pathetically to
    acknowledge his sin and publish his repentance, who came down and
    stood against the lower end of the foreseat after he had been
    prevented (by our shutting the east door) from going out; stood
    impudently, and said indeed he owned his sin of stealing, was heartily
    sorry for it, begged pardon of God and men, and hoped he should do so
    no more, which was all he could be brought unto, saying his sin was
    already known, and that there was no need to mention it in particular,
    all with a remisse voice, so that but few could hear him. The Church
    at length gave their judgment against him, that he was a notorious,
    scandalous sinner, and obstinately impenitent. And when I was
    proceeding to spread before him his sin and wickedness, he (as 'tis
    probable), guessing what was like to follow, turned about to goe out,
    and being desired and charged to tarry and hear what the church had to
    say to him, he flung out of doors, with an insolent manner, though
    silent. Therefore the Pastor applied himself to the congregation, and
    having spread before them his sin, partly to vindicate the church's
    proceeding against him, and partly to warn others; sentence was
    declared against him according to Matthew 18, 17."

The next also is a case of excommunication. It appears from the records
(p. 658) that "Upon the 9{th} day of August ther went out a fleet
Souldiers to Canadee in the year 1690, and the small pox was abord, and
they died, sixe of it; four thrown overbord at Cap an." Among these four
was Ebenezer Owen, who left a widow and a brother Josiah; and it is to
them that this entry relates:--

    "Josiah Owen, the son of William Owen (whose parents have been long in
    full communion), a child of the covenant, who obtained by fraud and
    wicked contrivance by some marriage with his brother Ebenezer Owen's
    widdow, as the Pastor of the church had information by letters from
    the Court of Assistance touching the sentence there passed upon her
    (he making his escape). And living with her as an husband, being, by
    the Providence of God, surprised at his cottage by the Pastor of the
    Church with Major Quinsey and D. Tompson (of whom reports were that he
    was gone, we intending to discourse with her and acquaint [her] with
    the message received from the said Court informing her ________ their
    appointment of an open confession of their sin in the congregation),
    he was affectionately treated by them, and after much discourse,
    finding him obstinate and reflecting, he was desired and charged to be
    present the next Sabbath before the Church, to hear what should be
    spoken to him, but he boldly replied he should not come. And being
    after treated by D. Tompson and his father to come, and taking his
    opportunity to carry her away the last weeke, after a solemn sermon
    preached on 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4 and 5,[5] and prayers added, an account was
    given to the church and congregation of him, the Brethren voting him
    to be an impenitent, scandalous, wicked, incestuous sinner, and giving
    their consent that the sentence of excommunication should be passed
    upon and declared against him, which was solemnly performed by the
    Pastor of the Church according to the direction of the Apostle in the
    above mentioned text: this 17 of January, 1691/2."

The above, four in number, are all the cases of church discipline recorded
as having been administered during the Fiske pastorate. Considering that
this pastorate covered more than a third of a century, and that during it
the original township had not yet been divided into precincts,--all the
inhabitants of what are now Quincy, Randolph and Holbrook as well as those
of the present Braintree, being included in the church to which Mr. Fiske
ministered,--the record indicates a high standard of morality and order.
The town at that time had a population of about seven hundred souls, which
during the next pastorate increased to one thousand.

Mr. Fiske died on the 10th of August, 1708, and the Rev. Joseph Marsh was
ordained as his successor on the 18th of the following May (1709). At this
time the town was divided for purposes of religious worship into two
precincts, the Records of the North Precinct--now Quincy--beginning on the
17th of January, 1708. It then contained, "by exact enumeration,"
seventy-two families, or close upon four hundred souls. The record now
proceeds in the handwriting of Mr. Marsh:--

    "The first Church meeting after my settlement was in August 4, 1713,
    in the meeting-house. It was occasioned by the notoriously scandalous
    life of James Penniman, a member of the Church, though not in full
    communion. The crimes charged upon him and proved were his
    unchristian carriage towards his wife, and frequent excessive
    drinking. He behaved himself very insolently before the church when
    allowed to speak in vindication of himself, and was far from
    discovering any signs of true repentance. He was unanimously voted
    guilty and laid under solemn admonition by the Church."

The next entry is one of eight years later, and reads as follows:--

    "1721. Samuel Hayward was suspended from the Lord's supper by the
    Brethren for his disorderly behaviour in word and deed, and his
    incorrigibleness therein."

Up to this time it had been the custom of the Braintree church that any
person "propounded" for membership should, before being admitted, give an
oral or written relation of his or her religious experience,--a practice
in strict accordance with the usage then prevailing, with perhaps a few
exceptions, throughout Massachusetts.[6] The record, under date of
December 31, 1721, contains the following in relation to this:--

    "Dr. Belcher's son Joseph, junior Sophister, [admitted.] He made the
    last Relation, before the brethren consented to lay aside Relations.

    "Because some persons of a sober life and good conversation have
    signified their unwillingness to join in full communion with the
    Church, unless they may be admitted to it without making a Public
    Relation of their spiritual experiences, which (they say) the Church
    has no warrant in the word of God to require, it was therefore
    proposed to the Church the last Sacrament-day that they would not any
    more require a Relation as above said from any person who desired to
    partake in the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper with us, and after the
    case had been under debate at times among the brethren privately for
    the space of three weeks, the question was put to them January 28
    1721/2 being on a Lord's Day Evening in the Meeting-house, whether
    they would any more insist upon the making a Relation as a necessary
    Term of full communion with them?

    "It passed in the negative by a great majority."

Two months later the case of James Penniman again presented itself. It was
now nearly nine years since he had been solemnly admonished; and on the
4th of April, 1722,--

    "Sabbath day. It was proposed to the church last Sabbath to
    excommunicate James Penniman for his contumacy in sin, but this day
    he presented a confession, which was read before the Congregation, and
    prayed that they would wait upon him awhile longer, which the Church
    consented to, and he was again publicly admonished, and warned against
    persisting in the neglect of Public Worship, against Idleness,
    Drunkenness and Lying; and he gave some slender hopes of Reformation,
    seemed to be considerably affected, and behaved himself tolerably
    well."

The following entries complete the record during the Marsh pastorate of
sixteen years, which ended March 8, 1726, Mr. Marsh then dying in his
forty-first year:--

    "September 9. Brother Joseph Parmenter made a public Confession, in
    the presence of the Congregation for the sin of drunkenness.

    "September 21. At a Church meeting of the Brethren to consider his
    case, the question was put whether they would accept his confession
    [to] restore him; it passed in the negative, because he has made
    several confessions of the sin, and is still unreformed thereof: the
    Brethren concluded it proper to suspend him from Communion in the
    Lord's Supper, for his further humiliation and warning. He was
    accordingly suspended.

    "March 3{d}, 1722-3. Sabbath Evening. Brother Parmenter having behaved
    himself well (for aught anything that appears) since his suspension,
    was at his desire restored again by a vote of the Brethren, _nemine
    contradicente_.

    "March 10. Joseph, a negro man, and Tabitha his wife made a public
    confession of the sin of fornication, committed each with the other
    before marriage, and desired to have the ordinance of Baptism
    administered to them.

    "May 26. The Brethren of the Church met together to consider what is
    further necessary to be done by the Church towards the reformation of
    James Penniman. He being present desired their patience towards him,
    and offered a trifling confession, which was read, but not accepted by
    the Brethren, because he manifested no sign of true repentance
    thereof: they came to (I think) a unanimous vote that he should be
    cast out of the Church for his incorrigibleness in his evil waies,
    whenever I shall see good to do it, and I promised to wait upon him
    some time, to see how he would behave himself before I proceeded
    against him.

    "At the same church meeting Major Quincey was fairly and clearly
    chosen by written votes to the office of tuning the Psalm in our
    Assemblies for Public Worship.

    "January 26, 1723/4 Lord's-day. In the afternoon, after a sermon on 1
    Cor. 5.5.[7] James Penniman persisting in a course of Idleness,
    Drunkenness, and in a neglect of the Public Worship, &c. had the
    fearfull sentence of excommunication pronounced upon him.

    "February 2, 1723/4. Lord's Day. After the public service the Church
    being desired to stay voted--that Benjamin Neal, David Bass and Joseph
    Neal jun. members in full communion have discovered such a perverse
    spirit and been guilty of such disorderly behaviour in the House and
    Worship of God that they deserve to be suspended from communion with
    us at the Lord's table.

    "February 9. Lord's Day evening. David Bass acknowledging his
    offensive behavior and promising to be more watchfull for time to
    come, the brethren signified their consent that he be restored to full
    communion with them.

    "March 1. This day (being Sacrament day) Benjamin Neal and Joseph
    Neal, confessing their offensive behavior in presence of the Brethren,
    were restored to the liberty of full communion."

The above are all the record entries relating to matters of discipline
during the Marsh pastorate, which ended March 8, 1726. They cover a period
of sixteen years. On the 2d of November following the Rev. John Hancock
was ordained, and the following entries are in his handwriting:--

    "January 21, 1728. Joseph P---- and Lydia his wife made a confession
    before the Church which was well accepted for the sin of Fornication
    committed with each other before marriage.

    "August 12, 1728. The Church met again at the house of Mrs. Marsh to
    examine into the grounds of some scandalous reports of the conduct of
    Brother David Bass on May the 29{th} who was vehemently suspected of
    being confederate with one Roger Wilson in killing a lamb belonging to
    Mr. Edward Adams of Milton. The witnesses, viz. Capt. John Billings,
    Mr. Edward and Samuel Capons of Dorchester, being present, the Church
    had a full hearing of the case, who unanimously agreed that brother
    Bass, though he denied the fact of having an hand in killing the lamb,
    yet was guilty of manifest prevaricating in the matter, and could not
    be restored to their communion without giving them satisfaction, and
    desired the matter might be suspended.

    "[Nov. 11, 1728.] On Monday November the 11, 1728 we had another
    church meeting to hear and consider Brother David Bass's confession,
    which (after some debate) was accepted; and it was unanimously voted
    by the Church that it should be read before the whole Congregation,
    with which brother Bass would by no means comply, and so the matter
    was left at this meeting.

    "But on December the 15 following David Bass's confession was read
    publicly before the Church and Congregation, which he owned publicly,
    and was accepted by the brethren by a manual vote.

    "November 17, 1728. Mehetabel the wife of John B---- Jun{r} made a
    confession before the Church and Congregation for the sin of
    fornication, which was well accepted.

    "September 28, 1729. Elizabeth M---- made a confession before the
    whole congregation for the sin of fornication, which was accepted by
    the Church.

    "July 2, 1732. Abigail, wife of Joseph C----, made a confession of the
    sin of fornication, which was well accepted by the Church, though she
    was ill and absent.

    "August 6, 1732. Ebenezer H---- and wife made their confession of the
    sin of fornication.

    "July 1, 1733. Tabitha, a servant of Judge Quincy, and a member of
    this Church, made her confession for stealing a 3 pound bill from her
    Master, which was accepted.

    "August 11, 1734. Nathan S---- and wife made their confession of the
    sin of fornication which was well accepted by the church.

    "September 28, 1735. Elizabeth P----, widow, made her confession of
    the sin of fornication and was accepted.

    "[Sept. 8, 1735.] At a meeting of the First Church of Christ in
    Braintree at the house of the Pastor, September the 8{th} 1735, after
    prayer--Voted, That it is the duty of this Church to examine the
    proofs of an unhappy quarrel between Benjamin Owen and Joseph Owen,
    members in full communion with this Church on May 30{th} 1735, whereby
    God has been dishonored and religion reproached.

    "After some examination thereof it was unanimously voted by the
    brethren--That the Pastor should ask Benjamin Owen whether he would
    make satisfaction to the Church for his late offensive behaviour,
    which he refused to do in a public manner, unless the charge could be
    more fully proved upon him. Whereupon there arose several debates upon
    the sufficiency of the proof to demand a publick confession of him;
    and there appearing different apprehensions among the brethren about
    it, it was moved by several that the meeting should be adjourned for
    further consideration of the whole affair.

    "Before the meeting was adjourned Benjamin Web acquainted the brethren
    with some scandalous reports he had heard of Elizabeth Morse, a member
    of this Church, when it was unanimously voted to be the duty of this
    Church to choose a Committee to examine into the truth of them and
    make report to the Church. And Mr. Benjamin Web, Mr. Moses Belcher
    Jun{r} and Mr. Joseph Neal, Tert. were chose for the committee.

    "Then the meeting was adjourned to the 29{th} Inst. at 2 oclock P. M.

    "The brethren met upon the adjournment, and after humble supplication
    to God for direction, examined more fully the proofs of the late
    quarrel between Benj. Owen and Joseph Owen but passed no vote upon
    them.

    "[Oct. 22, 1735.] At a meeting of the 1{st} Church in Braintree at the
    house of the Pastor, Oct. 22, 1735--after prayer, Benj. Owen offered
    to the brethren a confession of his late offensive behavior which was
    not accepted.

    "Then it was voted by the brethren that he should make confession of
    his offence in the following words, viz: Whereas I have been left to
    fall into a sinful strife and quarrel with my brother Joseph Owen, I
    acknowledge I am greatly to blame that I met my brother in anger and
    strove with him, to the dishonor of God, and thereby also have
    offended my Christian brethren. I desire to be humbled before God, and
    to ask God's forgiveness; I desire to be at peace with my brother, and
    to be restored to the charity of this Church, and your prayers to God
    for me.

    "To which he consented, as also to make it in public.

    "At the desire of the brethren the meeting was adjourned to Friday the
    24 Inst. at 4 o'clock P. M. that they might satisfy themselves
    concerning the conduct of Joseph Owen in the late sinful strife
    between him and his brother. And the Pastor was desired to send to him
    to be present at the adjournment.

    "The brethren met accordingly, and after a long consideration of the
    proof had against Joseph Owen, it was proposed to the brethren whether
    they would defer the further consideration of Joseph Owen's affair to
    another opportunity. It was voted in the negative.

    "Whereupon a vote was proposed in the following words viz: Whether it
    appears to the brethren of this Church that the proofs they have had
    against Joseph Owen in the late unhappy strife between him and his
    brother be sufficient for them to demand satisfaction from him. Voted
    in the affirmative.

    "And the satisfaction the brethren voted he should make for his
    offence was in the following words:--I am sensible that in the late
    unhappy and sinful strife between me and my brother Benj. Owen, I am
    blameworthy, and I ask forgiveness of God and this Church, and I
    desire to be at peace with my brother and ask your prayers to God for
    me.

    "Then it was proposed to the brethren whether they would accept this
    confession, if Joseph Owen would make it before them at the present
    meeting--Voted in the negative.

    "Whereupon it was voted that he should make this satisfaction for his
    offence before the Church upon the Lord's day immediately before the
    administration of the Lord's supper. With which he refusing to comply
    though he consented to make it before the Church at the present
    meeting, the meeting was dissolved.

    "October 26, 1735. Benj'n Owen made a public confession of his
    offence, and was restored to the charity of the Church.

    "Memorandum. At the adjournment of the Church meeting Sept. the 29{th}
    1735, Mr. Moses Belcher and Mr. Joseph Neal, two of the committee
    chosen Sept. the 8{th}, made report to the brethren, that they had
    been with Eliz. Morse, and that she owned to them she had been
    delivered of two bastard children since she had made confession to the
    church of the sin of fornication, and she promised them to come and
    make the Church satisfaction for her great offence the latter end of
    October.

    "[Nov. 10, 1735.] At a church meeting, Nov. 10{th}, 1735, the case of
    Elizabeth Morse came under consideration. And she having neglected to
    come and make satisfaction for her offence according to her promise,
    though she was in Town at that time, the brethren proceeded and
    unanimously voted her suspension from the communion of this church. It
    was likewise unanimously voted that the Pastor should admonish her in
    the name of the Church in a letter for her great offence.

    "Upon a motion made by some of the brethren to reconsider the vote of
    the church Oct. 24 relating to Joseph Owen, it was voted to reconsider
    the same. Voted also that his confession be accepted before the
    brethren at the present meeting, which was accordingly done, and he
    was restored to their charity.

    "December 7, 1735. Lieutenant Joseph Crosbey made confession of the
    sin of fornication, and was restored to the charity of the church.

    "December 21, 1735. John Beale made confession of the sin of
    fornication, and was restored to the charity of the brethren.

    "April 18, 1736. Susanna W---- made confession of the sin of
    fornication, and was restored to the charity of the brethren.

    "May 1, 1737. Sam P---- and wife made public confession of the sin of
    fornication. Accepted.

    "January 22, 1737/8. Charles S---- and wife made a public confession
    of the sin of fornication.

    "June 11, 1738. Benj'n Sutton and Naomi his wife, free negroes, made
    confession of fornication.

    "December 17, 1738. Jeffry, my servant, and Flora, his wife, servant
    of Mr. Moses Belcher, negroes, made confession of the sin of
    fornication.

    "May 20{th}, 1739. Benjamin C---- and wife, of Milton, made confession
    of fornication.

    "Jan'y 20, 1739/40. Joseph W---- and wife confessed the sin of
    fornication.

    "October 25, 1741. This Church suspended from their communion Eleazer
    Vesey for his disorderly unchristian life and neglecting to hear the
    Church, according to Matt. 18, 17."

The Hancock pastorate lasted eighteen years, ending with Mr. Hancock's
death on the 7th of May, 1744; and no record of cases of church discipline
seems to have been kept by any of his successors in the pulpit of the
North Precinct church. In the year 1750 Braintree probably contained some
eighteen hundred or two thousand inhabitants, and during the half-century
between 1725 and 1775 there is no reason to suppose that any considerable
change took place in their condition, whether social, material or
religious. It was a period of slow maturing. The absence of a record,
therefore, in no way implies change; if it indicates anything at all in
this case, it indicates merely that the successors to Mr. Hancock, either
because they were indolent or because they saw no advantage in so doing,
made no written mention of anything relating to the church's life or
action beyond what was contained in the book regularly kept by the
precinct clerk. There are but two exceptions to this, both consisting of
brief entries made, the one by the Rev. Lemuel Bryant, the immediate
successor of Mr. Hancock, the other by the Rev. Anthony Wibird, who in
1755 followed Mr. Bryant. Both entries are to be found on the second page
of the volume from which all the extracts relating to church discipline
have been taken. Mr. Bryant was for his time an advanced religious
thinker, and, as is invariably the case with such, he failed to carry the
whole of his flock along with him. Owing to declining health he resigned
his pastorate in October, 1753, having exactly two months before recorded
the following case of discipline:--

    "August 22, 1753. Ebenezer Adams was Suspended from the Communion of
    the Church for the false, abusive and scandalous stories that his
    Unbridled Tongue had spread against the Pastor, and refusing to make a
    proper Confession of his monstrous wickedness."

The other of these two records bears date almost exactly twenty years
later, and was doubtless made because of the preceding entry. It is very
brief, and as follows:--

    "November 3, 1773. The Church made choice of Ebenezer Adams for
    deacon, in the place of deacon Palmer, who resigned the stated
    exercise of his office."

After 1741, therefore, the only records of the North Precinct church are
those contained in the book kept by the successive precinct clerks, which
has often been consulted, but never copied. None of the entries in it
relate to cases of discipline or to matters spiritual, they being almost
exclusively prudential in character. No record is made of births,
baptisms, deaths or marriages, which were still for several years to come
noted in the small volume from which I have quoted. Accordingly the
Braintree North Precinct records after Mr. Hancock's ministry are of far
inferior interest, though as the volume containing them from 1709 to 1766
distinctly belongs to what are known as "ancient records," and as such is
liable at any time to be lost or destroyed, I have caused a copy of it to
be made, and have deposited it for safe keeping in the library of this
Society. An examination of this volume only very occasionally brings to
light anything which is of more than local interest, or which has a
bearing on the social or religious conditions of the last century, though
here and there something is found which constitutes an exception to this
rule. Such, for instance, is the following entry in the record of the
proceedings of a Precinct meeting held on the 19th of July, 1731, to take
measures for properly noticing the completion of the new meeting-house
then being built:--

    "After a considerable debate with respect to the raising of the new
    meeting-house, &c., the Question was put whether the committee should
    provide Bred Cheap Sugar Rum Sider and Bear &c. for the Raising of
    said Meeting House at the Cost of the Precinct. It passed in the
    affirmative."

I have been unable to discover any subsequent detailed statement of
expenses incurred and disbursements made under the authority conferred by
this vote. Such a document might be interesting. Two years before, when in
1729 the Rev. Mr. Jackson was ordained as pastor of the church of Woburn,
among the items of expense were four, aggregating the sum of L23 1_s._,
representing the purchase of "6 Barrels and one half of Cyder, 28 Gallons
of Wine, 2 Gallons of Brandy and four of Rum, Loaf Sugar, Lime Juice, and
Pipes," all, it is to be presumed, consumed at the time and on the spot.

It has of course been noticed that a large proportion of the entries I
have quoted relate to discipline administered in cases of fornication, in
many of which confession is made by husband and wife, and is of acts
committed before marriage. The experience of Braintree in this respect
was in no way peculiar among the Massachusetts towns of the last century.
While examining the Braintree records I incidentally came across a
singular and conclusive bit of unpublished documentary evidence on this
point in the records of the church of Groton; for, casually mentioning one
day in the rooms of the Society the Braintree records to our librarian,
Dr. S. A. Green, he informed me that the similar records of the Groton
church were in his possession, and he kindly put them at my disposal.
Though covering a later period (1765-1803) than the portion of the
Braintree church records from which the extracts contained in this paper
have been made, the Groton records supplement and explain the Braintree
records to a very remarkable degree. In the latter there is no vote or
other entry showing the church rule or usage which led to these
post-nuptial confessions of ante-marital relations; but in the Groton
records I find the following among the preliminary votes passed at the
time of signing the church covenant, regulating the admission of members
to full communion:--

    "June 1, 1765. The church then voted with regard to Baptizing children
    of persons newly married, That those parents that have not a child
    till seven yearly months after Marriage are subjects of our Christian
    Charity, and (if in a judgment of Charity otherwise qualified) shall
    have the privilege of Baptism for their Infants without being
    questioned as to their Honesty."

This rule prevailed in the Groton church for nearly forty years, until in
January, 1803, it was brought up again for consideration by an article in
the warrant calling a church meeting "to see if the church will reconsider
and annul the rule established by former vote and usage of the church
requiring an acknowledgment before the congregation of those persons who
have had a child within less time than seven yearly months after marriage
as a term of their having baptism for their children."

The compelling cause to the confessions referred to was therefore the
parents' desire to secure baptism for their offspring during a period when
baptism was believed to be essential to salvation, with the Calvinistic
hell as an alternative. The constant and not infrequently cruel use made
by the church and the clergy of the parental fear of infant
damnation--the belief "that Millions of Infants are tortured in Hell to
all Eternity for a Sin that was committed thousands of Years before they
were born"--is matter of common knowledge. Not only did it compel young
married men and women to shameful public confessions of the kind which has
been described, but it was at times arbitrarily used by some ministers in
a way which is at once ludicrous and, now, hard to understand. Certain of
them, for instance, refused to baptize infants born on the Sabbath, there
being an ancient superstition to the effect that a child born on the
Sabbath was also conceived on the Sabbath; a superstition presumably the
basis on which was founded the provision of the apocryphal Blue Laws of
Connecticut,--

  "Whose rule the nuptial kiss restrains
  On Sabbath day, in legal chains";[8]

and there is one well-authenticated case of a Massachusetts clergyman
whose practice it was thus to refuse to baptize Sabbath-born babes, who in
passage of time had twins born to him on a Lord's day. He publicly
confessed his error, and in due time administered the rite to his
children.[9]

With the church refusing baptism on the one side, and with an eternity of
torment for unbaptized infants on the other, some definite line had to be
drawn. This was effected through what was known as "the seven months'
rule"; and the penalty for its violation, enforced and made effective by
the refusal of the rites of baptism, was a public confession. Under the
operation of "the seven months' rule" the records of the Groton church
show that out of two hundred persons owning the baptismal covenant in that
church during the fourteen years between 1761 and 1775 no less than
sixty-six confessed to fornication before marriage.[10] The entries
recording these cases are very singular. At first the full name of the
person, or persons in the case of husband and wife, is written, followed
by the words "confessed and restored" in full. Somewhat later, about the
year 1763, the record becomes regularly "Confessed Fornication;" which two
years later is reduced to "Con. For.;" which is subsequently still further
abbreviated into merely "C. F." During the three years 1789, 1790 and
1791 sixteen couples were admitted to full communion; and of these nine
had the letters "C. F." inscribed after their names in the church records.

I also find the following in regard to this church usage in Worthington's
"History of Dedham" (pp. 108, 109), further indicating that the Groton and
Braintree records reveal no exceptional condition of affairs:--

    "The church had ever in this place required of its members guilty of
    unlawful cohabitation before marriage, a public confession of that
    crime, before the whole congregation. The offending female stood in
    the broad aisle beside the partner of her guilt. If they had been
    married, the declaration of the man was silently assented to by the
    woman. This had always been a delicate and difficult subject for
    church discipline. The public confession, if it operated as a
    corrective, likewise produced merriment with the profane. I have seen
    no instance of a public confession of this sort until the ministry of
    Mr. Dexter (1724-55) and then they were extremely rare. In 1781, the
    church gave the confessing parties the privilege of making a private
    confession to the church, in the room of a public confession. In Mr.
    Haven's ministry, (1756-1803) the number of cases of unlawful
    cohabitation, increased to an alarming degree. For twenty-five years
    before 1781 twenty-five cases had been publicly acknowledged before
    the congregation, and fourteen cases within the last ten years."

It will be noticed in the above extract that the writer says he had "seen
no instance of a public confession of this sort" prior to 1724, and that
until after 1755 "they were extremely rare." In the case of the Braintree
records, also, it will be remembered there was but one case of public
confession recorded prior to 1723, and that solitary case occurred in
1683.

The Record Commissioners of the city of Boston in their sixth report
(Document 114--1880) printed the Rev. John Eliot's record of church
members of Roxbury, which covers the period from the gathering of the
church in 1632 to the year 1689, and includes notes of many cases of
discipline. Among these I find the following, the earliest of its kind:--

    "1678. Month 4 day 16. Hanna Hopkins was censured in the Church with
    admonition for fornication with her husband before thei were maryed
    and for flying away from justice, unto Road Iland." (p. 93.)

During the next eighteen years I find in these records only seven entries
of other cases generally similar in character to the above, though the
Roxbury records contain a number of entries descriptive of interesting
cases of church discipline, besides many memoranda of "strange providences
of God" and "dreadful examples of Gods judgment." It would seem, however,
that the instances of church discipline publicly administered on the
ground of sexual immorality were infrequent in Roxbury, as in Dedham and
Braintree, prior to the year 1725. As will presently be seen, a change
either in morals or in discipline, but probably in the latter more than in
the former, apparently took place at about that time.

       *       *       *       *       *

So far as they bear upon the question of sexual morality in Massachusetts
during the eighteenth century, what do the foregoing facts and extracts
from the records indicate?--what inferences can be legitimately drawn from
them? And here I wish to emphasize the fact that this paper makes no
pretence of being an exhaustive study. In it, as I stated in the
beginning, I have made use merely of such material as chanced to come into
my hands in connection with a very limited field of investigation. I have
made no search for additional material, nor even inquired what other facts
of a similar character to those I have given may be preserved in the
records of the two other Braintree precincts. I have not sought to compare
the records I have examined with the similar records I know exist of the
churches of neighboring towns,--such as those of Dorchester, Hingham,
Weymouth, Milton and Dedham. So doing would have involved an amount of
labor which the matter under investigation would not justify on my part. I
have therefore merely made use of a certain amount of the raw material of
history I have chanced upon, bringing to bear on it such other general
information of a similar character as I remember from time to time to have
come across.

Though the historians of New England, whether of the formal description,
like Palfrey and Barry, or of the social and economic order, like Elliott
and Weeden, have little if anything to say on the subject, I think it not
unsafe to assert that during the eighteenth century the inhabitants of New
England did not enjoy a high reputation for sexual morality. Lord
Dartmouth, for instance, who, as secretary for the colonies, had charge of
American affairs during a portion of the North administration, in one of
his conversations with Governor Hutchinson referred to the commonness of
illegitimate offspring "among the young people of New England"[11] as a
thing of accepted notoriety; nor did Hutchinson, than whom no one was
better informed on all matters relating to New England, controvert the
proposition.

And yet, speaking again from the material which chances to be at my own
disposal, I find, so far as Braintree is concerned, nothing to justify
this statement of Lord Dartmouth's in the manuscript record book of Col.
John Quincy, which has been preserved, and is now in the possession of
this Society. Colonel Quincy was a prominent man in his day and
neighborhood; and the North Precinct of Braintree, in which he lived and
was buried, when, nearly thirty years after his death, it was incorporated
as a town, took its name from him. As a justice of the peace, Colonel
Quincy kept a careful record of the cases, both civil and criminal, which
came before him between 1716 and 1761, a period of forty-five years. These
cases, a great part of them criminal, were over two hundred in number, and
came not only from Braintree but from other parts of the old county of
Suffolk. Under these circumstances, if the state of affairs indicated by
Lord Dartmouth's remark, and Governor Hutchinson's apparent admission of
its truth, did really prevail, many bastardy warrants would during those
forty-five years naturally have come before so active a magistrate as John
Quincy. Such does not seem to have been the case. Indeed I find during the
whole period but four bastardy entries,--one in 1733, one in 1739, one in
1746, and one in 1761,--and, in 1720, one complaint against a woman to
answer for fornication. Considering the length of time the record of
Colonel Quincy covers, this is a remarkably small number of cases, and,
taken by itself, would seem to indicate the exact opposite from the
condition of affairs revealed in the church records of the same period,
for it includes the whole Hancock pastorate. This record book of Colonel
Quincy's I will add is the only original legal material I have bearing on
this subject. An examination of the files of the provincial courts would
undoubtedly bring more material to light.

I have only further to say, in passing, that some of the other cases
mentioned in this John Quincy record are not without a curious interest.
For instance, August 24, 1722, John Veasey, "husbandman," is put under
recognizance in the sum of L5 "for detaining his child from the public
worship of God, said child being about eleven years old." On the same day
John Belcher, "cordwainer," is put under a similar recognizance "for
absenting himself from the public worship of God the winter past." Eleazer
Veasey,--the Braintree Veaseys I will say in passing were members of the
Church of England in Braintree, and not members of the Braintree
church,--Eleazer Veasey is, on the 20th of September, 1717, fined five
shillings to the use of the town poor for "uttering a profane curse." So
also Christopher Dyer, "husbandman," "did utter one profane curse," to
which charge he pleaded guilty, and, on the 17th of May, 1747, was fined
four shillings for the use of the poor. In this case the costs were
assessed at six shillings, making ten shillings as the total cost of an
oath in Massachusetts at that time; but as Dyer was a "soldier of His
Majesty's service," the court added that if the fine was not paid
forthwith, he (Dyer) "be publickly set in the stocks or cage for the space
of three hours."

Returning to the subject of church discipline and public confessions of
incontinence, it will be observed that in the case of the North Precinct
Church of Braintree the great body of these confessions are recorded as
being made during the Hancock pastorate, or between the years 1726 and
1744. This also, it will be remembered, was the period of what is known in
New England history as "The Great Awakening," described in the first
chapter of the recently published fifth volume of Dr. Palfrey's work. Some
writers, while referring to what they call "the tide of immorality" which
then and afterward "rolled," as they express it, over the land, so that
"not even the bulwark of the church had been able to withstand" it,--these
writers, themselves of course ministers of the church, have, for want of
any more apparent cause, attributed the condition of affairs they
deplored, but were compelled to admit, to the influence of the French
wars, which, it will be remembered, broke out in 1744, and, with an
intermission of six years (1749-1755), lasted until the conquest of Canada
was completed in 1760. But it would be matter for curious inquiry whether
both the condition of affairs referred to and the confessions made in
public of sins privately committed were not traceable to the church
itself rather than to the army,--whether they were not rather due to the
spiritual than to the martial conditions of the time.

I have neither the material at my disposal, nor the time and inclination
to go into this study, both physiological and psychological, and shall
therefore confine myself to a few suggestions only which have occurred to
me in the course of the examination of the records I have been discussing.

"The Great Awakening," so called, occurred in 1740,--it was then that
Whitefield preached on Boston Common to an audience about equal in number
to three quarters of the entire population of the town.[12] Five years
before, in 1735, had occurred the famous Northampton revival, engineered
and presided over by Jonathan Edwards; and previous to that there had been
a number of small local outbreaks of the same character, which his
"venerable and honoured Grandfather Stoddard," as Edwards describes his
immediate predecessor in the Northampton pulpit, was accustomed to refer
to as "Harvests," in which there was "a considerable Ingathering of
Souls." A little later this spiritual condition became general and, so to
speak, epidemic. There are few sadder or more suggestive forms of
literature than that in which the religious contagion of 1735, for it was
nothing else, is described; it reveals a state of affairs bordering close
on universal insanity. Take for instance the following from Edwards's
"Narrative" of what took place at Northampton:--

    "Presently upon this, a great and earnest Concern about the great
    things of Religion, and the eternal World, became _universal_ in all
    parts of the Town, and among Persons of all Degrees, and all Ages; the
    Noise amongst the _Dry Bones_ waxed louder and louder: All other talk
    but about spiritual and eternal things, was soon thrown by.... There
    was scarcely a single Person in the Town, either old or young, that
    was left unconcerned about the great Things of the eternal World.
    Those that were wont to be the vainest, and loosest, and those that
    had been most disposed to think, and speak slightly of vital and
    experimental Religion, were now generally subject to great
    awakenings.... Souls did as it were come by Flocks to Jesus Christ.
    From Day to Day, for many Months together, might be seen evident
    Instances of Sinners brought _out of Darkness into marvellous Light_,
    and delivered _out of an horrible Pit, and from the miry Clay, and set
    upon a Rock_, with a _new Song of Praise to God in their mouths_ ...
    in the Spring and Summer following, _Anno_ 1735 the Town seemed to be
    full of the Presence of God. It never was so full of _Love_, nor so
    full of _Joy_; and yet so full of Distress as it was then. There were
    remarkable Tokens of God's Presence in almost every House.... Our
    publick _Praises_ were then greatly enlivened.... In all _Companies_
    on _other_ Days, on whatever _Occasions_ Persons met together,
    _Christ_ was to be heard of and seen in the midst of them. Our _young
    People_, when they met, were wont to spend the time in talking of the
    _Excellency_ and dying _Love_ of JESUS CHRIST, the Gloriousness of the
    way of _Salvation_, the wonderful, free, and sovereign _Grace_ of God,
    his glorious Work in the _Conversion_ of a Soul, the _Truth_ and
    Certainty of the great Things of God's Word, the Sweetness of the
    Views of his _Perfection &c._ And even at _Weddings_, which formerly
    were meerly occasions of Mirth and Jollity, there was now no discourse
    of any thing but the things of Religion, and no appearance of any, but
    _spiritual Mirth_."[13]

And it was this pestiferous stuff,--for though it emanated from the pure
heart and powerful brain of the greatest of American theologians, it is
best to characterize it correctly,--it was this pestiferous stuff that
Wesley read during a walk from London to Oxford in 1738, and wrote of it
in his journal,--"Surely this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in
our eyes." Such was the prevailing spiritual condition of the period in
which the entries I have read were made in the Braintree church records.
In the language of the text from which Dr. Colman preached on the occasion
of the first stated evening lecture ever held in Boston, "Souls flying to
Jesus Christ [were] pleasant and admirable to behold."

The brother clergyman[14] who prepared and delivered from the pulpit of
the Braintree church a funeral sermon on Mr. Hancock referred to the
religious excesses of the time, and described the dead pastor as a "wise
and skilful pilot" who had steered "a right and safe course in the late
troubled sea of ecclesiastical affairs," so that his people had to a
considerable degree "escaped the errors and enthusiasm ... in matters of
religion which others had fallen into."[15] Nevertheless it is almost
impossible for any locality to escape wholly a general epidemic; and in
those days public relations of experiences were not only usual in the
churches, but they were a regular feature in all cases of admission to
full communion. That this was the case in the Braintree church is evident
from the extract already quoted from the records, when in 1722 "some
persons of a sober life and good conversation signified their
unwillingness to join in full communion with the church unless they
[might] be admitted to it without making a Public relation of their
spiritual experiences." It was also everywhere noticed that the women, and
especially the young women, were peculiarly susceptible to attacks of the
spiritual epidemic. Jonathan Edwards for instance mentions, in the case of
Northampton, how the young men of that place had become "addicted to
night-walking and frequenting the tavern, and leud practices," and how
they would "get together in conventions of both sexes for mirth and
jollity, which they called frolicks; and they would spend the greater part
of the night in them"; and among the first indications of the approach of
the epidemic noticed by him was the case of a young woman who had been one
of the greatest "company keepers" in the whole town, who became "serious,
giving evidence of a heart truly broken and sanctified."

This same state of affairs doubtless then prevailed in Braintree, and
indeed throughout New England. The whole community was in a sensitive
condition morally and spiritually,--so sensitive that, as the Braintree
records show, the contagion extended to all classes, and, among those
bearing some of the oldest names in the history of the township, we find
also negroes,--"Benjamin Sutton and Naomi his wife," and "Jeffry, my
servant, and Flora, his wife,"--grotesquely getting up before the
congregation to make confession, like their betters, of the sin of
fornication before marriage. It, of course, does not need to be said that
such a state of morbid and spiritual excitement would necessarily lead to
public confessions of an unusual character. Women, and young women in
particular, would be inclined to brood over things unknown save to those
who participated in them, and think to find in confession only a means of
escape from the torment of that hereafter concerning which they
entertained no doubts; hence perhaps many of these records which now seem
both so uncalled for and so inexplicable.

So far, however, what has been said relates only to the matter of public
confession; it remains for others to consider how far a morbidly excited
spiritual condition may also have been responsible for the sin confessed.
The connection between the animal and the spiritual natures of human
beings taken in the aggregate, though subtile, is close; and while it is
well known that camp-meetings have never been looked upon as peculiar, or
even as conspicuous, for the continence supposed to prevail at them, there
is no doubt whatever that in England the license of the restoration
followed close on the rule of the saints. One of the authorities on New
England history, speaking of the outward manifestations of the "Great
Awakening," says that "the fervor of excitement showed itself in strong
men, as well as in women, by floods of tears, by outcries, by bodily
paroxysms, jumping, falling down and rolling on the ground, regardless of
spectators or their clothes." Then the same authority goes on to
add:--"But it was common that when the exciting preacher had departed, the
excitement also subsided, and men and women returned peaceably to their
daily duties."[16] This last may have been the case; but it is not
probable that men and women in the condition of mental and physical
excitement described could go about their daily duties without carrying
into them some trace of morbid reaction. It was a species of insanity; and
insanity invariably reveals itself in unexpected and contradictory forms.

But it is for others, like my friend Dr. Green, both by education and
professional experience more versed in these subjects than I, to say
whether a period of sexual immorality should not be looked for as the
natural concomitant and sequence of such a condition of moral and
religious excitement as prevailed in New England between 1725 and 1745. I
merely now call attention to the fact that in Braintree the Hancock
pastorate began in 1726 and ended in 1743, and that it was during the
Hancock pastorate, also the period of "the Great Awakening," that public
confessions of fornication were most frequently made in the Braintree
church; further, and finally, it was during the years which immediately
followed that the great "tide of immorality" which the clergy of the day
so much deplored, "rolled over the land."

But it still remains to consider whether the entries referred to in the
church records must be taken as conclusive evidence that a peculiarly lax
condition of affairs as respects the sexual relation did really prevail in
New England during the last century. This does not necessarily follow;
and, for reasons I shall presently give, I venture to doubt it. In the
first place it is to be remembered that the language used in those days
does not carry the same meaning that similar language would carry if used
now. For instance, when Jonathan Edwards talks of the youth of Northampton
being given to "Night-walking ... and leud practices," he does not at all
mean what we should mean by using the same expression; and the young woman
who was one of the greatest "company keepers" in the whole town, was
probably nothing worse than a lively village girl much addicted to walking
with her young admirers after public lecture on the Sabbath
afternoons,--"a disorder," by the way, which Jonathan Edwards says he made
"a thorough reformation of ... which has continued ever since."[17]

So far the relations then prevailing between the young of the two sexes
may have been, and probably were, innocent enough, and nothing more needs
be said of them; but coming now to the facts revealed in the church
records, I venture to doubt the correctness of the inference as to general
laxity which would naturally be drawn from them. The situation as respects
sexual morality which prevailed in New England during the eighteenth
century seems to me to have been peculiar rather than bad. In other words,
though there was much incontinence, that incontinence was not promiscuous;
and this statement brings me at once to the necessary consideration of
another recognized and well-established custom in the more ordinary and
less refined New England life of the last century, which has been
considered beneath what is known as the dignity of history to notice, and
to which, accordingly, no reference is made by Palfrey or Barry, or, so
far as I know, by any of the standard authorities: and yet, unless I am
greatly mistaken, it is to this carefully ignored usage or custom that we
must look for an explanation of the greater part of the confessions
recorded in the annals of the churches. I refer, of course, to the
practice known as "bundling."

I do not propose here to go into a description of "bundling,"[18] or to
attempt to trace its origin or the extent to which it prevailed in New
England during the last century. All this has been sufficiently done in
the little volume on the subject prepared by Dr. H. R. Stiles, and
published some twenty years ago. For my present purpose it is only
necessary for me to say that the practice of "bundling" has long been one
of the standing taunts or common-place indictments against New England,
and has been supposed to indicate almost the lowest conceivable state of
sexual immorality;[19] but, on the other hand, it may safely be asserted
that "bundling" was, as a custom, neither so vicious nor so immoral as is
usually supposed; nor did it originate in, nor was it peculiar to, New
England. It was a practice growing out of the social and industrial
conditions of a primitive people, of simple, coarse manners and small
means. Two young persons proposed to marry. They and their families were
poor; they lived far apart from each other; they were at work early and
late all the week. Under these circumstances Saturday evening and Sunday
were the recognized time for meeting. The young man came to the house of
the girl after Saturday's sun-down, and they could see each other until
Sunday afternoon, when he had to go back to his own home and work. The
houses were small, and every nook in them occupied; and in order that the
man might not be turned out of doors, or the two be compelled to sit up
all night at a great waste of lights and fuel, and that they might at the
same time be in each other's company, they were "bundled" up together on a
bed, in which they lay side by side and partially clothed. It goes without
saying that, however it originated, such a custom, if recognized and
continued, must degenerate into something coarse and immoral. The
inevitable would follow. The only good and redeeming feature about it was
the utter absence of concealment and secrecy. All was open and recognized.
The very "bundling" was done by the hands of mother and sisters.

As I have said, this custom neither originated in nor was it peculiar to
New England, though in New England, as elsewhere, it did lead to the same
natural results. And I find conclusive evidence of this statement in all
its several parts in the following extract from a book published as late
as 1804, descriptive of customs, etc., then prevailing in North Wales. For
the extract I am indebted to Dr. Stiles:--

    "Saturday or Sunday nights are the principal time when this courtship
    takes place; and on these nights the men sometimes walk from a
    distance of ten miles or more to visit their favorite damsels. This
    strange custom seems to have originated in the scarcity of fuel and in
    the unpleasantness of sitting together in the colder part of the year
    without a fire. Much has been said of the innocence with which these
    meetings are conducted; but it is a very common thing for the
    consequence of the interview to make its appearance in the world
    within two or three months after the marriage ceremony has taken
    place."

And again, referring to the same practice as it prevailed in Holland,
another of the authorities quoted by Dr. Stiles, relating his observations
also during the present century, speaks of a--

    "courtship similar to bundling, carried on in ... Holland, under the
    name of _queesting_. At night the lover has access to his mistress
    after she is in bed; and upon application to be admitted upon the bed,
    which is of course granted, he raises the quilt or rug, and in this
    state _queests_, or enjoys a harmless chit-chat with her, and then
    retires. This custom meets with the perfect sanction of the most
    circumspect parents, and the freedom is seldom abused. The author
    traces its origin to the parsimony of the people, whose economy
    considers fire and candles as superfluous luxuries in the long winter
    evenings."

The most singular, and to me unaccountable, fact connected with the custom
of "bundling" is that, though it unquestionably prevailed--and prevailed
long, generally and from an early period--in New England, no trace has
been reported of it in any localities of England itself, the mother
country. There are well-authenticated records of its prevalence in parts
at least of Ireland, Wales, Scotland and Holland; but it could hardly have
found its way as a custom from any of those countries to New England. I
well remember hearing the late Dr. John G. Palfrey remark--and the remark
will, I think, very probably be found in some note to the text of his
History of New England--that down to the beginning of the present century,
or about the year 1825, there was a purer strain of English blood to be
found in the inhabitants of Cape Cod than could be found in any county of
England. The original settlers of that region were exclusively English,
and for the first two centuries after the settlement there was absolutely
no foreign admixture. Yet nowhere in New England does the custom of
"bundling" seem to have prevailed more generally than on Cape Cod; and
according to Dr. Stiles (p. 111) it was on Cape Cod that the practice held
out longest against the advance of more refined manners. It is tolerably
safe to say that in a time of constantly developing civilization such a
custom would originate nowhere. It is obviously a development from
something of a coarser and more promiscuous nature which preceded
it,--some social condition such as has been often described in books
relating to the more destitute portions of Ireland or the crowded
districts in English cities, where, in the language of Tennyson,--

  "The poor are hovell'd and hustled together, each sex, like swine."

Such a custom as "bundling," therefore, bears on its face the fact that it
is an inheritance from a simple and comparatively primitive period. If,
then, in the case of New England, it was not derived from the mother
country, it becomes a curious question whence and how it was derived.

But no matter whence or how derived, it is obvious that the prevalence of
such a custom would open a ready and natural way for a vast increase of
sexual immorality at any time when surrounding conditions predisposed a
community in that direction. This is exactly what I cannot help surmising
occurred in New England at the time of "the Great Awakening" of the last
century, and immediately subsequent thereto. The movement was there, and
in obedience to the universal law it made its way on the lines of least
resistance. Hence the entries of public confession in the church records,
and the tide of immorality in presence of which the clergy stood aghast.

But in order to substantiate this theory of an historical manifestation it
remains to consider how generally the custom of "bundling" prevailed in
New England, and to how late a day it continued. The accredited historians
of New England, so far as I am acquainted with their writings, throw
little light on this question. Mr. Elliott, for instance, in his chapter
on the manners and customs of the New England people, contents himself
with some pleasing generalities like the following, the correctness of
which he would have found difficulty in maintaining:--

    "With this exalted, even exaggerated, value of the individual
    entertained in New England, it was not possible that men or women
    entertaining it should yield themselves to corrupt or debasing
    practices. CHASTITY was, therefore, a cardinal virtue, and the abuse
    of it a crying sin, to be punished by law, and by the severe reproof
    of all good citizens."[20]

According to this authority, therefore, as "bundling" was unquestionably
both a "corrupt" and a "debasing practice," "it was not possible that men
or women" of New England "should yield themselves" to it; and that ends
the matter.

Passing on from Mr. Elliott to another authority: in his recently
published and very valuable "Economic and Social History of New England,"
Mr. Weeden has two references to "bundling." In one of them (p. 739) he
speaks of it as "certainly an unpuritan custom" which was "extensively
practised in Connecticut and Western Massachusetts," against which
"Jonathan Edwards raised his powerful voice"; and again he later on (p.
864) alludes to it as "a curious custom which accorded little with the New
England character," and which "lingered among the lower orders of people
... prevailing in Western Massachusetts as late as 1777." I am led to
believe that the custom prevailed far more generally and to a much later
date than these statements of Mr. Weeden would seem to indicate; that,
indeed, it was continued even in eastern Massachusetts and the towns
immediately about Boston until after the close of the Revolutionary
troubles, and probably until the beginning of the present century. The
Braintree church records throw no light on this portion of the subject;
but the Groton church records show that not until 1803 was the practice
discontinued of compelling a public confession before the whole
congregation whenever a child was born in less than seven months after
marriage. Turning then to Worthington's "History of Dedham" (p. 109),--a
town only ten miles from Boston,--I find that the Rev. Mr. Haven, the
pastor of the church there, alarmed at the number of cases of unlawful
cohabitation, preached at least as late as 1781 "a long and memorable
discourse," in which, with a courage deserving of unstinted praise, he
dealt with "the growing sin" publicly from his pulpit, attributing "the
frequent recurrence of the fault to the custom then prevalent of females
admitting young men to their beds who sought their company with intentions
of marriage." Again, in a letter of Mrs. John Adams, written in 1784, in
which she gives a very graphic and lively account of a voyage across the
Atlantic in a sailing-vessel of that period, I find the following, in
which Mrs. Adams, describing how the passengers all lived in the common
cabin, adds:--"Necessity has no law; but what should I have thought on
shore to have laid myself down in common with half a dozen gentlemen? We
have curtains, it is true, and we only in part undress,--about as much as
the Yankee bundlers."[21] Mrs. Adams was then writing to her elder sister,
Mrs. Cranch; they were both women of exceptional
refinement,--granddaughters of Col. John Quincy, and daughters of the
pastor of the Weymouth church. Mrs. Adams while writing her letter knew
that it would be eagerly looked for at home, and that it would be read
aloud and passed from hand to hand through all her acquaintance, and this
was in fact the case; so it is evident, from this easy, passing allusion,
that the custom of "bundling" was then so common in the community in which
Mrs. Adams lived, that not only was written reference to it freely made,
but the reference conveyed to a large circle of friends a perfect idea of
what she meant to describe. At the same time the use of the phrase "the
Yankee bundlers" indicates the social class to which the custom was
confined.

The general prevalence of the practice of "bundling" throughout New
England, and especially in southeastern Massachusetts, up to the close of
the last century may therefore, I think, be assumed. I have already said
that the origin of the custom was due to sparseness of settlement, the
primitive and frugal habits of the people permitting the practice, and the
absence of good means of communication. It becomes, therefore, a somewhat
curious subject of inquiry whether traces of "bundling" can be found in
the traditions and records of any of our large towns. That it existed and
was commonly practised within a ten-mile radius of Boston I have shown;
but I greatly doubt whether it ever obtained in Boston itself.
Nevertheless, an examination of the church records of Boston, Salem, and
more especially of Plymouth, would be interesting, with a view to
ascertaining whether the spirit of sexual incontinence prevailed during
the last century in the large towns of New England to the same extent to
which it unquestionably prevailed in the rural districts. My own belief is
that it did so prevail, though the practice of "bundling" was not in use;
if I am correct in this surmise, it would follow that the evil was a
general one, and that "bundling" was merely the custom through which it
found vent. In such case the cause of the evil would have to be looked for
in some other direction. It would then, paradoxical as such a statement
may at first appear, probably be found in the superior general morality of
the community and the strict oversight of a public opinion which, except
in Boston,--a large commercial place, where there was always a
considerable floating population of sailors and others,--prevented the
recognized existence of any class of professional prostitutes. On the one
hand, a certain form of incontinence was not associated either in the male
or female mind with the presence of a degraded class, while, on the other
hand, the natural appetites were to a limited extent gratified. It was in
their attempt wholly to ignore these natural appetites that Jonathan
Edwards and the clergy of the last century fell into their error.

I have alluded to the early church records of Plymouth as probably
offering a peculiarly interesting field of inquiry in this matter. I have
never seen those records, and know nothing of them; but as long ago as the
year 1642 Governor Bradford had occasion to bewail the condition of
affairs then existing at Plymouth,--"not only," he declared,
"incontinencie betweene persons unmaried, for which many both men and
women have been punished sharply enough, but some maried persons allso";
and he exclaimed, "Marvilous it may be to see and consider how some kind
of wickednes did grow and breake forth here, in a land wher the same was
so much witnesed against, and so narrowly looked unto, and severly
punished when it was knowne!" But finally, with great shrewdness and an
insight into human nature which might well have been commended to the
prayerful consideration of Jonathan Edwards and the revivalists of exactly
one century later, Governor Bradford goes on to conclude that--

    "It may be in this case as it is with waters when their streames are
    stopped or dammed up, when they gett passage they flow with more
    violence, and make more noys and disturbance, then when they are
    suffered to rune quietly in their owne chanels. So wikednes being here
    more stopped by strict laws, and the same more nerly looked unto, so
    as it cannot rune in a comone road of liberty as it would, and is
    inclined, it searches every wher, and at last breaks out wher it getts
    vente."[22]

There is one other episode I have come across in my local investigations,
of the same general character as those I have referred to, which throws a
curious gleam of light on the problems now under discussion. I have
already mentioned the fact, quite significant, that during the very period
when the church was most active in disciplining cases of fornication, the
court record of John Quincy shows that but one case of fornication was
brought before him in forty-five years. This was in 1720, and the woman
was bound over in the sum of L5 to appear before the superior court. That
woman I take to have been a prostitute. Her case was exceptional, so
recognized, and summarily dealt with. In the Braintree town records there
are some mysterious entries which I am led to believe relate to another
and similar case, but one in which the objectionable character was
otherwise dealt with. In the midst of the Revolutionary troubles the
following votes were passed at the annual town meeting held in the
meeting-house of the Middle Precinct, now Braintree, on the 15th of March,
1779:--

    "Voted That Doctor Baker be desired to leave this Town, also

    "Voted, that the eight men that Doctor Baker gott a warrant for go
    immediately and Deliver themselves up to Justice."

Fifteen days later, at another meeting held on the 30th of March, this
matter again presented itself, and the following entry records the action
taken:--

    "A motion was made to chuse a Committee to be Ready to appear and make
    a stand against any vexatious Law suit that may be brought against any
    of the Inhabitants of this Town by Doctor Moses Baker Then,

    "Voted, that Thomas Penniman, Esq{r.} Col{o} Edmund Billings, Mr.
    Azariah Faxon, Capt. John Vinton and Capt. Peter B. Adams be a
    Committee to use their Influence with proper authority to suppress,
    any vexatious Law suits that may be brought by Doctor Moses Baker
    against any of the Inhabitants of this Town and that said Committee
    shall be allowed by the Town for their time.

    "Messrs William Penniman and Joseph Spear entered their dissent to the
    Last Vote, as being Illegal and Improper, as there was no such article
    in the warrant only in General Terms."[23]

I have endeavored to learn something of the transaction to which these
mysterious entries of over a century ago relate, and the result of my
inquiries seems to indicate a state of affairs then existing in the
neighborhood of Boston very suggestive of those "White-cap" and
"Moonshiner" proceedings in the western and southern States, accounts of
which from time to time appear in the telegraphic despatches to our
papers. Dr. Moses Baker lived and practised medicine in what is now the
town of Randolph, and in 1777 he was one of two physicians to whom the
town voted permission to establish an inoculating hospital. In 1779 he was
about forty years of age, and married. At the time there dwelt not far
from where Dr. Baker lived a woman of bad reputation, with whom Dr. Baker
was, whether rightly or not, believed to have improper relations. Certain
men living in the neighborhood accordingly undertook to act as a local
committee to enforce good morals; and this committee decided to ride Dr.
Baker and the woman in question together on horseback to a convenient
locality near the meeting-house, and there tar and feather them. A
broken-down old hack, deemed meet and appropriate for use as a charger in
such case, was accordingly procured; and going to the woman's house, the
_vigilantes_ actually took her from her bed, and, without allowing her to
clothe herself, put her on the horse, and then proceeded to Baker's house.
He in the mean time had received notice of the proposed visit; and when
the party reached their destination they found him indignant, armed and
resolute. He threatened to shoot the first man who laid hands on him. This
was a turn in affairs which the self-constituted vindicators of public
morality had not contemplated, and accordingly they proceeded no further
in their purpose. Dr. Baker was not molested, and the woman was released.

It is immaterial, so far as this paper is concerned, whether there was, or
whether there was not, ground for the feeling against Baker. In the
emergency he does not seem to have demeaned himself either as one guilty
or afraid; and, as the action of the town meetings shows, he did not
hesitate to bring the whole matter before the courts and into public
notice. But for my present purposes this is of no consequence; the
significance of the incident here lies in the confirmatory evidence which
the extracts from the records afford of the inferences drawn from the
facts set forth in the earlier part of this paper. The offending female in
this case seems to have been what is known as a woman of bad or abandoned
character; the man's relations with her are assumed as notorious. Here was
a state of things which public opinion would not tolerate. Probably more
than half of those who took part in the proposed vindication of decency
and morals looked with indifference on the custom of "bundling." That was
in anticipation of marriage, and in its natural results there was nothing
which savored of promiscuous incontinence. The extraordinary entries in
the records show how fully the town sympathized with and supported the
_vigilantes_, as they would now be called in Mexicanized parlance of the
extreme Southwest. The distinction I have endeavored to draw between the
excusable, if not permissible, incontinence of the New England country
community of the last century, and the idea of promiscuous immorality as
we entertain it, is clearly seen in this Baker episode.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having now made use of all the original material the possession of which
led me into the preparation of the present paper, it might at this point
properly be brought to a close; but I am tempted to go on and touch on one
further point which has long been with me a matter of doubt, and in regard
to which I have been disposed to reach opposite conclusions at different
times,--I refer to the comparative morality of the last century and that
which is now closing. Has there been during the nineteenth century, taken
as a whole, a distinct advance in the matter of sexual morality as
compared with the eighteenth? Or has the change, which it is admitted has
taken place, been only in outward appearance, while beneath a surface of
greater refinement human nature remains ever and always the same? It is
unquestionably true that in a large and widely differentiated community
like that in which we live the individual, no matter who he is, knows very
little of what may be called the real "true inwardness" of his
surroundings. Any one who wishes to satisfy himself on this point need
only seek out some elderly and retired country doctor or lawyer of an
observing turn of mind and retentive memory, and then, if the inquirer
should be fortunate enough to lead such an one into a confidential mood,
listen to his reminiscences. It has been my privilege to accomplish this
result on several occasions; and I may freely say that I have always
emerged from those interviews in a more or less morally dishevelled
condition. After them I have for considerable periods entertained grave
and abiding doubts whether, except in outward appearance and respect for
conventionalities, the present could claim any superiority over the past.
A cursory inspection of the criminal and immoral literature of the day,
which the printing-press now empties out in a volume heretofore undreamed
of, tends strongly to confirm this feeling of doubt,--which becomes almost
a conviction when, from time to time, the realistic details of some Lord
Colin Campbell or Sir Charles Dilke or Charles Stewart Parnell scandal are
paraded in the newspapers.

Yet, such staggering evidence to the contrary notwithstanding, I find
myself unable to get away from the record; and that record, so far as it
has cursorily reached me in the course of my investigations, leads me to
conclude that the real moral improvement of the year 1891, as compared
with the conditions in that respect existing in the year 1691 or even
1791, is not less marked and encouraging than is the change of language
and expression permissible in the days of Shakspeare and of Defoe and of
Fielding to that to which we are accustomed in the pages of Scott,
Thackeray and Hawthorne.

For instance, again recurring to my own investigations, I have from time
to time come across things which, as indicating a state of affairs
prevailing in the olden time, have fairly taken away my breath. Here is a
portion of a note from the edition of Thomas Morton's "New English
Canaan," prepared by me some years ago as one of the publications of the
Prince Society, which bears on this statement:--

    "Josselyn says of the 'Indesses,' as he calls them [Indian women] 'All
    of them are of a modest demeanor, considering their savage breeding;
    and indeed do shame our _English_ rusticks whose ludeness in many
    things exceedeth theirs.' (_Two Voyages_, 12, 45.) When the
    Massachusetts Indian women, in September, 1621, sold the furs from
    their backs to the first party of explorers from Plymouth, Winslow,
    who wrote the account of that expedition, says that they 'tied boughs
    about them, but with great shamefacedness, for indeed they are more
    modest than some of our English women are.' (Mourt, p. 59.) See, also,
    to the same effect Wood's _Prospect_, (p. 82). It suggests, indeed, a
    curious inquiry as to what were the customs among the ruder classes of
    the British females during the Elizabethan period, when all the
    writers agree in speaking of the Indian women [among whom chastity was
    unknown] in this way. Roger Williams, for instance [who tells us that
    'single fornications they count no sin'] also says, referring to their
    clothing,--'Both men and women within doores, leave off their beasts
    skin, or English cloth, and so (excepting their little apron) are
    wholly naked; yet but few of the women but will keepe their skin or
    cloth (though loose) neare to them, ready to gather it up about them.
    Custome hath used their minds and bodies to it, and in such a freedom
    from any wantonnesse that I have never seen that wantonnesse amongst
    them as (with griefe) I have heard of in Europe' (_Key_, 110-11)."[24]

Again, I recently came across the following, which illustrates somewhat
curiously what may be called the social street amenities which a sojourner
might expect to encounter in a large English town of a century ago. If
ever there was a charming, innocent little woman, who, as a wife and
mother, bore herself purely and courageously under circumstances of great
trial and anxiety,--a woman whose own simple record of the strange
experience through which she passed appeals to you so that you long to
step forward and give her your arm and protect her,--if there ever was, I
say, a woman who impresses one in this way more than Mrs. General
Riedesel, I have not met her. Mrs. Riedesel, as the members of this
Society probably all know, followed her husband, who was in command of the
German auxiliary troops in Burgoyne's army, to America in 1777, and in so
doing passed through England, accompanied by her young children. Here is
her own account of a slight experience she had in Bristol, where, the poor
little woman says, "I discovered soon how unpleasant it is to be in a city
where one does not understand the language, ... and wept for hours in my
chamber":--

    "During my sojourn in Bristol I had an unpleasant adventure. I wore a
    calico dress trimmed with green taffeta. This seemed particularly
    offensive to the Bristol people; for as I was one day out walking with
    Madame Foy more than a hundred sailors gathered round us and pointed
    at me with their fingers, at the same time crying out, 'French whore!'
    I took refuge as quickly as possible into the house of a merchant
    under pretense of buying something, and shortly after the crowd
    dispersed. But my dress became henceforth so disgusting to me, that as
    soon as I returned home I presented it to my cook, although it was yet
    entirely new."[25]

It was at Bristol also that the little German woman, hardly more than a
girl, describes how, the very day after her arrival there, her landlady
called her attention to what the landlady in question termed "a most
charming sight." Stepping hastily to the window, Mrs. Riedesel says, "I
beheld two naked men boxing with the greatest fury. I saw their blood
flowing and the rage that was painted in their eyes. Little accustomed to
such a hateful spectacle, I quickly retreated into the innermost corner of
the house to avoid hearing the shouts set up by the spectators whenever a
blow was given or received."

Street customs, manners and language are, to a very considerable extent,
outward exponents of the moral condition within. It would not be possible
to find any place in Europe now where women could be seen going about the
streets in the condition as respects raiment which Josselyn, Winslow and
Roger Williams seem to intimate was not unusual with the British females
of their time; nor would a strumpet even, much less any decent woman, from
a foreign land, be treated in the streets of any civilized city as Madame
Riedesel describes herself as having been treated in the streets of
Bristol in 1777. One cannot conceive of an adulterer or adulteress now
doing public penance in a white sheet before a whole congregation
assembled for the public worship of God, nor of a really respectable young
married couple standing up under the same circumstances and confessing to
the sin of fornication. Even if such a thing were done, it would be looked
upon as rather suggestive than edifying. All the evidence accordingly
indicates that, morally, the improvement made in the nineteenth century as
compared with those that preceded it has been more than superficial and in
externals only,--that it has been real, in essentials as well as in
language and manners. So, while it would not be safe to adopt Burke's
splendid generality, that vice has in our time lost half its evil in
losing all its grossness, yet it is not unfair to adopt the trope in a
modified form, and assert that, in the matter of sexual morality, vice in
the nineteenth century as compared with the seventeenth or the eighteenth
has lost some part of its evil in losing much of its grossness.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] History of Norfolk County, Massachusetts, p. 231.

[2] In 1839 the Rev. William P. Lunt prepared and delivered before the
First Congregational Church of Quincy two most scholarly and admirable
historical discourses on the celebration of the two hundredth anniversary
of the gathering of the society. In the appendix to these discourses (p.
93) Dr. Lunt states that the earlier records of the church had never been
in the possession of either of its then ministers, the Rev. Peter Whitney
or himself; and he adds: "In a conversation with Dr. Harris, formerly the
respected pastor of Dorchester First Congregational Church, I understood
him to say that Mr. Welde, formerly pastor of what is now Braintree
Church, had these records in his possession; but when he obtained them,
and for what purpose, was not explained. They are probably now
irrecoverably lost. As curious and interesting relics of old times, their
loss must be regretted."

The extent of this loss is here stated by Dr. Lunt with great moderation.
The records in question cover the history of the Braintree church during
the whole of the theocratic period in Massachusetts; and, for reasons
which will appear in my forthcoming history of Quincy, the loss of these
records causes not only an irreparable but a most serious break, so far as
Braintree is concerned, in the discussion of one of the most interesting
of all the problems connected with the origin and development of the New
England town, and system of town-government. There is room for hope that
the missing volume may yet come to light.

[3] Proc. Mass. Hist. Soc., 2d series, vol. i. p. 239.

[4] "And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if
he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and
a publican."

[5] 3. "For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have
judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done
this deed.

4. "In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,
and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,

5. "To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus."

[6] Ellis, The Puritan Age in Massachusetts, 206-208.

[7] "5. To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus."

[8] Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p. 37.

[9] Drake's History of Middlesex County, vol. ii. p. 371.

[10] Butler's History of Groton, pp. 174, 178, 181.

[11] Hutchinson's Diary and Letters, vol. i. p. 232.

[12] Palfrey, vol. v. p. 9.

[13] A Faithful Narrative of the Surprising Work of God in the Conversion
of Many Hundred Souls, &c., 1738, pp. 8-10.

[14] The Rev. Ebenezer Gay, of Hingham.

[15] Lunt's Two Discourses, 1840, p. 48.

[16] Elliott's The New England History, vol. ii. p. 136.

[17] Narrative, pp. 4, 5.

[18] TO BUNDLE. Mr. Grose thus describes this custom: "A man and woman
lying on the same bed with their clothes on; an expedient practised in
America, on account of a scarcity of beds, where, on such occasions,
husbands and parents frequently permitted travellers to _bundle_ with
their wives and daughters." (_Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue._)

The Rev. Samuel Peters, in his "General History of Connecticut" (London,
1781), enters largely into the custom of bundling as practised there. He
says: "Notwithstanding the great modesty of the females is such, that it
would be accounted the greatest rudeness for a gentleman to speak before a
lady of a garter or leg, yet it is thought but a piece of civility to ask
her to _bundle_." The learned and pious historian endeavors to prove that
_bundling_ was not only a Christian custom, but a very polite and prudent
one.

The Rev. Andrew Barnaby, who travelled in New England in 1759-60, notices
this custom, which then prevailed. He thinks that though it may at first
"appear to be the effects of grossness of character, it will, upon deeper
research, be found to proceed from simplicity and innocence." (_Travels_,
p. 144.)

Van Corlear stopped occasionally in the villages to eat pumpkin-pies,
dance at country frolics, and _bundle_ with the Yankee lasses.
(_Knickerbocker, New York._)

Bundling is said to be practised in Wales. Whatever may have been the
custom in former times, I do not think _bundling_ is now practised
anywhere in the United States.

Mr. Masson describes a similar custom in Central Asia: "Many of the Afghan
tribes have a custom in wooing similar to what in Wales is known as
_bundling-up_, and which they term _namzat baze_. The lover presents
himself at the house of his betrothed, with a suitable gift, and in return
is allowed to pass the night with her, on the understanding that innocent
endearments are not to be exceeded." (_Journeys in Belochistan,
Afghanistan, &c._, vol. iii. p. 287.)--BARTLETT, _Dictionary of
Americanisms_.

[19] Knickerbocker's History of New York, book iii. chaps. vi., vii.

[20] Elliott's The New England History, vol. i. p. 471.

[21] Letters of Mrs. Adams, (1848,) p. 161.

[22] History, pp. 384-386.

[23] Braintree Records, pp. 480, 499, 500, 523.

[24] See, also, Proc. Mass. Hist. Soc., 2d series, vol. iv. p. 10.

[25] Letters and Journals, p. 48.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Superscripted characters are indicated by {superscript}.

The original text includes several blank spaces. These are represented by
________ in this text version.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Some Phases of Sexual Morality and
Church Discipline in Colonial New England, by Charles Francis Adams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME PHASES OF SEXUAL ***

***** This file should be named 36989.txt or 36989.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/8/36989/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
