The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Land of Lure, by Elliott Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Land of Lure
       A Story of the Columbia River Basin

Author: Elliott Smith

Release Date: August 7, 2011 [EBook #36999]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAND OF LURE ***




Produced by Greg Bergquist, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)












                                   THE LAND of LURE

                          A STORY OF THE COLUMBIA RIVER BASIN

                                   By ELLIOTT SMITH

                     Author of "THE BELLS OF THE BOSQUE," "HULL 97."


    1920
    PRESS OF
    SMITH-KINNEY COMPANY
    Tacoma, Wash.

    Copyright, 1920
    By ELLIOTT SMITH


_DEDICATED TO MARIE SMITH--HIS WIFE

Although I was one of those who "Tried, failed and went away to try and
forget, if possible," her unfaltering faithfulness, and endurance, made
it possible for me to see and feel the things that I have written in
this--HER BOOK.

--ELLIOTT SMITH._




[Illustration: _Misshapen and dwaft by the pitiless rays of the
desert sun._]




INDEX TO CHAPTERS


    Chapter I.                      9

    Chapter II.                    20

    Chapter III.                   29

    Chapter IV.                    37

    Chapter V.                     42

    Chapter VI.                    57

    Chapter VII.                   64

    Chapter VIII.                  70

    Chapter IX.                    80

    Chapter X.                     90

    Chapter XI.                    96

    Chapter XII.                  104

    Chapter XIII.                 113

    Chapter XIV.                  123

    Chapter XV.                   136

    Chapter XVI.                  149

    Chapter XVII.                 163

    Chapter XVIII.                179

    Chapter XIX.                  193

    Chapter XX.                   206

    Chapter XXI.                  223

    Chapter XXII.                 236




The Land of Lure




CHAPTER I.


The early March wind was blowing with its usual force, and white wisps
of clouds were scurrying across the barren waste that lay between the
rough canyon, through which the raging torrents of the Columbia River
forced its way to the Pacific Ocean, and the range of hills thirty miles
farther south. The clouds seemed to mount higher, and take on greater
speed, while crossing this scene of desolation, and graveyard of buried
hopes, as if anxious to leave behind them the glare of the desert sands,
and the appealing eyes of the few unfortunate homesteaders, who were
compelled to remain on their claims until they had complied with the
demands made by a beneficient Government before they could become sole
owners of the spot upon which many of them were now making their last
efforts for a home of their own.

The ever present sage brush and tufts of scant bunch grass, dwaft by the
ages of drouth and the pitiless glare of the hot sun's rays, bowed
before each gust of the sand ladened wind and emitted weird and
unearthly sounds, as if the deported denizens of the desert were
warning the white man against the hopeless task of trying to wrest from
the jack rabbit and coyote the haunts over which they had held
undisputed sway for ages.

Deserted shacks, formerly the homes of earlier settlers, broken fences
posts, with tangled strands of barbed wire, each told their story of a
struggle for existence, defeat and departure, more pitiful than all the
stories of Indian massacres ever written. Here was a battle field, the
opposing forces being poverty, courage and determination, arrayed
against the elements.

Reinforcements, in the way of hardy homesteaders, were being constantly
drawn into this unequal contest, armed with no other weapon than the
ever abiding hope that nature would so alter her laws as to conform to
this particular locality, lured by the sound of those magic words: "A
home of your own," were ready to come into this deserted territory and
take up the legacies of blasted hopes, equipped with new ideas, and
seemingly fortified by the unfortunate experiences of others who had
made the trial, failed and gone their way to try and forget, if
possible, the ordeal through which they had passed. Trusting that the
touch of the magic wand, in the form of irrigation, would cause the
crystal water to flow, and convert the region into a garden of untold
wealth.

The winter preceding the March, during which our story opens, had been
an exceptionally hard one in the Central and Middle Western states,
floods and other unfortunate conditions having almost completely
destroyed the crops and thereby entailing a loss that was keenly felt
throughout the region, and causing a spirit of unrest among the poorer
element; a desire for a chance to throw off the yoke of dependents, as
wage earners, and to seek fields of greater opportunities. The
newspapers and magazines were filled with articles lauding the "Back to
the Soil" movement, and the country was flooded with pamphlets and
folders, in which glowing descriptions of the opportunities afforded the
homeseekers in the far Northwest was given.

The railroads whose lines reached this vast territory were making
special rates to prospective home builders, and daily homeseekers'
excursions were being run over these routes. Trains loaded with eager
tourists, bound for the land of their dreams, the mecca of their hopes,
the happy land of somewhere; firmly believing that they, at least, had
within their reach the goal for which they, and many of their fathers,
had striven for years. To some, and in fact to a great many, this dream
was to become a reality, and to those whose hardy constitution and
indomitable determination has made such a transformation possible, is
due the development of an Empire in the far Northwest.

It is with one of these tourist families that our story has to deal.
Travis Gully, a man of middle age, had been born and reared in the
county of Champaign, Illinois, and had lived but a few miles from the
town of that name, he had seen it grow from a small village to its
present state of importance. In the neighborhood where he had lived he
was well known, and generally liked. He had taken but casual interest
in things socially, and had mingled but little with the young people of
his set. He had always worked as a farmhand, and had acquired but little
in the way of an education. At the age of twenty-three, he married
Minnie Padgitt, the daughter of a country minister, and had settled down
to the life of a farmer, on a rented farm. At the age of thirty-eight he
was the father of four girls and one sturdy boy, and was still renting,
having made but one change in location since his marriage. Content to
toil for his family, never having had aroused in him a desire for a
better lot in life. The ambition for a home of his own, having lain
dormant for so long, it is not surprising that, when once awakened, it
was all consuming. The awakening came suddenly during one of his regular
weekly visits to town.

On this occasion, being attracted by a crowd on the station platform,
Gully wandered down toward the center of excitement, and beheld a number
of his friends, shaking hands and bidding goodbye to others of his
acquaintances, who he judged from their dress and excited appearance,
were evidently leaving on the train, that had just pulled in and now
stood with engine panting and clanging bell, waiting for the signal to
leave with its long string of coaches, the windows of which were raised
on the station side, regardless of the cold snow-laden March wind that
came in fitful gusts into the eager faces that peered in twos and threes
from each window. Faces that bore the smile of comradeship, whether
beaming on friend or stranger. Some were an enigma; back of the smile
could be seen traces of sadness, sorrow at leaving old homes and
friends, combined with expressions of firm determination to go
brave-heartedly into the great unknown country.

With questioning gaze, Gully approached a group of his acquaintances,
who stood apart from the crowd. As he came up, and before he could ask
the cause of the excitement, he was greeted by one of the party:

"Hello, Trav! Going with us?" he asked, with outstretched hand.

Gully seized the proffered hand of his friend, William Gowell. "Going
where?" he asked. "I did not know you were leaving, Bill."

"Sure," replied Gowell, "hadn't you heard about it? Going to the
Northwest to take up a homestead. Lots of the people from here are
going," and he named over several of their mutual friends, who had sold
their possessions and were taking advantage of the homeseekers' rates.
He told him of the great advantages offered by the new country, and
added: "Better come on, Trav."

Travis Gully, after talking with his friends, was astonished and
bewildered by what he learned. A special car had been sent into Chicago,
loaded with a display of the products of this new country, specimens of
timber, minerals, grain and fruit, apples, pears and peaches, the like
of which had never before been seen. "And just think, such land as
produced this fruit was free, open for settlement. All one had to do was
to live on it for a while, and it was theirs."

As he listened to these astounding statements, he asked himself: "Why
was it not possible for him to take advantage of this golden
opportunity? Why could not he, like so many of his friends, sell out and
follow in a few weeks? He would see what could be done." And with this
resolve, fired by this new ambition to possess a home of his own,
prompted by the advice of those of his friends who were casting their
lot with those of the homeseekers, he eagerly sought out each source of
information, even to making inquiry as to the probable cost of tickets
for himself and family, and after bidding those of his friends who were
going goodbye, he watched the train until it rounded a curve that hid it
from view, and promising himself that he would follow at the earliest
possible moment. With pockets bulging with folders, maps and descriptive
literature, he hurried home with the eagerness of a child, to prepare
his family for their first move into the land of unlimited
possibilities.

Gully, upon his arrival home, was met at the gate by his two eldest
girls, who, after opening the gate, received the few small bundles
brought by their father, and scurried away to the house to announce his
arrival. He watched them as they raced to the door. Ida, the eldest, a
slight girl who had just entered her teens, had been her mother's help
in caring for the younger members of the family, had taken up her share
of the household duties since she could stand upon a chair at the
kitchen table, and wash the few dishes after each meal, and then care
for the ever present baby, while her mother took up the never ending
duties of her sordid existence. This constant strain on the girl had
robbed her of her natural childhood and aged her prematurely. This fact
was noted by the father in his present frame of mind as it never had
been before. He thought of the advantages of the freedom of the far
Northwest, and pictured to himself the fields of waving grain, and
over-burdened orchards, as shown in the booklets he had hastily scanned,
and thought of them as his own, as a play ground for his children.

Driving into the barn yard, Gully cared for his team; each little chore,
as it was done, was accompanied with thoughts that heretofore had never
been taken into consideration. As he hung up the harness he viewed it
critically, and wondered how much it would bring at a sale. He walked
around his faithful team and asked himself if their age would impair
their value. When he went to the crib for corn he estimated the quantity
on hand, and calculated its probable worth. Never before had he
considered his small possessions from such a view point.

So absorbed was he in this new mental activity that he took no note of
time, and he was suddenly aroused by the children, who had been sent to
tell him that supper was ready. On the way to the house, in response to
the summons, his hand constantly clutched the papers in his pocket.
Nervous and abstractedly he entered the kitchen, where his wife was
busily engaged placed the supper on the table. So absorbed was she that
she failed to notice his coming in; not until they were seated at the
supper table did she note the change in his appearance, and then only
after he had made some reference to the fact that he had seen William
Gowell while in town, and that he was leaving the country; that the
Moodys and Lanes and several others of their acquaintance had also gone
on the same train. He then told her of all he had heard of this great
country to which so many of their friends had gone, of his wish to go
with his family and share the opportunities. He went into detail and
explained what the cost of going would be; what he hoped to realize from
the sale of their possessions, even if sold at a sacrifice.

He talked on feverishly, forgetting the frugal meal set before him,
forgetting the tired children, who, little knowing the important part
this proposed move was to play in their future, had eaten their supper,
and all but the two eldest were nodding in their chairs. He showed his
wife and the two oldest girls the illustrations in the folders, showing
the pictures of just such farms as the last few hours had convinced him
he might own.

Seizing a teaspoon from his untouched cup of coffee, he used the handle
to point out rows of--to them meaningless--figures, compiled to show the
millions of feet of timber, tons of grain and fruit produced. To him it
was equally meaningless, except in a vague way. His untrained mind was
incapable of grasping the extent of the information conveyed, but he had
accepted it all as simple facts, for had not Gowell, Moody and Lane
acknowledged their faith in it by going. Thus he talked on until
exhausted. The family retired at an unusual hour, the wife and children
to wonder what it was all about, and he to toss restlessly from the
effects of an over exhausted mind.

He arose early the following morning, having formulated his plans during
the restless night, and immediately began to put them into execution. He
had decided to hold a public sale the following Saturday, and if
successful, would be on his way to his future home the next Monday, on
which date he had learned another homeseekers' excursion would come
through his home town. To accomplish this would require rapid work, and
before breakfast on the morning following this resolve, he was up
assembling his few belongings, getting them in shape for the sale. Old
farming implements were pulled from long forgotten nooks and corners,
incomplete sets of harness and bridles were being over hauled and made
fit to bring the best possible price, the flock of poultry was counted
and an estimate made of their probable value, the two cows, with their
calves, the three pigs, kept over to provide the following winter's
supply of meat, his team, wagon and harness, together with his household
goods, constituted his earthly possessions.

The few days following the hastily made plans were filled with incidents
that tried the patience of the tired wife and mother. To her it was all
like a dream. It was the first time she had ever been taken into her
husband's confidence or been consulted as to his plans for the future.
She did not realize that she was expected to express an opinion as to
the wisdom of the proposed move; if he said it was advisable the matter
was settled.

The constant demand on both her and the older children for assistance in
assembling the various articles intended for the sale was met with
unquestioning silence, and not until her aged father and mother came to
see if the rumors of their departure which had reached them were true,
did she realize to the fullest extent what her going away really meant;
that it meant the leaving behind those aged parents, from whom she had
never been separated except for a few miles; that it meant the severance
of all the ties and scenes with which she had been associated from her
earliest recollection to the present time.

The realization of this fact came upon her with a sudden shock that
stirred within her the first semblence of rebellion that her simple
nature had ever shown. To this feeling of remonstrance she gave way but
for a moment, then with violent weeping she threw herself down at her
mother's knee, and with her head buried in the aged woman's lap, the
cradle of comfort she had always known, she vowed she would not go.
"Travis was wrong; they were doing well enough where they were; father
must stop him, and not let him sell everything and go away," but when
the aged mother placed her trembling hand upon the bowed head and
assured her that "Travis knew what was best, it was probably a wise
move, she and father had talked the matter over as soon as they had
heard that they were going, and regretted that they were not at an age,
to accompany them. She must do as her husband said for his and the
children's sakes, and then too," she added, "perhaps father and I can
come later, after you are settled in your new home." With this
assurance the kind old mother comforted her weeping daughter, who, after
recovering from her first and only outbreak, arose and resumed her
duties with such an attitude of utter indifference that her husband and
father, who had been looking over the articles arranged for the sale the
following day, saw no evidence of her grief upon returning to the house
a few moments after the occurrence.

Gully's enthusiasm, as he discussed with his wife's father and mother
the advantages of the new country to which he was going, knew no bounds.
He had acquired from his constant reference to the descriptive
literature he had in his possession a fund of facts and figures that
were most convincing, and he referred them unhesitatingly to persons who
had seen this exhibition car while on its tour, and who could verify the
statements as set forth in the circulars. Thus he talked on until long
after the supper, to which the old people had stayed, was over, and
after promising to return the following day to be present at the sale,
they had driven home.




CHAPTER II.


The notices of sale, which had been posted throughout the neighborhood,
was held the following day. The attendance was good, and its success,
financially, exceeded Travis Gully's expectations, bringing him a much
larger amount than he had hoped to realize. This was no doubt due to the
spirited bidding of numerous relatives and friends, who chose this
method of aiding the departing family.

After the last of those who had bought had taken their purchases and
departed, and but a few of the idle curious remained, viewing the small
pile of articles that had proven unsalable, the reaction came to Travis
Gully in a manner that fairly staggered him. As he beheld this remnant
of his years of accumulation of personal effects laying discarded and
rejected by all, he glanced in the direction of his huddled wife and
children, who were awaiting the departure of the vehicle which was to
carry them to her parents home. Haggard and dejected they looked. He had
not counted on the effect on them, and it smote him. "Oh, well, they
would soon be settled again, and in a home of their own, where every
nail that was driven, every tree that was planted, would be for them,
and would be theirs." With this consoling thought, he thrust his hand
into his pocket and walked toward the barn. He started as his finger
tips came in contact with the money, the proceeds of the sale. Drawing
it forth, he held it for a moment and stared. This, then, was the price
of his wife and children's content; t'was for the acquirement of this
that he had dispoiled their poor little home, and they were, at that
very moment, looking regretfully at the little pile of rubbish, each and
every article of which, though refused by others, could be associated
with some pleasant moment of their lives.

Returning the money to his pocket, and with such thoughts as the above
filling his mind, he entered the barn. There, too, he was overcome with
a feeling of loneliness; the empty stalls where for years his team had
stood, the unfinished feed of hay in the manger just as they had left it
when those faithful creatures had been led away by the hand of new
owners; the cobs from which the corn had been eagerly bitten were still
damp from contact with the mouths that had yielded so willingly to his
guiding hand. Noting each little detail as it gnawed its way into his
soul, he broke down, and with bowed head he wept as only a grief
stricken man can, and thus they found him when he was sought, to tell
him that they were ready to take him and his family, for the last time,
from the home they had occupied for so many years.

The few unsold articles of household goods and those reserved to be
taken on the trip, together with the family, were taken to the home of
Mrs. Gully's parents, where they were to remain until final preparations
for the journey were completed. The evening after and the day following
the sale were both long to be remembered periods in the lives of those
concerned. At intervals friends or relatives would call to bid farewell,
and to wish the Gullys Godspeed on their journey. At such times the
subject of the trip was taken up and discussed, but was referred to at
other times as seldom as possible.

The term "The Northwest" was usually applied in a general way. None of
those directly interested seemed to appreciate the vast area comprising
this territory. Their conception of it was confined to an area about the
size of the county in which they lived, or at best, a portion of their
home state. They readily received and promised to deliver messages to
those of their neighborhood who had preceded them on the journey.

The selection of a final destination was the question of most
importance. The states of Montana, Idaho, Washington and Oregon each
offered exceptional opportunities to the homesteaders with limited
means. So after deciding to buy through tickets to a coast point, with
stopover privilege, there was nothing to do but await the day of
departure.

At last the Monday came that was to be an epoch in the lives of Travis
Gully and his family. It being but a few miles to the station, an early
noonday meal was eaten, bounteous supplies of lunches were stored neatly
away for the travelers who, with their various trunks, satchels and
bundles, were loaded into a wagon and sent to the village earlier in the
day, the family following after lunch. The intervening time between
their arrival at the station and that of the train upon which they were
going was one of intense excitement. The unaccustomed ordeal of
purchasing tickets, reserving berths in the tourist sleeper, and
checking the baggage, together with constant interruptions with offers
of well meant advice and suggestions from their friends, kept nerves
strained to the breaking point.

At the sound of the whistle of the incoming train, hearts throbbed
wildly, or missed a stroke; the children were hurriedly embraced, the
parting kiss and tender final pat given; the mother and father came
forward to bid Gully and his wife goodbye; then pent up feeling broke
their bonds and mother and daughter wept in each others arms. Amid this
scene of sorrow, excitement and flurry the train, with grinding brakes,
hissing air valves and clanging bell, drew up to the station and
stopped.

The time between the stopping of the train and the conductors deep,
gutteral, "All aboard," seemed but the briefest, yet 'twas ample, and
with final good-byes said and tears hastily dried, they were bundled
helter skelter into their seats, and with the waving of many hands from
the station platform, they were on their way.

As the train's speed increased and familiar objects were being rapidly
left behind, with new and strange landscapes being reeled off, the
children, with eager faces pressed closely to the car windows, gave
joyous expressions of childish delight, while the mother sat silent,
oblivious to her surroundings.

Travis Gully, with his newborn spirit of independent manhood struggling
within him, sat stolidly awaiting the approaching conductor, as if
uncertain of the fact that he was really going, until he had submitted
the mass of yellow and green strips of cardboard, which he was firmly
clutching in his hand, to that official for inspection.

Settled down at last for the long journey over new country, the constant
change of new scenes and experiences kept the family entertained and
their minds diverted from their personal discomforts, and they soon gave
evidence of interest and delight. The wife's spirits being thus revived,
she viewed the panorama of passing scenes with ever increasing interest,
and discussed her future plans and hopes with feverish eagerness. As
their first night as tourists approached, and the outer world was shut
out by darkness, the berths were made ready by the deft hands of the
train porter, and both upper and lower sections were huddled full of
drowsy and fretful children. The unaccustomed noise and noisome
atmosphere gave but little promise of rest for the tired father and
mother. Long into the night they lay awake, their minds filled with
hope, fear and uncertainty, that crowded their way to the front with
such rapidly changing sensations that exhaustion finally overcame them,
and with the constant rattle of the train, as it crossed the joints in
the rails, dinning its way into their benumbed brains, they sank into
unconsciousness.

Morning found them but little refreshed, but after partaking of the
steaming coffee, prepared on a stove with which the car was equipped for
the purpose, and eating a hearty meal, they took note of the changed
appearance of the country through which they were passing. Miles and
miles of flat level country, partially covered with snow, drifted by the
winter wind, with an occasional spot swept bare, which showed the brown
stubble of the wheat field or plowed ground made ready for the spring
planting. Fences were rare, and looking out across the country, the home
could be seen, and they appeared miles apart; straw stacks, around which
frowsey haired horses and cattle stood, dotted the landscape.

The afternoon of their second day out the blue foothills of the Rockies
could be seen in the distance, and as they gradually drew nearer, they
were whirled through miles of barren waste of sage brush, the shrub that
was to play an ever active part in their future lives.

The three days following were much the same; over mountains, valleys,
plains and steams they were speeded until, becoming inured to the
constant changes, they ceased to comment. The grandure of the scenery
did not appeal to their undeveloped finer senses; they were simply awed
by its vastness.

The morning of their arrival at Wenatchee, Washington, the point chosen
for their first stop, was bright and clear. The fresh mountain air swept
down from the pine covered slopes of the hills that surrounded one of
the most fertile valleys in the state, in the heart of which nestled the
little city, justly famed for its magnificent fruit. Miles of splendid
orchards, starting at the very threshold of the business blocks,
extended back to the hills on both sides of the valley. The low drone
of the bees as they swarmed forth among the fast swelling buds in quest
of the first sip of nectar, mingled with the roar of the turbulent
Columbia river, and made music that soothed the tired travelers as
nothing else could.

Travis Gully was impressed with the signs of plenty that were visable at
every hand. By inquiry, he learned that hundreds of acres as valuable as
that contained in the surrounding valley were available for
homesteading. All it needed was water. He soon made the acquaintance of
a professional "Locator," a human parasite that hovers around the border
of all Government land. In this particular instance the "locator" was a
venerable patriarch, with flowing white beard and benign countenance,
who assured Gully that "He had just the place for him. It was about
fifty miles back over the route he had come. Did he not remember that
beautiful stretch of rolling land through which he had passed? That was
the place. Thousands of acres of this fine land was now being taken up
by homesteaders. He must act quickly or his opportunity would be gone."
After listening to a glowing description of this paradise, Gully agreed
to accompany him to see the land, which he did the following day.

There are times when it seems that fate plays into the hand of the
trickster, and on this particular day nature was extremely lavish with
her blessings. Never had the spring sun shone more brightly, the balmy
air was laden with the elixir of good will and contentment, every
soothing draught taken into the lungs spread like an intoxicant,
filling the brain with dreams of success and achievements that danced
just ahead, almost within reach, yet still to be striven for.

Gully, whose mind was filled with the contents of the circulars he had
read, and who had seen the statements made therein, verified in the
locality he had chosen to make his first stop, firmly believed in the
possibilities of the land shown him, and made filing on it immediately
upon his return to the town. He did not question the possibilities of
irrigation or take into account its remoteness; neither did he
investigate the results of past efforts put forth by others in this
conquest of the desert. It was not a desert to him. The winter's snow,
that had just disappeared, had left abundance of moisture in evidence.
Grass was springing up in profusion, and countless wild flowers attested
the fertility of the soil.

So after the necessary arrangements had been made, he came with his
family, all eager to do their part in the preparation of their future
home. Kind neighbors, though few there were, came with offers to help
erect the house. The family was provided with shelter until such time as
the structure was habitable, and they were happy under these new
conditions; they who had never known a harsher fate than the demands of
an exacting landlord for his annual toll, the regular routine of
settling the yearly account with the trusting merchant in the nearby
village, and a frugal existence through the winter on what remained of
the year's yield. Oh! happy renter, there; should his yield be scant or
insufficient, there was someone to appeal to for assistance, which was
gladly given. The homefolks were there, and others to extend help and
sympathy at the time of misfortune, but on the desert, what? A home of
your own.

At last the home was completed; just two rooms, with a board roof, the
outer walls adorned with tar paper held in place with laths, and when
they moved in joy reigned in this primitive home. A rough board table,
two benches and a cook stove, cooking utensils, still shining with the
burnish of new tin, shone upon the walls just outside the kitchen door,
a shelf with new tin basin and water pail were provided. The remaining
room was furnished with two beds, built of scraps of lumber, the corners
of the room forming one side and the head, discarded balewire, woven
across, took the place of springs; three family portraits, done in
crayon, a gaudy calendar of the year before, bearing the general
merchandise advertisement of the faithful old merchant at home, a nickel
alarm clock upon a shelf, and the home was furnished. But it was a home
of their own.




CHAPTER III.


The journey of thousands of miles, the excitement of getting settled,
and cool fresh breezes that swept down from the snow capped peaks of the
Cascades, made sleep easy, and no thought of the morrow disturbed the
rest of this emancipated renter. Morning came, and with it the bright
sunshine and oppressive silence of the desert; not a dog to bark, nor a
noisy fowl to break the stillness. As the sun rose from the horizon, and
before it assumed its brassy glare, a mirage formed across the level
plain, magnifying the humble homes of the neighboring homesteaders into
palatial mansions, and the sage brush into forests, and glistening lakes
with twinkling waves upon their surfaces. Travis Gully, with his family,
stood awed by the magnitude of the panorama unrolled before their gaze,
and looked with feverish expectancy into the vista of possibilities the
future held in store for them. The sun mounted higher into the blue
dome, the mirage passed, and objects assumed their normal proportions,
while the faithful wife told of the hopes for good this vision foretold.

The weeks that followed, each day of which was fraught with hours of
patient toil, clearing away the brush for the first spring planting, the
honest father hewing a spot in the wilderness of sand and sage brush,
the eager children rushing in at each stroke of the mattock, seizing
the uprooted particles of brush and bearing them triumphantly away, to
be placed on one of the many piles of rubbish that marked the path of
this industrious toiler; the patient mother, appearing at the doorway,
looking out across the miles of unchanging gray toward the far east with
that indefinable expression of homesickness depicted upon her face. Of
such scenes as this is the material made of which the everlasting
monument, in the form of a prosperous farming district is built. _Every
fruit tree that grows in the far famed Northwest should be looked upon
as a sprig in the laurel wreath with which to crown the brows of the
sturdy homesteaders--those departed and yet to come._

At the close of each day, and after the evening meal, huge bonfires were
lit in the clearing, around which the children danced gleefully, their
shadows casting fantastic shapes in the background, where the gaunt and
hungry coyote lurked, and at intervals mingled its voice in discordant
note with their merry laughter, as if in vain endeavor to impress upon
their minds the narrowness of the space that lay between their joyous
anticipations and deepest gloom.

Planting time arrived with all its hopes for a bounteous yield. Each day
was devoted to preparing the ground and planting. The winter just passed
had afforded sufficient snow and moisture to produce perfect planting
conditions, and many were the plans made for the expenditure of the
proceeds of this first harvest for a good home, farming implements, and
other necessities for successful farming.

The grain was sown, and the kitchen garden planted in precise rows and
nicely shaped beds. A wagon load of scabrock was hauled from a dry
coulee that wended its way diagonally across this vast area of sand and
sage. These were used to form the border of prim walks and flower beds,
each stone being placed in position and carefully embedded in the soft
sand, _each a cornerstone for the castle of hope_, soon to be displaced
by an inexorable nature, and to allow the upper structure of dreams to
fall about the builder, a pall of utter disappointment.

Just a few days of alluring sunshine, only a few balmy nights, and the
tiny plants were raising their tender shoots above the surface of the
sand, which through its ages of shifting now refused to remain under
control of mere man, and was growing restless, rolling in fiendish glee
down the sides of the nicely formed flower beds and rollicking in
sparkling bits across the walks, filling, with maddening persistance,
every opening made in its surface by the upspringing plants.

The age worn battle between the Goddess Flora and the relentless desert
was being fought over. She with all her garlands, was trying to wreath
the brow of this gray monster, while he, with his withering sunrays and
constant battering with tiny particles of sharp, flinty sand, was
repulsing her every advance.

The Gods, Jupiter, Pluvius and Boreas, standing sponsors for the
contending forces, intervened and changed at times what seemed certain
victory. One with his gentle showers or torrential downpour would rush
to the scene of the fray, settling the tiny grains of sand and thereby
quelling the galling batteries that were assailing the tender plants, at
the same time administering to their bruised and quivering stems and
foliage; then, conscious of a kindly act, he sails away, seated upon his
fleecy crafts of air, emitting an occasional growl, warning his enemy,
the wind, against his return. Scarcely has his frown disappeared over
the brow of the hills to the south, followed by his majestic guard of
chariots, with billowing gold and silver plumage, when a faint whisper
is heard in the grass. Hark! 'tis louder! See the tops of the bunchgrass
moving restlessly; Old Boreas is stalking his enemy. He creeps prone
upon the ground, like a serpent he raises his head with a hissing sound;
on, upward to the top of the tallest reeking sage brush he crawls;
maddened by the presence of those hated sparkling drops of crystal water
that bedecks this misshapen shrub, he shakes them in myriads to the
ground and laughs with glee. But in so doing he is restraining one of
the arch fiends of the desert, the sand. At this discovery he shrieks
with anger, and seizing the precious drops, hoists them into the air,
scattering them in misty spray and hurries them miles through space,
back to their natural haunts, where they are left to assemble themselves
and await another call. Thus left to their own, again the sun and sand
renew the attack, and wear down, by constant onslaught, every particle
of vegetation not originally intended to laugh to scorn their every
effort.

But the fortitude of those alien plants was noble; gallantly they
withstood the siege. For days and weeks, constantly scorched and
blistered during the day, they came up smiling in the morning, with
heads erect, to greet the same sun their parent plant had known and
throve under, but stung, whipped and tortured by the never ceasing, ever
shifting myriads of cutting particles of sand, bleeding to the last
infinitesimal mite, they had to die; they hung their noble heads, became
discolored and withered, and when the morning sun shone forth it was
upon the same dwarfed sage brush and hissing bunchgrass it had always
known. The scabrock border, the horned toad that sought shelter beneath
the protecting edges, all one color, gray, monotonous gray.

Small indeed would be the area of reclaimed land in the great northwest
if each homesteader had given up hopes and abandoned his dreams with his
first disappointment, and had he not awakened to renewed effort at each
stroke of misfortune administered by what seemed to be a relentless
fate.

Nature, in her lavish distribution of blessings, had not wholly
forgotten this seemingly neglected spot. The nights were cool and
refreshing, the air pure and uncontaminated, and both he and his family
being blessed with rugged health. Travis Gully looked upon the havoc
wrought with undaunted courage and determination. He submitted to the
loss of his first planting with resignation, and hastened to seek means
whereby he might provide food and other necessities for his family. To
the north lay the never failing wheat fields of the Big Bend country;
east, the Couer d'Alene mining district; and west of the Cascade
Mountains the lumbering industries of the Puget Sound region. These each
offered a solution of a means of livelihood, ample employment and good
wages; but with the departure of the family from the homestead went the
cherished dream of a home.

Often at night when the children, now grown sunburned and inured to the
intense heat and blistering sands, were on their pallets, enjoying the
peaceful sleep of tired but happy childhood, Gully and his wife would
sit for hours and try to devise means whereby the coming winter might be
lived through with some semblance of comfort. During these heart to
heart talks, while seated before the door of their humble home, Gully's
gaze would wander out across his broad acres, which under the pale
starlight in this clear desert air, could easily be transformed, in
vision, to fields of waving grain; conversation would cease; a restless
move made by one of the children would attract the attention of the
watchful mother, who, upon entering the house cautiously stepping with
stealthy tread among the little sleeping forms, would approach the
table, give the flame of the one small kerosene lamp a gentle turn
upward and throw into bold relief every evidence of abject poverty
within the confines of that one sparsely furnished room. With wide
staring eyes she would hastily scan the face of each sleeping child as
if in dread of finding the fiendish hand of hunger clutching at some
innocent throat; but all is quiet. Passing a trembling hand across her
weary forehead, she slowly turned, and as she did so, read in every
object that met her gaze one word, _sacrifice_. The little blue
overalls, with their numberless patches, and frayed and tattered hem,
the little gingham aprons, worn threadbare by the constant nipping,
picking and catching on the scraggling branches of the despised sage
brush, all shrieked sacrifice. Suddenly, with a quick movement, a little
foot is thrust from beneath the scant cover, and at the same time a
varicolored sand lizzard scurries across the bare floor and disappears
through a convenient crack. Seizing the lamp, she hurries to the side of
the sleeping child, takes the little brown foot in her loving hands and
seeks in vain for some mark of injury inflicted by the frightened
lizzard; finding none, she places the little foot tenderly on the pallet
and reaches for the cover; stops, and stares. What does she see? Only a
little toe, the nail gone, a partially healed wound, showing where the
cruel snag of the hated sage brush had torn its way into her very flesh
and blood. With a groan she bows her head for a moment, then hastily
scanning the room, she misses the little shoes and stockings so much
needed for the protection of those little feet. Arising, she replaces
the lamp upon the table, turns it low, and returns to her husband's
side, prepared to make one of the greatest sacrifices ever made by a
woman, and one of which little has even been said or written. She must
tell him to go, and leave her and the children alone and unprotected in
the desert. He must go, that they might live, go until the winter snows
drive him home. O God! it would be lonely, days of constant watching
across the quivering sea of unchanging gray, nights of wakeful
listening, broken by the sound of the ghoulish yip of the hungry coyote
and the mournful hoot of the ground owl.

_Give honor to the famous women of our land, if you must. She who first
made our glorious flag, those who devoted their lives to nursing back to
health and strength our nation's heroes, and the sainted mothers of
distinguished men; but, oh! remember the wives of the pioneer and
homesteader, and ask yourself; is she not entitled to a place among
these?_

Travis Gully, being completely lost in his dreams of independence, had
not missed her from his side. The good wife stole softly up to him, and
placing her hand upon his knee, slipped down beside his chair. He, being
thus suddenly aroused from his reverie, and noting her appearance of
abject misery, assisted her to arise, drew her trembling form near him,
and spoke cheerfully of the situation, assuring her all would be well in
the end. He forbade her to discuss his departure at that time, and there
beneath the broad expanse of star bedecked sky, surrounded by the vast
and desolate desert, they renewed their faith in each other and resolved
to continue the battle, and with revived hopes they planned for the
future, and for hours rebuilt the castle so ruthlessly destroyed by the
desert storm.




CHAPTER IV.


The month of June had arrived, and with it came the intensified summer
heat, now almost unbearable in the shadeless glare, and as the time
approached for Gully's departure, it was finally decided that the wheat
fields of the north would be the easiest of access for his journey in
search of work. The question of water for domestic use being the most
difficult to solve, it was decided to build a cistern sufficiently large
to hold enough to last until his return, and for the next few weeks the
time was devoted to this work. It was while thus engaged that the family
received its first ray of hopes for the ultimate consummation of their
dream, and the hope to which their minds would frequently revert during
the long fall and winter months that were to follow.

After the cistern had been dug and Gully, with painstaking care, was
trying to cement the interior, patiently replacing each trovel of wet
cement as it rolled from the sides, as the sand gave way and allowing it
to fall repeatedly to the bottom, each time being taken up and carefully
replaced, gradually setting, inch by inch, until the task was
accomplished; his wife on the surface, mixing the sand and cement in
small quantities and handing it down to him, as required; doing her part
to conquer the wilderness as valiantly as any man; when there was a
hurried scampering of little feet, and the children came breathlessly
up, calling to their parent that "Wagons were coming, lots of them."
This announcement to the uninitiated would seem but small cause for
comment, but to those who live for weeks and months without the advent
of a stranger within miles of their habitation, the approach of an
unknown horseman or vehicle is hailed with excitement and wonder.

Gully hastily emerged from his work beneath the surface and looked
inquiringly in the direction indicated by the excited youngsters, where
a few miles to the west a dense cloud of dust could be seen. An
occasional horseman, driving loose stock, or a covered wagon or
buckboard, could be distinguished through the dense pall of dust that
hung with maddening persistence over the approaching caravan.
Speculation was rife among the now excited family, and many were the
theories advanced as to the cause of this unusual sight. It being
definitely determined that the approaching wagon train was wending its
weary way along the road that terminated at their humble abode, hurried
arrangements were made to greet the strangers, the children were
assembled at the kitchen door, and their faces washed to remove, if
possible, a small portion of the desert grime; their sunburned locks,
that the wind had whipped into wild confusion, were hastily untangled,
and arranged into semblence of order. When this task was completed and
each little bronzed cheek shone with the too strenuous application of
common laundry soap, that only resulted in bringing out in bold relief
the myriads of copper colored freckles with which they were covered
with generous profusion, they were admonished by their mother to "keep
clean," and were allowed to scurry away, to watch in wide eyed wonder
the approach of the strangers. The mother, with purely feminine
instinct, removed all evidence of the white splashes of cement from her
hands and shoes, changed her dress, and after these pitiful efforts at
making herself presentable, joined with the waiting children.

Many of my readers have, no doubt, waited with feverish expectancy the
ringing up of the curtain on some notable drama, or looked forward with
a mingling of joyous anticipation and dread to the arrival of a relative
or friend whom they had not seen for years. But few indeed are left who
can describe or define the sensation of commingled joy, dread and
uncertainty that fills the heart of the lonely homesteader on an
occasion like this. Hours seemed to pass during the interval between the
discovery of their approach and the arrival of the strangers, the
hundreds of questions that rushed, unbidden, to the minds of the
isolated desert dwellers. Who were they, and what was their motive for
coming? Were they transient visitors on an idle tour, or some wandering
band of nomads, drifting derelicts, who had strayed from the beaten
paths to evade if possible, contact with civil authorities; or better
yet, were they new neighbors coming to cast their lot with them, to
assist in the reclamation, the conquest of the desert? Such were the
multitude of questions recurring to the minds of the anxious watchers,
each, in its turn, being cast aside to be replaced by others, in
bewildering succession.

Travis Gully, who, owing to the narrowness of his self constituted
domain and the wild desert environments, had allowed himself to drift
backward, and contact with conditions with which he was unfamiliar had
awakened in him the spirit of alert defensiveness of primitive man. He
felt the sting of resentment at the approach of the strangers, and it
was with a forced smile, and hesitating handshake that he greeted the
foremost of the party, who had at last ridden within the front dooryard.
Glancing over his shoulder, he assured himself of the safety of his
family. The wife and three eldest children had remained standing near
the door, while two little towheads, that protruded from behind the
building, showed where the two youngest had taken refuge.

Gully invited the stranger to dismount, but the latter, thanking him
curtly, remained mounted until the entire party, consisting of some
twenty-five or thirty men, equipped with a complete field outfit, wagons
loaded with tents and provisions, abundance of stock, both draft and
pack animals, had arrived within hailing distance. Turning in his
saddle, the chief, or man in charge, raised his gauntleted hand with a
commanding jesture, and with brakeblocks grinding against glistening and
heated tires, rattle of chains and shouts from the teamsters, the
procession came to a stop. Dismounting, he gave a few instructions to
his men, who remained on their wagons; then returning to the waiting
homesteader, asked as to the conditions for making permanent camp in the
neighborhood. On being assured that there was no water for the stock
nearer than three miles, the windmill overtopping the well at that point
being in full view, was pointed out to him, and minute directions for
finding the road that ran tortuously through the miles of sagebrush to
this oasis, was given. With a courteous bow, the chief mounted, gave
orders to his men to follow, and moved off in the direction of the well.

As the last sound of the departing cavalcade was stifled in the muffling
sand, Mrs. Gully came to where her husband was standing, gazing absently
in the direction the strangers had gone. Who were they and what were
they here for, was the absorbing and unanswered question; who was this
clean, trim man, dressed in his khaki suit and neat leather leggings,
who had such absolute authority over this thoroughly equipped
expedition; not a homesteader, this was evident by his professional
appearance; not a fugitive, because his manner was too gentle. Who was
he, and what was his business?




CHAPTER V.


As the season approached for the exodus of homesteaders for the harvest
field, hurried preparations for the departure was made, the cistern was
completed, huge piles of sage brush was gathered for fuel and placed
conveniently near the house. Thus was Travis Gully's time taken up for
the next few days following the arrival of the campers at the well. Many
were the inquiring glances that were cast in the direction of the group
of glistening white tents. Parties of men could be seen going and
coming, morning and night, some walking, others mounted or in vehicles.
Once a band of what seemed to be loose horses was seen to be approaching
the home of the Gullys, but when within a short distance of the house a
mounted man, emerging from the tent village, followed them and turned
them westward, soon being lost in the sea of gray sagebrush, but not
before it was discovered that it was a pack train, going out for
supplies.

At last the day came when the mystery of their purpose was to be solved.
On his first trip to the well for water with which to fill his now
completed cistern, Gully noted a fact that had been overlooked by him on
the occasion of their visit to his home; each wagon and all the
equipment was stamped U. S. G. S. This fact, however, left no clue in
his crude mind as to who they were, and not until he saw one of the
party with an instrument on a tripod, mounted upon a small knoll near
the road to his home, did he awake to the realization of the fact that
they had something to do with a survey.

The task of filling the cistern consumed many days, and required
numberless trips to and from the well. During these frequent visits the
acquaintance of some of the men around camp was made and the information
was volunteered by one of their number that they were a party of United
States Geological Surveyors sent out by the Government to make a survey
of the desert with the view to ascertaining if it was feasible to
irrigate the region by gravity from some of the numerous lakes and
streams that lay hidden away in the mountains that surrounded the entire
valley.

Irrigation! So this was the reason for all this activity. Gully's heart
leaped at the sound of this magic word. Here was the realization of his
dream. It was to be--and why not? Was not the Government making the
survey, had not the authorities awakened to the fact that here was a
country of some seven hundred and fifty thousand acres of valuable land
laying idle. Why not convert it into homes for thousands, who, like
himself, though less venturesome, were dreaming of a home of their own.
With gladdened heart, forgetful of poverty and past disappointments, he
hurriedly filled his barrels with water and drove home eager to tell his
wife the good news.

"I knew it was coming," he told her. Had he not talked with the men who
had been sent to bring about this transformation? "Just think, Minnie,"
he exclaimed, "we are among the first. Others may follow, but we have
our land."

Water, bright sparkling water, flowing in rippling streams; all they
wanted; no more wearisome trips across the dry parched waste, with the
constant drum, drum of the empty barrels dinning in his ears--no more
return trips with the barrels filled at starting, but now sadly
depleted, and the wagon box reeking and dripping with the waste caused
by the splash, splash of the precious fluid. Irrigation--and a home of
his own.

A few days after the discovery of the object of the party encamped at
the well was made, it became generally known, and the glad news was
being discussed in every home throughout the sparsely settled
neighborhood. Men could be seen loitering around the camp or mingling
with the surveyors in the field, eagerly gathering such scraps of
information as was given out and hastily departing to add fuel to the
already inflamed imagination of the settlers.

It never occurred to them that even though the survey resulted in a
favorable report, it would probably take years before the accomplishment
of the purpose for which it was being made, and the added strain of
uncertainty, waiting and watching made the life of the homesteader more
unbearable.

When the morning came for the departure of the little band of harvesters
for the broad wheatfields of the big bend country, it was an unusual
sight that greeted the vision. It had been previously arranged that
they should assemble at the well and make that the starting point for
their journey. Small puffs of dust might be seen arising miles away,
each marking the approach of one or more of the sturdy homesteaders,
many of whom had made the trip the fall before and knew of the many long
hours of toil that awaited them. Yet they were marching forth, with grim
determination to put as many hours into each day as mortal man could
stand. It was their harvest as well as the wheat growers; their season
for retrieving the few hard-earned dollars lost in seeding and planting
during the spring just passed; theirs, to accumulate the necessary food
and clothing for the wives and little ones they were leaving behind in
the desert, to watch longingly for their return when the harvest was
ended.

The party with which Gully was going had decided to take one wagon with
four horses to convey their crew, with the camp equipment, to the grain
fields. The men came in every conceivable means of conveyance,
accompanied by a member or, in some instances, by the entire family, who
were to return with the rigs to their homes, after seeing them safely on
their way. Each came with his blanket roll neatly tied with a cord or
strap. Two dilapidated telescope grips, made of canvas, were provided to
carry the extra clothing of the party; a writing tablet and a package of
plain white envelopes, by means of which the messages, scribbled with
pencil, and often by lantern light, of love, sorrow, success or defeat,
were to be conveyed to the lonely ones in the desert wilds; a spool of
black cotton thread, some needles and a few extra buttons, for an
emergency, were carefully stored deep in one corner of the grip. All to
be used in common, all brothers in the wilds; there was no business
rivalry, no competition there; just an equal desire that all might live.

They were late in getting started, owing to the distance some of them
had to come, and when the last of the party rode up, seated upon a horse
fully harnessed, complaining that his delay was caused by the collapsing
of one of the wheels of his vehicle, the poor old weather beaten buggy
rendered unserviceable by its constant use on many trips to and fro
across the sandy waste; the spiteful particles of sand, gnawing, cutting
and grinding their way into each tiny crevice, between the rim and
spoke, into the hub and under the tire, until its wheels, after days,
weeks and months of rattling, squeaking and groaning, could no longer
stand the strain, the inanimate thing sank helplessly down, to be cast
to one side, among the harsh, rasping sagebrush, and left there to
sizzle, shrink and bleach in the blistering sun rays, until called for
and taken helplessly back to the home of its owner for repairs, in the
way of having hard bits of sun parched leather, cut from well worn and
discarded shoes, forced between its once perfectly fitting rim and tire,
the whole being wound and rewound with the indispensable balewire. Such
an end; what could be expected of a thing of flesh and blood?

"Never mind," cried his waiting companions, cheerfully. "You can soak
the old critter up in the irrigation ditch pretty soon." And with this
merry jest, at the same time recalling to their minds the condition of
their own means of conveyance, and also one of the many uses to which
the abundance of water could be put when once turned loose, to run
rampant across the stretch of barren waste. They prepared to start on
their journey.

Each of the party, with sad heart and quivering voice, all doing their
best to present an indifferent exterior, bade the waiting members of
their families, the gathered neighbors, and the members of the survey
crew a hearty goodbye, and drove northward, knowing full well that their
toilsome progress across the valley would be followed by tear stained
eyes and aching hearts, until the evening shades settled and the thin
spiral column of dust, watched for a time after the object which caused
it to mount high into the heated atmosphere had been hidden by a cloak
of darkness.

The first night out the travelers spent at a small spring that flowed in
a feeble stream down the rock ledge that formed the northern boundary of
the desert, and sank from sight, being swallowed by the thirsty sands.
It was a hard drive that brought them to this place, and during the
hours that intervened between their departure from the well and arrival
at their first camp, was spent in almost silence. Each of those present
seemed lost in silent contemplation of the difficulties that confronted
him. Various subjects had been brought up for discussion, followed for a
few moments, and then were allowed to drop. All except Travis Gully, who
was driving, seemed lost to their surroundings.

It was a varied assortment of which this little group of men was
composed, taken at random from various points, from different walks of
life, no common interest in the way of mechanics or profession, yet
bound together by stronger ties, a mutual understanding of each other's
absorbing ambition to build a home; appreciating to the fullest extent
the difficulties and hardships endured, the disappointments and
suffering caused by the one common affliction, poverty.

There was the muscular iron molder from Pittsburg, who would sit, with
half closed eyes, and liken the heat of the desert to the fiery glow of
the familiar furnaces; the clouds of dust to the dense smoke of his home
city, and ask himself: "Had he moved wisely?" The pressman, from one of
the largest printing establishments in Denver, who would in dreamy
silence listen to the constant clatter of the wagon, and in fancy
hearing the rumble of his once favorite machine, the press, rolling out
in endless sheets items of news, gathered from all over the world;
suddenly the wagon wheel strikes a stone, and with a lurch, he starts
with outstretched hand to adjust a roller, replace a belt, or take up
the torn web. Smiles feebly at his absentmindedness and resumes his
seat. The professor, who for years taught in a college in Kansas,
watched with earnest gaze each specimen of desert plant life that
struggled for existence beside the dusty road, unable to release himself
from the desire to increase his botanical knowledge. An exsoldier and
Travis Gully, the farmer, completed this incongruous party.

Upon their arrival at the spring just before sundown, they arose from
their seats in the wagon, cramped and dusty from their long ride, and
shambling to the rock ledge, relieved their parched throats with copious
draughts from the spring. Knowing that the scarcity of water on the road
over which their route lay would necessitate a forced drive on the
morrow, they hastily unharnessed the horses, gave them water and
picketed them to munch the scant herbage until sufficiently cooled to be
given their ration of grain, they then prepared their own frugal supper,
after which, with pipes lit, and each seated around the smoldering
sagebrush fire, their faces turned homeward, watched the shades of
evening settle, and noted the twinkling lights that shone from their
humble homes miles away across the level plain. Conversation no longer
lagged; each was eager to express his views as to the result of the
survey now being made, and the certainty of the wealth to follow the
reclamation of the thousands of acres of fertile land that lay stretched
for miles to the south. No one doubted for a moment but what it would
come. Was not each of the railroads that extended across the great
Continental Divide, advertising the fertile valleys of the Northwest as
the goal of the poor man? Was not every Commercial Club in the cities
through which these avenues of commerce and forerunners of civilization
ran, sending out and scattering among the inhabitants of the entire
territory from the Atlantic seaboard to the Rocky Mountains, pamphlets
in which was set forth, in glowing word pictures, accounts of the
possibilities of the undeveloped lands now laying idle, yours for the
asking? Were they not morally responsible for the welfare of each family
who, lured by their flattering descriptions, had given up their means of
a livelihood, and sold their small accumulation of personal property, in
most instances for what they could get; frequently scarcely enough to
reach this land of dreams, and at best with but a few hundred dollars?

Would these mighty forces that were being brought to bear for the
purpose of converting the undeveloped resources of this vast country
into a merchantable article, going to accomplish their end by the
sacrifice of thousands of human ambitions, and even lives? Certainly
not; give them a chance.

This survey was being made with the view to placing within the reach of
the settlers the means whereby wealth and affluence might be obtained.

Such was the opinion of all, and with optimistic views and hopes
renewed, the blankets were unrolled and spread upon the bare ground, and
with a cheery "Goodnight," each of these champions of right and justice
lay down to enter the enchanted land of dreams, and live through the
realization of all they had hoped for.

Just before daylight the following morning all were astir and the horses
fed, and with the never to be forgotten acrid smell of burning sagebrush
permeating the cool air, which, gathered amid the eternal snows that lay
undisturbed for ages on the glistening sides of the mountain peaks to
the west, was wafted and filtered through miles of spruce and pine
forests and delivered in all its exhilerating morning freshness to fill
with health and vigor the lungs of these conquerors of the wilderness;
breakfast was eaten, blankets rolled, and just as the rosy tint of the
pitiless sun shone in the east, the start was made.

The road which had led them for weary miles across the desert the
afternoon before came to an abrupt ending at the spring. The solid cliff
of basaltic rock formed an impassible barrier to the north. There seemed
no reason for the road leading squarely up to the ledge other than to
gain access to the scant water supply the small spring afforded, this
spot having been for years the stopping place for weary travelers and
hordes of thirsty stock. No road leading from the spring being visable,
a return drive was made until a road leading directly east was
encountered. This road was followed for several miles, when a break in
the range of hills afforded an exit verging a little to the northeast.
After a few miles the road turned directly north again, leading into a
break in the barrier of hills and out through a coulee to the plateau,
where lay the wheat fields that were the destination of the little band
of harvesters.

The trip through the coulee, once made, would never be forgotten.
Immediately at the entrance of the funnel like gorge, with its
precipitous walls of stone towering in heights from a few hundred to two
thousand feet, the way seemed blocked by a lake several miles in length.
Clear and cool it lay, constantly lashed into fury by the strong
current of air rushing from the chasm above. The white, foam crested
waves, spending their force upon the sandy shore at the lower end,
retreating after each attack, leaving behind a deposit of white frothy
foam that was picked up by the wind and scattered far beyond the reach
of the next incoming wave, there to be dried by the sun, and the
residue, a white crystal, powdered salts, left sparkling in the
sunlight. Nothing in the way of vegetation except a species of harsh
quackgrass grew within the radius covered by this deposit. The waters of
this lake possessed strong mineral properties that were fatal to plant
life, also rendering it extremely nauseating and unfit for drinking.
Owing to this fact, it had been known to the Indians of Chief Moses'
tribe as "Poison Water." Yet cool and sparkling it lay, a gem in the
barren gulch, relieving the eye of those who chanced to pass that way,
but often proving a sad disappointment to both the travel worn man and
beast, who, unacquainted with its peculiar qualities, upon first
beholding its rippling surface, hastened to its brink to appease a
desert born thirst.

As the lake was approached by the party, the members of which had
previously heard of its existence and the nature of its waters, no stop
was made. A passage around it was sought and soon discovered in a well
worn trail that followed a dry ravine which led down to the lake, and
extending around its head, reentered the coulee some miles above. They
continued their journey along this ravine, the route being marked at
intervals by the bleached bones of animals which had perished of thirst
within a short distance of abundance of cool dear water that a caprice
of nature had rendered, like fools gold, alluring, but of no value.

For fifteen or twenty miles the road ran tortuously among the huge
boulders that had fallen from the crest of the solid walls that arose
hundreds of feet on either side, the crevices and nooks of which were
the haunts of the rattlesnake and lizard. The projecting ledges that
occasionally occurred showed signs of being the nesting place of
hundreds of hawks that circled in an aimless manner at dizzy heights
above this giant crevice. Limpid pools of alkaline water lay teeming
beneath the blistering suns rays, their white salty rim unmarked by the
footprints of any living thing, accursed by nature and abhorred by all
God's creatures, wasting their contents by evaporation during the
summer, and replenished by the torrents that rushed through this
abandoned water course during the annual spring thaw.

That it had been a water course was evidenced by the beds of well worn
gravel, devoid of all soil, and the marks of the constant wash of the
waves on the face of the cliffs on either side. Who knows but what at
some remote period the mighty Columbia river had flowed through this
grand coulee, emptying into an inland sea, the bed of which now formed
the desert of almost a million acres, destined to be the home of half as
many people? Flowing thus for ages, nourishing plants now unknown; its
limpid waters, cooling and refreshing the prehistoric monsters that
came daily to drink at its brink; sheltering beneath its rippling waves
species of fish now extinct, their fossalized forms only remaining to
remind us of the mighty changes that have taken place. Flowing
peacefully on, secure in its mightiness, yet all the while somewhere
along its course was being assembled the power that wrought this change,
the terrific force in the nature of gases generated far in the depths of
the earth. It might be thousands of miles away, conducted through
unknown channels and crevices, seeking the point of least resistance,
forced hither and thither by the ever increasing pressure, until a
subterranean cavity is formed by a slight upheaval or displacement of
the stratification. Into this rush the gases, followed by the raging
fires, until further resistance is impossible. The imprisoned demon
crouches in narrow confines, trapped at last; and with a mighty shudder,
the effects of which are felt on the surface, causing the ponderous
mastodon to halt unsteadily, and raising his gigantic head in alarm,
sounds a note of warning, and followed by his herd, rushes madly through
the mass of huge ferns in search of safety.

The imprisoned force, no longer able to confine its strength, furiously
gathers its reenforcement, and with terrific, thunderous roar, forces
the crust and breaks through, tearing asunder this sphere that has taken
eons to form, disgorging in fiery torrents upon the surface of half a
continent the contents of its seething cauldron.

Back rush the floods of the Columbia, as if aghast at the havoc wrought;
stays its flow but for a moment, and charges this indomitable foe that
dares to impede its progress, and pours its waters, now made black and
muddy by the tons of ashes and stone sent hurtling into its waves, into
the thousands of crevices and fissures trying in vain to throttle this
fiery demon who greets the oncoming stream with flaming tongue, converts
it into steam and additional power with which it throws out huge volumes
of mud that seal the crevices and cool the lava about its glaring
throat, thus using its enemy to erect a barrier against itself.
Hopelessly defeated, the mighty river seeks a course whereby it may
reach its former terminus, the inland sea. It wanders on with
indefatigable persistence, taking the abandoned beds of some of its
former tributaries; follows it until overtaking the original stream at
some unaccustomed place, absorbs it and hurries on its way over boulders
and through canyons and gorges, rapids and cataracts harrassing its
waters in a manner heretofore unknown. In its wild flight it makes a
detour of more than a hundred miles, appropriates the channel of another
stream, and turns back toward the inland sea, still determined to do its
part in replenishing this vast storage place.

Upon reaching its western boundary, oh! what a change had taken place.
Stretching away as far as could be seen was a mass of oozing matter,
decaying seaweed and pools of slimy water, heated to almost boiling,
reeking with the stench of dead fish, the whole being sprinkled with
cinders and ashes, and teeming with muck and filth.

A break in the southern boundary of the former body of water showed
where a fissure had been opened up, through which its contents had
drained, following the outlet until it had emptied into the Pacific
Ocean. The noble Columbia, unable to gain access to refill the basin,
took up the course of the liberated deluge and followed resignedly in
its wake.




CHAPTER VI.


The third day out the harvesters reached the scene of action in the
grain fields, and by noon of that day had found employment, the entire
party being engaged for the season with promise of work for their
horses. This was indeed an agreeable surprise. They had expected to
remain in the same neighborhood, but to be employed together was more
than they had hoped for.

The afternoon of the same day they drove to the home of their employer.
Here the scene that greeted them was something of a disappointment to
them, as the home of the wheat grower was but little better than their
own desert shacks, save that it had one redeeming feature, an abundance
of water. A well, surmounted by a large windmill, was located near the
center of a large enclosure, and was the attraction for a number of
horses and cattle. A few lazy hogs wallowed contentedly in the mud
beneath the long watering trough, into which flowed, with fitful gushes,
at each stroke of the slender pumprod, a stream of pure cold water,
which was consumed by the waiting stock or allowed to overflow at will
from the trough. The large barn, the dilapidated machine shed, and the
typical home of the wheat grower was complete. No, not complete. There
was yet another object. It was located in the further corner of the barn
yard. It was an old wagon, with huge frame mounted upon it. This frame
was covered with flimsy, dirty canvas, and had a stovepipe protruding
from the top. From a door in the back, three narrow rickety steps
reached down to the ground as if inviting one to enter, and at the same
time daring them to take the chance. Off to one side was a pile of
sagebrush, with a broken handled axe near by, and a barrel of stale
water with a tin cup hung by a piece of wire over its chime, two tin
basins laying upon the ground, while to a nail driven in the corner post
of the canvas covered structure hung a piece of sack twine with a
twisted aluminum comb dangling at its ends, and a dirty towel which the
constant action of the wind kept from becoming rigid and stiff. This was
the "cook house," where the toilers were to get their meals during the
harvest.

With faint misgivings at the uninviting prospects the strangers,
beholding the broad acres of grain now just turning to gold on the high
ground, and gradually shading to a dark green in the swails and hollows,
and extending over from one and a half to two or three sections of rich
land, asked themselves why conditions were not better.

The men already engaged at harvesting on this wheat ranch not yet having
come in from their day's work, our party cared for their horses and
strolled about the place, wondering at the absence of signs of life, but
being unfamiliar with such conditions, among the stalks of heavily
headed grain that reached to their shoulders, and taking the plump, well
filled heads in their hands, fondled them lovingly, and their minds
went back to their own desert homes, to their lonesome wives and
children, and asked themselves if the time would ever come when their
land would produce such a bounteous yield, and thought with proud
satisfaction of how, in case of such an event, they would remain at home
and enjoy the sweet sound of the harvest machinery as it garnered for
them and theirs.

Wonderingly they waited for someone to come, some friendly voice to
greet them, if not in profuse welcome, to at least tell them where they
were to put their few effects and where they were to receive the
accommodation that, being strangers, they had every reason to expect.
They had brought their blankets, it was true, but it was with the view
to using them while camping out. They little realized that, had they not
brought them, they would have been provided with little more
accommodation than a beast of burden.

The sun went down and they sauntered back to the barn yard, where they
had left their wagon, and loitered around it with a fondness due the
only familiar object in sight. Still no one came. From the grain field
the clicking of the sickle as it mowed down the grain could be plainly
heard, wafted from afar on the rapidly cooling twilight breeze. Travis
Gully arose from his seat on the wagon pole as if moved by some
uncontrollable impulse, and going around to the side of the wagon, threw
back the rolls of blankets and drew forth the old canvas telescope grip.
Taking it fondly in his rough hands, he knelt beside it on the ground,
unloosened the straps, removed the tablet and envelopes, and taking from
his overall pocket a stub of a pencil, resumed his seat and began to
write, with a slow cramped movement, the first letter home. Slowly he
poured out from his own burdened heart the cry of a distressed soul.

The remaining members of the party, realizing that this was to be the
anxiously looked for first news, sent loving messages to their homes. No
mention was made of the tiresome trip, of the forbidding aspect of their
first employment; just a letter of encouragement, reassuring them of
their success, and hopes for a profitable season and safe return.
"Simple enough," you might say, but oh! what relief to the pent up
feelings of those sturdy homebuilders.

Think, if you can, of what might have been written and read between the
lines, of the anguish and uncertainty that was tugging at the heart
strings of each of them, knowing, as they did, the conditions under
which they had left their families; out alone on the desert, realizing
that they, themselves, knew absolutely nothing of the duties they would
be called upon to perform on the morrow, and tell me if you do not agree
with me when I say that there, in the evening shades, under environments
that would try the strength of the bravest, was not endured to the
fullest extent, misery.

The letter was finished, and after placing it in the envelope, Gully sat
with it in his hand and gazed thoughtfully at the address. The iron
molder lit his pipe and moved off in the direction of the barn; the
professor and the soldier arose and strolled to the well; all silent,
lost in their own thoughts, the nature of which can only be guessed.

The sudden opening of a door at the main house aroused them from their
reverie, and turning in the direction of the noise, they saw a woman
come out and secure an armful of stovewood and reenter the building. In
a few moments a dense smoke was emitted from the stovepipe, an
indication that supper was being prepared. Darkness was fast obscuring
the landscape, and from the distant field the conversation of the men
returning from their work could be plainly heard, and mingling with it
were the sounds of rattling chains and creaking harness. Upon their
arrival at the barnyard, and while some of the horses were still
drinking at the well, a man was seen to emerge from the house bearing a
lighted lantern, and go to the barn, where other lanterns were lighted
and carried about by the men.

Our friends went to the barn and upon making their presence known, were
greeted with a tired "Howdy do" from the workers, as they unharnessed
and distributed grain among their horses.

The owner of the wheat ranch, for it was he who had come from the house
with a lighted lantern, came hurriedly up, and after pointing out a row
of empty stalls, instructed the strangers to put their horses inside.
This they gladly did, after which the lanterns were hung on pegs outside
the barn and the workmen disappeared in the darkness. Our friends,
hearing sounds at the well, went there and found several of the men
stripped to their waists, washing the dust and perspiration in the
trough and drying their faces on large red handkerchiefs with which they
had mopped their faces during the heat of the day. As they completed
their ablutions, they disappeared, until there was but one who, upon
raising his streaming face from its immersion in the trough, inquired of
our friends: "You fellows had supper." Upon being assured they had not,
he advised them to "wash up, and come on down to the cook house," the
location of which was easy, owing to the light which shone through the
canvas cover, bringing out in bold relief the silhouette figures of
several men seated at the table, with elbows in the air, working
industriously, making way with generous portions of food, as was
indicated by the shadows of dark objects before them.

Thoroughly tired and hungry, not being accustomed to waiting until this
unseemly hour for their evening meal, they followed their new
acquaintance and mounted the rickety stairs leading up to the entrance
of the cook house. They were astonished at the arrangement of the
interior; every available inch of space was taken up and made to serve
some purpose. The forward end of the canvas structure was partitioned
off and used for a kitchen--the rear portion, with a table running the
full length, served as the dining room--while boards, fastened with
hinges to either side, could be either raised or lowered, doing duty as
seats. The sides of the structure was so arranged that the upper portion
could be swung outward and propped, thus being converted into awnings
and at the same time affording ventilation. Immediately over the table
and drawn up to the top of the canvas canopy by means of a rope fastened
to each corner, and running through pulleys, was a woven wire bed
spring. This could be lowered at night and was the sleeping place of "my
lady," the cook, a haggard, sad-eyed individual, the widow of an
unfortunate homesteader who, unable to endure the hardships of a
pioneer, had gone to his reward the summer before.

When the first two members of our party had entered the cook house the
rest were compelled to remain outside until some of those who had
finished vacated, for when the table was filled those who went in first
had to remain seated until the last one who entered had finished his
meal.

The food was abundant and good, well cooked and served, when you take
into consideration the difficulties under which it was prepared, and was
eaten by the tired and overworked harvesters in a manner indicating a
complete indifference to after effect. When supper was finished, there
being no opportunity for gaining information, the hour being late, our
friends returned to their wagon, unrolled their blankets, and lay down
to ponder over this unheard of way of treating hired help. But not for
long. Being fatigued to the limit of human endurance, they fell asleep,
with the faint sound of the clatter of tin pans and cups that emanated
from the cook house and the incessant rattle of the windmill dinning in
their ears.




CHAPTER VII.


When morning came--not morning proper--but it was sometime after
midnight, Travis Gully was awakened by the sound of someone cutting
wood. Peering from beneath his blankets, he saw a lighted lantern at the
cook house. Other lanterns were being carried to and fro among the
horses in the barn. Sleepy individuals were crawling out from every
conceivable place--from the hay mow and machine shed, carrying their
inseparable blanket rolls. At the well men were busily pumping water by
hand, the wind having died down during the night. Not being sufficiently
awake to fully realize the meaning of this activity, Travis Gully
stretched his tired limbs, rolled over, gave his blankets an extra tuck
and drifted away in slumber. Not long, however, was he allowed to remain
in this condition, for he was suddenly startled from his dreams by a
gruff voice shouting: "Roll out, here, you fellows," and started to a
sitting position, with tired sleepy eyes blinking in the bright glare of
the lantern light, he beheld the boss standing over them, smiling
amusedly at their bewildered looks. Their first day in the harvest field
had begun, the first of many just such days that were to follow before
they could return to their homes, and during the long winter evenings
recount to the eager listening wife and children the varied experiences
through which they had passed, embellishing each little incident with a
tinge of humor that could not be appreciated at the time of its
occurrence.

Dressing hurriedly, they went to the barn to care for their horses and
found them munching contentedly at their morning feed, which had already
been given them. Seeing the other men busily harnessing their teams
they, without question, did likewise, resolving to be governed in their
actions by the example of the older hands; they waited expectantly for
each move. One of the men, more congenial than the others had proven,
asked them how they had slept. Upon being told, he suggested that they
bring their blankets into the hay mow where, he assured them, they would
be more comfortable. This was the first intimation they had that they
were not to be provided with a bed, but must choose their own resting
place. They were soon to realize that the hours for rest were as scant
as the accommodations for enjoying them, and adapted themselves to
prevailing conditions. So after converting the watering trough into a
lavatory for making their morning toilet, they proceeded with the rest
of the men to the cook house for breakfast; after which, having no
special duty assigned them, they were at a loss to know how to proceed.
It being yet dark, they stood awkwardly around, while some of the men
brought out their teams, watered them, and springing upon one of the
horses rode back in the direction from which they had come the evening
before.

They did not remain long in doubt, however, for the owner of the ranch
came from the house and instructed them to follow the road over the
hill, where they were heading grain, and to await his arrival, adding
that their horses would be sent out later by one of the boys, who would
drive them while on the job. This arrangement was a disappointment to
Gully, who had hoped that he might be permitted to drive them, but he
made no complaint, and they did as they were bidden.

When they arrived at the place indicated by the owner, they found the
header with the horses hitched ready for starting. Three header boxes
were awaiting the arrival of teams and drivers. A circle had been cut in
a large area of ripe grain and a few loads piled in the center,
indicating where the stack setting was to be made. The driver of the
heading machine, or "header puncher," as he was called, was groping
around in the uncertain light, oiling up or adjusting the drapers or
elevator canvas.

In a few moments a wagon came from the house with a barrel of water, a
few additional pitchforks, and some extra parts of machinery that might
be needed in case of a breakdown. Our friends were assigned their
respective duties; Gully was to be stacker, the molder as "spike pitch"
or helper in the stack yard, the professor was "loader," and the soldier
was given a pitchfork and sent to turn the grain in the "backswarth," a
narrow strip cut around the entire field before the regular heading is
begun. This is usually cut green and allowed to cure for hay. So with
their horses being driven to a header box the siege had begun.

For five weeks, each day being identical, days of constant grind, short
nights, and three trips to the cook house, days of blistering heat, the
sunrays being intensified by concentration and reflection from the
shining surface of the glistening straw. The light soil, mostly volcanic
ash, being pounded and loosened by the constant tramping of the horses
in their many trips to and from header to stack; lifted high at each
turn of the "bullwheel" of the header and sent flying in stifling
clouds, clogging the eyes, ears, nose and mouths of the workers, while
trickling streams of perspiration from beneath their hatbands washed
furrows through the accumulated mass on their faces.

The first week of this toil tried the spirit of our party almost to the
breaking point. Night would find them bowed down with aching backs from
the unaccustomed strain of pitching the heavy grain; hands numb and
cramped, with blistered palms; throats dry and parched from the intense
heat and dust from the straw. They would sink down upon their blankets
in the hay mow and sleep the sleep of utter exhaustion, but the hopes of
our homesteaders were being constantly revived by the receipt of
encouraging letters from home.

Opportunities for getting these letters mailed were few, it was
explained, but by sending them to the camp of the surveyors they were
taken to the distant town and forwarded; and such news as they brought.
"All are well at home. Do not worry; we are doing splendidly. Of course
we miss you very much and want you with us, but when you do come home,
you can stay. Just think, a party of the surveyors were on our land
today and have driven stakes showing exactly where the irrigation ditch
is to run." Thus wrote Gully's wife, and others would tell of rumors of
large land deals, whole sections and half of townships, being purchased
by big companies, all to be immediately improved. Houses were being
erected in every direction; parcels of land heretofore considered
worthless were being filed on; a school house was being built and,
really, things were beginning to be quite homelike.

Upon receipt of these cheerful missives the disappointment of the first
season was for the time forgotten, and the men entered into their daily
toil with cheerful hearts, filled with the anticipation of the
realization of their dreams. Thus on through the ensuing threshing
season up until the later fall, when it seemed that a snowfall might
occur any day, did our sturdy homesteaders toil on until the last of the
golden grain was sacked and hauled to a place of safety. Then only did
they turn their faces homeward, with the indispensable blanket rolls,
the old canvas telescope grip, now more dilapidated than ever, thrown at
random in the wagon; with overalls out a knee, the frazzled threads of
many colored patches indicating the earnest efforts of their wearers to
make them last the season through; hats out at crown, and well worn
shoes, they were indeed a travesty on the party who had left their homes
only a few months before. But each sun tanned face was wreathed in
smiles, for securely tucked away in those well worn overalls was a snug
sum, their harvest wages, that insured them and their loved ones
against want during the coming winter.

They were going to their "own homes." They did not have to move or worry
about a new location for the following year; things were different now.
This money they had earned, hard earned, it was true. Think of the many
comforts it would buy--shoes for the little ones, and much provisions,
and by judicious expenditure additions might be made to their homes.
They could at least weatherboard them and make them more comfortable.
Such were the thoughts and suggestions that filled the minds of these
faithful home builders throughout the first day of their journey home.




CHAPTER VIII.


I have often wondered, as no doubt many of my readers have, what there
is in a man's nature that makes him blush and feel ashamed of doing a
little act that is in every respect perfectly natural, and one, that if
publicly known, would raise him in the estimation of his fellow men, and
yet while condemning himself for his weakness, his heart actually throbs
with the pleasure he derives from doing as he has done.

The first day on their return journey from the harvest field was a
joyous one, the relaxation from the strain and the diversion acting as
an elixir. Freed from the noise of clattering machinery out upon the
highway, and relieved of the sight of miles of brown fields of stubble,
our friends rejoiced at the sight of the desert with its thousands of
acres of bunch grass and sagebrush that stretched far ahead of them to
the foothills, there to be met by the dark green shade of the mountain
pine and fir, above which shone in all its glittering splendor the
eternal snow on the mountain peaks. They spoke in endearing terms of the
mighty wilderness as theirs, as if little realizing that the small
portion of that vast domain to which they actually held claim was
insignificant.

They had chosen a different route by which to make their return, one
that led them through a small village situated at the edge of the
desert. It was here that the last night out from home was spent, and
here too was demonstrated the peculiar traits of man's character
referred to at the opening of this chapter.

After the establishment of the camp for the night and after the team had
been cared for, Travis Gully was noticeably restless, and at length
wandered away from his companions and entered the village store. No
thought of his own disheveled appearance entered his mind. It was of the
dear wife and little ones he thought. The morrow would see him with
them, and the long summer's watching and waiting would be at an end.
What more natural than that he should wish to take some little token to
the children and to her, who had borne the burden of the long summer's
separation that they might retain their homestead?

He thought of her as he had last seen her, as she stood at the camp near
the well, struggling to withhold the tears that he know too well had
flown many times since he left. He recalled the pitiful effort she had
made to dress for the occasion of his departure; of her brown dress, her
best dress, the one that had been carefully made, stitch by stitch, in
preparation for their long journey from their old home to the land of
promise; how it had withstood the days of constant wear while she was
cramped up in the tourist coach, being whirled away across the
continent, and how guardedly she had spread the cloth upon her lap to
protect the precious fabric from being soiled by the touch of many
little fingers made greasy by clutching the huge sandwiches of fried
chicken, ham and cheese, with which the spacious hamper, their traveling
companion, was bounteously provisioned; and how after their arrival, and
while seeking a suitable location, it had been subjected to countless
brushings and spongings, until at last it bore all too plainly the
evidences of the hard usages to which it had been called up to submit.
And yet, it was still her best.

She should have a new dress, one that he himself had bought, and without
hesitating he approached the expectant merchant to make known his wants,
and here his confusion was made evident. Never having made a purchase of
this nature, he was at a loss as to quantity, quality and color. After
numerous suggestions from the over-anxious merchant a selection was
made, the required number of yards guessed at and measured off. Then
after purchasing a small carton of animal crackers and some peanuts and
candy for each of the children, he paid the amount of his purchase, and
with his precious bundles tucked beneath his arm sought the camping
place.

As he approached the camp fire around which his companions were seated,
he was seized with a desire to hide his bundles lest they might jeer him
good-naturedly about his extravagance. He tried to reach the wagon by a
circuitous route to avoid observation until he had hidden his bundles.
In this effort he was partially successful, but the others had seen him
in time to arouse their suspicions, and they accused him of buying a new
suit. To this he entered a strenuous denial, but looked guilty and felt
uncomfortable the remainder of the evening. He did not join in the
conversation that followed his arrival, but sat, as the firelight died
down, and watched across the barren waste for the first twinkling light
that might give evidence that human beings inhabited this vast region
of hidden possibilities.

Thus he sat long after the other members of the party had gone to bed,
sat dreaming, as his watchful gaze centered on the darkened space made
more dense by the rays of the fitful flicker of the dying fire, space
that for the lack of distinguishable form might be likened unto a
yawning cavern, a bottomless abyss, whose only known content was stygian
darkness. Was it into the unsatiable maw of this monstrous dungeon by
night and inferno by day that he had allowed himself and loved ones to
be drawn; unwittingly, it was true, but as irrestistably as a disabled
craft into the vortex of some mighty whirlpool, carried around and
around the outer circle, fascinated by the charm of the smooth gliding
movement. Suddenly the arc of the circle decreases, and looking further
toward the center, other objects are seen, but it is noted that they
seem to be moving more rapidly. Why this increased speed? Is the goal in
sight, or has their proximity to the desired end given them a vantage
view? Ah! they will keep speed with the large object just ahead of their
craft; perhaps they can learn what motive drew them to this delightful
place. But a moment, a pause, a quiver and a plunge downward; one mighty
wail of despair, followed by a gurgling sound of gluttenous
satisfaction, and they realize too late their fate. Casting a
despairing look backward to warn those in sight not to follow, but on
they come, heedless of their warning, offering themselves unconscious
sacrifices to the ever increasing demand for new territory for new
outlets, for the ever populated districts of the world.

It was the same old story. The pioneer fighting the first great fight,
blazing the trail and marking the route with suffering, tears and even
death, that future generations might follow at their ease.

Travis Gully wondered if he, as its helmsman, had allowed his craft to
be drawn into dangerous waters, bearing with him his family, the
precious passengers whose lives had been intrusted to his care. Had he,
at the first narrowing of the circle, gone and left them in this vast
wilderness. Was it justice? Were they safe? A few more hours would tell.
And let the conditions in the future be what they may, he would never
leave them again. With this resolve, and with a feeling of comfortable
assurance that his leaving would not again become necessary he, with one
more look to see that his bundles remained where he had hidden them,
went to his rest.

Taking advantage of an early start, the following morning the party was
well on its way when the sun shone above the jagged ridge of hills that
marked the eastern boundary of the desert, shown as mellow and as soft
as the spring sunshine in their old eastern homes. The lateness of the
fall season had robbed it of its brassy glare and the cool wind that had
swept over the valley during the night had driven out the quivering heat
units with which the blistering sands had been surcharged.

The drive home was a pleasant one and good progress was made. Everyone
was intent on locating at the very earliest possible moment the
windmill, surrounded by its village of glistening white tents, that they
were sure could be seen for miles. Numerous windmills were in sight far
across the plain, but none that they could distinguish as the one
marking their journey's end.

As they drew nearer to their homes, and after they had reentered the
road over which they had made their outward trip, evidence of a changed
condition was everywhere apparent. New houses, their unpainted outer
wall reflecting the bright sunrays, could be seen for miles; hundreds of
acres had been cleared of sagebrush, and small mounds of white ashes
surrounded by charred ends of brush over which the reawakening bunch
grass waved, showed where the bonfires had been made. In some instances
many acres had been plowed and harrowed, made ready for the sowing of
grain that would immediately follow the first of the winter's rains.
This evidence of advancement gladdened the hearts of our worthy friends
and speculation was rife among them as to the probable value of land
under these changed conditions.

In their eagerness to reach their homes no stop was made for lunch.
Water for their horses was obtained from a newly made cistern at the
edge of a large area of newly plowed land. Evidence of a recently
abandoned camp was near at hand, but no sign of life. The journey was
resumed after watering the horses and in a short while familiar objects
could be pointed out, and in some instances their individual homes could
be located. There was the old windmill, its weather stained wheel and
vane contrasting strangely with other windmills that glittered with
their newness on adjoining sections, the old landmark that had withstood
the onslaught of the terrific wind and sand storms for years, warped by
the intense heat of the blistering desert sun, drawing with tireless
energy the cool sparkling water from the depths of the well over which
it stood guard, and beckoning to the chance wayfarer to come and partake
of its refreshing draughts. Thus it had stood, known as "The Windmill,"
the friend of every stockman, homesteader, land owner or wandering
Indian that chanced its way since the day, many years ago, a progressive
sheep man, seeing the value to his herds of this extensive grazing
ground, had caused to be hauled for many miles, across mountain, stream
and plain, the machinery for its erection, for the establishment of this
oasis in the desert. Unconscious of the fact that he was erecting a
monument to himself and a source of comfort and blessings to hundreds of
human being for many years to follow.

Upon their arrival at the windmill they were disappointed to find that
the tents were gone; the party of surveyors had left the field. The only
remaining evidence of their having been there was an occasional white
stake driven into a mound of earth, marking a corner, or an iron pipe
with a brass cap on which was recorded the elevation above sea level.
The busy groups of men, the hurrying camp wagons and pack trains, were
missing, so the anxiously awaited information as to the probability of
irrigation in the near future was not to be gotten.

The families of the homesteaders having been informed of the day and
time of their probable arrival, had assembled at the well to greet them.
Travis Gully's wife and three of his children were there. Being unable
to find the horses that had gotten loose upon the range, they had walked
the three miles to the well to meet him. Ida, the eldest girl, had
remained at home to care for the youngest child, who was too small to
take the trip.

Here, at the same place where they had assembled a few months before,
they separated and went to their several homes. A neighbor whose horses
had been taken on the trip to the harvest field assisted Gully and his
family to reach their home. As they approached the house the children
who had been left at home came running out to greet them with joyous
shouts of welcome.

Thanking his friend for the ride, Gully threw his blanket roll from the
wagon and sprang down, seized his boy in his arms, lifted him high on
his shoulder and marched triumphantly into the house. His wife having
taken possession of the canvas grip, and with the rest of the children
eagerly crowding around, they followed him. A shaggy tramp dog who had
come unbidden, a self constituted guardian of his family during his
absence, came from beneath the kitchen table, sniffed suspiciously at
Gully's overalls, and scenting no evidence of danger, wagged his tail in
approval and returned to complete his nap. The three chickens of which
Joe was the proud owner, feeling that some event of importance was
taking place, crowded noisily around the door.

All these little incidents were unnoticed by the tired father who, now
being seated, was in a fair way of being smothered by the demonstrations
of his devoted children. Boisterously they crowded around and over him,
plying him with a constant volley of questions and recitals of
happenings during his absence. The mother, forgetting for the time the
long months of anxious waiting, beamed with satisfaction on this happy
scene. Curiosity to know the contents of the canvas grip soon aroused
the children, and after Gully had emerged from the mass of clinging arms
and tangled locks, he directed Joe to bring the grip to him.

Upon receiving the grip, and with his children seated around him on the
bare floor, with eager and expectant faces, he opened it, and as he
handed each their little bundle they scampered away to investigate its
contents. He handed his wife the package he had brought for her and
asked if she could guess its contents? After several attempts to do so,
all of which ended in failure, she opened it, and realizing at a glance
the nature of his gift, she was speechless with pleasure, and with her
eyes filled with tears, she threw her arms about his neck and laughed
with girlish glee. For the first time in the course of their married
life Minnie Gully had a glimpse of her husband's heart.

It was a happy family that gathered around the supper table that
evening. After the meal was eaten and the dishes removed the smaller
children brought their boxes of crackers, cut in grotesque forms of
various animals, and arranged them in rows to correspond with their idea
of a circus parade, of which they had once seen a picture. The mother
and two eldest girls unrolled the goods for the dress, and holding it to
the light, admired its beauty and discussed how it had best be made.
Gully sat silently smoking his pipe, enjoying for the first time a
feeling of absolute independence. He was in his own house, on his own
land, with funds to provide for the winter, and being undismayed by the
failure of his first effort on his homestead to raise a crop, dreamed
peacefully of the future.

Late into the night, long after the excited children had gone to sleep,
Gully and his wife sat and planned for the expenditure of the sum he had
earned during the harvest season. They talked of the many requirements
of the children, of the supply of provisions that would be necessary to
do their family until spring. Feed had to be purchased for the two
horses with which it had been necessary for him to provide himself when
he came upon the homestead. If the snowfall was light the amount of feed
required would be correspondingly small, but should the snow become
sufficiently deep to hide the bunch grass it would be necessary to feed
the whole winter through. Thus they planned, making numberless lists of
necessary purchases, and after comparing the amount required with the
funds on hand, revised and readjusted the list until finally giving up,
bewildered but happy, they went to their rest.




CHAPTER IX.


Travis Gully having acquired the habit of early rising during his
sojourn among the harvesters, was awake the following morning before the
rest of the family was astir. He lay for a short time drowsing and
enjoying the unaccustomed rest, but being unable to content himself,
arose, and after dressing stepped outside in the crisp morning air.
Daylight was just appearing over the brow of the hills to the east, a
narrow thread of silver light with a faint tinge of rosy dawn. The deep
shades of night, disappearing behind the peaks of the Cascade mountains
to the west, cast their purple hues over the snow covered expanse at
their summit, faded away and were lost amid the gloomy blackness of the
heavily timbered gorges that cut deeply down their sides to the Columbia
river.

Lighting his pipe, Gully strolled out near the cistern, where, seated
upon an upturned barrel, he breathed with exhilerating delight the
morning air and tried, in fancy, to picture to himself what the
reclamation of the thousands of acres that lay before him would mean. He
could see miles of just such grain as he had been helping to harvest,
and long avenues of fruit trees, extending across the clearing he had
made the spring before; trees like those he had seen growing in the
orchards at Wenatchee, where he had made his first stop. The little
strip of land that lay between his present humble home and the dusty
road, then no longer dusty, but a glistening well kept highway extending
away in the distance until lost to view by its ever decreasing
narrowness; this little strip of land would be a waving mass of
luxuriant alfalfa through which would wander his cows, horses and pigs.

His flights of imagination suggested to his mind a number of comfortable
cottages in close proximity to his own then pretentious home, in which
were domiciled each of his children. They should have homes of their
own.

Travis Gully sat dreaming his delightful dreams of the future, when he
was suddenly brought back to a realization of his surroundings by a hot
breath, immediately followed by a cold, damp muzzle being thrust against
his hand. Starting suddenly at this rude awakening, he frightened away
the faithful old dog who, having discovered his presence, had approached
to make his acquaintance. Appreciating the situation at a glance, Gully
spoke kindly to the dog, calling him back; he patted him on the head and
laughed good naturedly at his shaggy, woe begone appearance, and
promised him better times for the future than he had evidently been
accustomed to in the past.

It was now day, and the smoke was coming from the stoves within the
homes of some of his neighbors. Upon noting this fact, he went inside
the house, and after kindling a fire in his own kitchen stove, called to
his wife, who having been awakened by his movements, immediately came
out and joined him in the kitchen door, where they together watched the
rising sun shed its splendor over the scene.

The delight of having their father with them once more clung to the
family throughout the day. His every movement was followed by the joyous
band of happy children. They led him to the point where the surveyors
had set their instruments on their land and showed him the little stakes
upon which the plumb bob had been centered, and which they had carefully
preserved, telling him it was there the water was to flow. They told him
of the many little kindnesses bestowed upon them by these good men who
were to provide them with the much needed water, of how they had carried
their letters to and from the distant post office, and had distributed
pennies among the smaller children.

Thus the constant chatter flowed, each little incident doing its part to
reconstruct the tower of hope that was being built, and in which Travis
Gully and his family were to fortify themselves during the coming long
winter months. The remaining few days of pretty weather could not be
wasted in idleness. The trip to the distant town for supplies must be
made; the cistern must be refilled, and more ground gotten ready for
seeding before the frost came. All this Gully realized, and with hopes
and aspirations at their highest point, he was eager to begin
activities.

The horses that had been astray for several days returned for water and
were taken up and held in readiness for daily use. The second day after
Gully's return being Friday, it was decided by he and his wife that the
trip to the town should be made first, as the supplies were running
short. They were to go the following morning, and as it was to be a gala
day the whole family was going.

At this announcement the children danced with glee, as they had not been
further from home than the well since they came the March before, and
little realizing how tiresome the long trip across the desert would be,
they anxiously awaited the arrival of the time to start. Everything was
gotten ready that evening in preparation for the trip, Gully knowing
that the going and coming over the long sandy roads would consume most
of the day. It would require an early start to allow time for their
trading.

Sunrise the following morning found them well on their road to the town,
which could be seen in the distance, although many miles away, and as
the morning hours passed the enthusiasm of the children gradually
exhausted itself, and the last few miles of the trip were made in almost
complete silence, broken only by the monotonous squeaking of the harness
and rattle of the wagon, the box of which was a home made affair, almost
completely wrecked by the strain of being overloaded with barrels of
water, but which had been wired together with bale wire in order that
the boards extending from side to side would sustain the weight of those
seated upon them.

When they reached the town, which consisted of a few residences, a
railroad station and some half dozen stores, Gully drove to a vacant lot
a short distance from the main street, where a number of wagons were
already standing, with horses contentedly eating hay while their owners
were transacting their business.

After assisting his wife and children to alight he unhitched his team,
and then making them fast to the wheels, that they might eat, returned
to where his family had assembled and assisted them to brush from their
clothing the accumulation of sand and volcanic ash that had transformed
them into gray figures that blended with the buildings, fences and
sagebrush with which they were surrounded, all gray, the eternal gray of
the desert.

Had those of their friends who had known Travis Gully and his family in
their old home met them in their present condition, it is doubtful if
the most intimate among them would have been able to recognize them. The
changes that had taken place were in some respects advantageous. Minnie
Gully was no longer the tired, care worn mother of the year before. She
had thrown off that spirit of lassitude that marks so unmistakably the
drudge, the farmer's wife. That she had health was evidenced by the tinge
of color that shone through the coat of tan produced by the desert wind
and sun, and also by her buoyant step and actions. The children had
grown hardy and rugged by their unrestrained freedom in the wilderness,
and while showing a disposition to be more timid, were as yet unspoiled
by their isolation.

It was in Travis Gully that the change was most noticeable. He was no
longer the disinterested slave, the irresponsible renter with no higher
ambition than to grow an abundant crop for his landlord, that he might
be allowed to remain on the premises another year and thereby avoid the
exertion of a forced move. His summer spent in the harvest field had
netted him other than financial returns. It had developed in him a
firmer resolve to own a home of his own, and hardened his muscles for
the fray. His bearing was more independent, and the fire of a newborn
ambition shone in his eyes.

He was now the aggressor, and had dropped the role of a passive
follower. It was his first awakening, and never having been compelled to
feel the sting of defeat, was as yet undaunted. Thus it may be seen that
while the first year's planting on the homestead was a failure the
venture, as a whole, had its element of success.

The next few hours of their stay in the village was devoted to shopping,
and were filled with many incidents both amusing and trying. The
constant care of the children as they tugged at their mother's skirts,
calling her attention to various articles that caught their wondering
eyes, the trying on of shoes and selection of ginghams and calicoes,
with one ever present thought, that the purchases must be confined to a
certain amount, made the task a tiresome and nerve racking one. At last
it was finished, and when Travis Gully, who had gone for his team, drove
up to the store and loaded on his purchases, it was a tired and hungry
family that climbed into the wagon and took their places among the many
bundles and boxes with which it was piled and turned their faces
homeward, to drive back over the same dusty road; to listen for hours to
the rattle of the particles of sand as they were lifted high by the
revolving wheels and then allowed to drop upon the paper wrapped
bundles with which the bottom of the wagon was strewn; to listen to the
continuous crackling of the dry sagebrush as the wheels passed over it,
pressing it deep into the yielding sand, and which sprang back into
position after the vehicle had passed and awaited, with a patience born
of years of solitude upon the desert, for the next onslaught, continuing
this torture until ground to powder and mixed with the sand that had
lashed it for years. Take, if you will, a pinch of sand from the sage
covered desert, and seek out from its many particles the tiny atoms of
sagebrush and examine them. They are all the same misshapen, dwarfed and
gray.

It was far into the night before the Gully's reached their home and were
greeted by the faithful old dog who had remained behind, but little
notice was taken of his demonstration of welcome, so after he had
assured himself that all were present, and had tugged at the blanket in
which little Joe was brought, sleeping soundly, into the house, he
retired to his place under the kitchen table. Gully lost no time, after
caring for his horses and seeing that his purchases were safe for the
night, in going to his rest, conscious of the fact that an eventful day
in his life had passed.

It now being late in November, Gully knew that but a short time could be
expected before the first winter snow would come, and he had learned
that it sometimes came in such quantities as to drift in the roads and
make it very difficult to travel, and not caring to be caught unprepared
in such an event, left the following Monday in search of a place where
feed for his horses might be purchased. Accompanied by one of his
neighbors, he went back into the hills, and there they purchased a
sufficient amount to do them both. The roads being very sandy and the
distance great, it required several days with both their teams to haul
the hay to their claims. After this was accomplished and the winter's
supply of wood procured, the rest of the time before the snow fell was
devoted to clearing land in preparation for plowing the following
spring.

At last, upon awakening one morning Travis Gully found that the long
looked for snow had arrived, several inches having fallen during the
night, and it was still snowing quite hard. He looked out across the
level plain, and thought he had never seen a more beautiful sight. Not a
breath of air was stirring, and the huge flakes were coming down in
myriads, falling on the high tufts of bunch grass and remaining where
they had fallen. The unsightly sagebrush was transformed into every
conceivable shape, and its stubby, unyielding branches bedecked with soft,
fleecy snow that completely hid their identity and brought their
grotesque forms out in cameo like relief. The changed color and altered
conditions from its former sameness gave the landscape a weird, ghastly
appearance.

Gully stood fascinated by the dazzling whiteness, and wondered in a
vague, uncertain way why, if such a change was possible in so short a
time by a simple variation in climatic conditions, would it not be
possible to make the change permanent and productive of some good. Why
not change from the torturing dull gray to green and then a golden hue,
to be followed by the spotless mantle of white? Was it within the power
of man, with his advanced ideas and modern methods, to bring about such
a transformation? If so, would the change be permanent? That they had in
some instances, and over small areas, accomplished this feat it was
true, but it was noticeable in every instance of this kind new
complications had arisen to test their ingenuity, new difficulties were
constantly arising for mankind to combat.

Could it be possible that Dame Nature in her magnanimity in giving the
greater portion of the earth had reserved these few, isolated places for
the gratification of her whims, for reconstruction by her hand alone, to
be handed down in ages yet to come to a different, better and wiser
race. If it was possible for this once inland sea to be transformed into
a blistering barren waste, why would it not be equally possible for this
same power to tear down and remove the barriers that now arise between
this desert and its natural source of water supply, the mountains that
so change the currents of air and rend asunder the vaporous clouds, and
thereby render condensation impossible. What right had man to dictate
the conditions that shall obtain in certain localities, and would nature
concede their demands?

To Travis Gully the possibilities of irrigation were unknown. He had
never seen its results, except on the one occasion when he had stopped
for a few days in the little city, surrounded by its extensive
orchards, that had marked the end of his journey in quest of a home.
That similar conditions as those he was now called upon to combat once
existed in that now fertile valley he well knew, and the scenes of
beautiful homes surrounded by miles and miles of orchards, with
occasional patches of green alfalfa, was so indelibly impressed on his
mind that they were constantly recurring to his memory, and were easily
within the bounds of possibility as applicable to the locality in which
he had chosen to cast his lot. Would the change be made, would he and
his neighbors be given an opportunity to demonstrate to the world, the
results of intelligent handling of these greatest productive agents,
water, sunshine and soil?

He was sure they would. The coming of the Geological Surveyors was proof
that the authorities were at last going to reclaim this arid district
and bring it into a state of productiveness. That they had left the
vicinity of where he lived was true, but he had learned that they had
established a new camp farther into the desert, where their work was to
be continued, and as soon as the result of their investigation as to the
feasibility of the plan had been reported to the Department of the
Interior at Washington, D. C., actual work would start, and he would
soon see the realization of his dream, "A home of his own."




CHAPTER X.


The first snow was of short duration, although the fall was heavy. The
sun shone brightly before the end of the week and as it melted the
moisture was hastily consumed by the thirsty sands. The days that
followed the disappearance of the snow were ideal. No clouds of dust
arose to obscure the vision, and the quivering, dancing mirage that had
transformed the desert into a veritable fairy land appeared regularly
each morning and lingered, as if loath to deprive the desert dwellers of
the pleasure of its hypnotic influence, until compelled to retreat
before the advancing army of glinting sunbeams.

The invincible bunch grass, aroused from its lethargy by the magic touch
of moisture, sent forth from its withered roots tender shoots of green
that peeped shyly from the mass of sun parched stalks that, unable to
withstand the summer's heat, had fallen helplessly back, thus forming a
shield for their parent turf.

These days of sunshine were taken advantage of by Travis Gully and his
family, and rapid progress was made in clearing the land. With the
coming of the shades of evening his place, like those of hundreds of
others, was aglow with bonfires, the pyre of the burning sagebrush that
sizzled, crackled and fried as the blazing torch was applied, and when
the last faint glow of the remaining embers had died out and only ashes
were left, they could still feel the penetrating leer of the ghastly
gray that would not down.

As the winter approached every possible preparation was made for the
months of enforced idleness, and when it finally came the family, who
had never acquired the habit of reading, and were lacking in other forms
of amusement, the time hung heavily on their hands. The letters that
came from their old home at irregular intervals were anxiously awaited,
and upon receipt of them a sense of homesickness seemed to overcome the
family. Little incidents were recounted that recalled scenes and
recollections that during the busy season would have been lightly passed
and soon forgotten.

They had never met any of their former friends since coming to the
northwest, but had learned that the Gowells and Moodys had settled
somewhere in Montana, and word had been received from the Lane boys, who
had taken up a homestead in Washington, but the address given was a
remote point from the Gullys. The letters stated that those mentioned
were all doing well and were satisfied with the change. Not a word of
complaint had ever been written by Travis Gully or the members of his
family. They had failed the first year, but it was probably due to
unusual conditions, they thought, so they made no mention of the fact.

They had written home at regular intervals, stating that all were well,
the happy, healthy growth of the children was noted, and an amusing
description of their home, and experience in building the cistern and
hauling water with which to fill it, was faithfully chronicled. An
account of the trip to the harvest field was written, telling of the
enormous yield and the methods used in saving the grain, also of how a
sufficient amount was earned to meet the winter's requirements, but
never a word of the heart breaking failure of their first planting nor
of the tortures endured in the grain fields, feeling that the
possibilities of a reoccurrence of these unfortunate conditions was
remote. They looked only to a more successful future.

The little district school house, the erection of which had been started
early in the fall, was now complete, but no teacher could be found who
was willing to come into the wilderness to teach the few children of
which the district boasted. The neighborhood finally by common consent
organized what they called a "Literary Society," and a Sunday School.
The society met twice a month, and these meetings were looked forward to
as events of great importance, the program usually consisting of debates
by the older members and recitations, dialogues and songs by the
children of the community. The Sunday School met weekly, and the
homesteaders came with their families for distances of from ten to
fifteen miles to be in attendance.

As the holiday season approached; arrangements were made for a
neighborhood Christmas tree, contributions were taken up at a meeting of
the society, and a committee of arrangements appointed to take charge of
the affair. Someone being the fortunate possessor of a catalogue from an
eastern mail order house, it was brought into requisition and a
selection of decorations and trinkets for the tree was made and the
order for their shipment forwarded. A census of the community was taken
and no one forgotten.

[Illustration: _At dusk faint lights twinkled from the scattered homes
in this sea of eternal gray sage._]

For days before that memorable Christmas Eve an air of mystery
surrounded the actions of everyone concerned. Packages that came through
the regular mails from the home folks in the east were carefully hidden
away, not to be opened until Christmas. The age worn spirit of the
season's cheer had invaded the desert, bringing with it a feeling of
comradeship not possible to engender in a community without the desert
environments, the vastness and the solitude impressed upon the
homesteader a sense of his individual smallness and the necessity of
association with one another. They were there for a common purpose, the
conquest of the desert and the building of a home.

When the anxiously looked for package from the mail order house arrived
it was left at the Gully home until time to get the tree in readiness.
The morning of the day before Christmas was ushered in by a blizzard
that drove the finely powdered snow in blinding sheets into the faces of
Travis Gully and the two of his neighbors who had been chosen to meet at
the school house and make preparations for the assembly in the
afternoon. Gully, after hitching his team to the wagon in which had been
placed the packages and bundles, covered them snugly with old blankets
to protect them from the blowing snow, and drove to the school house,
where he found his two neighbors awaiting his arrival. They came out to
meet him with forlorn and hopeless expressions depicted on their faces.
Noting this, he asked them the cause of their distressed appearance,
when, both speaking at the same time, they exclaimed: "How about the
tree? We have no Christmas tree." Gully was amazed. Here they had made
arrangements for a befitting celebration, with the decorations to adorn
a Christmas tree, the time was at hand, and everyone had forgotten to
provide a tree for the occasion.

With crestfallen expressions, the men turned slowly and allowed their
gaze to sweep the plain in every direction, but could see no way out of
their difficulty. Not a shrub in all that vast area raised its scrawny
head to a height above four feet. What would they do? The wives and
children must not be disappointed. They had set their hearts on this
event as the nearest approach to a Christmas with the home folks. Here
at this Christmas celebration would be opened packages containing tokens
of love and thoughtfulness. The very knots in the cord that bound them,
and the creases in the paper with which they were wrapped, had been made
by fond hands that were separated from them by thousands of miles. No!
they must have a Christmas tree.

At this point in their dilemma, the resourcefulness of the true pioneer
asserted itself. With an exclamation of "I have it, boys," Gully sprang
from the wagon, and throwing back the blankets from the packages he
directed that they be taken inside, and after using the blankets to
protect his horses from the cold, he went to a huge pile of sagebrush
that had been hauled into the school yard for fuel, drew from its midst
and shook the snow from several of its largest branches. These he and
his companions carried into the school room. Gully's friends, not
knowing his ideas, fetched and carried at his command like eager
children. From beneath the newly constructed building was procured a
piece of discarded scantling which was appropriated and cut to the
desired length. The branches of the sagebrush were then cut from the
stalk and nailed with painstaking care to the smooth surface of one side
of the two by six inch scantling. Starting near the bottom with short
branches, the longer ones were worked in near the center and tapering as
the top was approached, the whole structure being topped with one
crowning bough; and thus completed, the crude affair was placed in
position, with the flat side securely nailed to the back wall of the
building. Upon stepping back to study the results of their efforts, the
men were surprised at the effect, the oddity of its appearance.

Procuring the box of trimmings, they proceeded with their task. By means
of the generous distribution of cotton batting which was originally
intended to create the effect of a snow drift at the base of the tree
they succeeded in hiding the background and the rough bark of the
boughs, and at the same time producing a decidedly wintery effect. Upon
having completed the tree thus far they decided to return to their homes
for their families, and to leave the final touches to the deft hands of
their wives.




CHAPTER XI.


Owing to the great distance it was necessary for some of the
homesteaders to come, it had been agreed upon to meet at the school
building during the afternoon, bringing their lunch and eating, after
which they would light the Christmas tree as soon after dark as would
give the best effect, and to distribute the presents early that those
who came from afar might return home at a reasonable hour.

It was shortly after the noon hour that Travis Gully and his two friends
returned with their families, as they were anxious to have the tree as
nearly completed as was possible before the arrival of those from a
distance. The wives of the designers of this novel Christmas tree,
having been in a measure prepared by having been told of its nature,
were astonished, upon entering the building, at the attractiveness of
the tree. They had expected to find some crude arrangement as a
substitute for the usual evergreen, but when they appreciated the
possibilities of the unfinished work before them, they were delighted,
and went eagerly at the task of its completion.

Taking up the work where the men had left off, they readjusted the
indiscriminate distribution of the fleecy cotton, sprinkling it with the
glistening powder so commonly used to produce the sparkling, frosty
effect, clipping an unruly bough here and there, placing the glittering
tin candle holders, with their assorted colored candles, so as to avoid
contact with the cotton when lighted, and after filling many small red,
green and blue stocking shaped mosquito netting bags with candies and
nuts, after which a tag bearing the name of some child of the
neighborhood was attached, these they distributed among the branches of
the tree, festooning the whole with a bewildering mass of yards of pure
white popcorn strung on a thread for the occasion, tissue paper designs
and sparkling tinsel that reflected the lights of the many candles in
rapidly changing hues and giving it the effect of a dazzling fountain
that persisted in its activities, though in the grasp of the frost king.

Before the completion of the decoration of the tree and for several
hours after the neighboring homesteaders began to arrive with their
families, each bringing their share of the Christmas packages and boxes
of lunch. Many and varied were the expressions of amazement and delight
that greeted the workers upon the arrival of each family. "Isn't it
lovely, and made of sagebrush, too. How did you do it?" Some, more
inquisitive than others, would have to handle the branches to convince
themselves that it was purely a local product. "Well, it beats the trees
we used to have back home. I wish they could see it," many would
exclaim.

As the neighbors arrived, their packages were taken and either hung on
the tree or placed conveniently near its base.

It was a happy gathering of pioneers. The little school building, though
being used for a purpose other than for which it was built, radiated
with warmth from the one huge sheet iron stove that stood in its center
and into which was being constantly fed handful after handful of crushed
and twisted sagebrush. As evening approached and the last of those who
were expected arrived and were met at the door and relieved of their
bundles and wraps, places were made for them near the stove that they
might warm their frosted fingers and toes.

It was soon growing quite dark, and the excited children were eagerly
clamoring for the candles to be lighted. Benches were drawn away from
the walls, and after being placed together, the lunch was spread, and
the Christmas festivities were begun. There was no snow white linen or
sparkling silver nor cut glass, no wines or imported beverages, not a
flower or sprig of green graced this banquet board. The benches were
covered with the paper removed from such of the packages as had been
unwrapped, and plain porcelain, granite and tin were the plates. The
knives, forks and spoons were the iron handled or plated varieties. All
evidence of stately ceremony was absent, but over all a spirit of good
fellowship reigned. Faith, Hope and Charity were their guests and
hovered close around this isolated gathering and directed their every
thought, word and action. The plain food was eaten with a relish, and
the steaming coffee, served from a granite pitcher that was constantly
being refilled from a large boiler on the sheet iron stove, was drank
with an appreciation of its warmth and invigorating effect.

The supper over and all evidence of it removed, with the benches so
arranged that all could get a view of the tree, the lighted lanterns
that had been hanging upon the walls, were lowered, and the tree
lighted. Breathlessly both young and old awaited the effect. Faintly the
little candles flickered and sputtered, trying with their tiny wicks to
allow the consuming flames to survive. A few went out, but were quickly
relighted, and as the hand that applied the match was withdrawn and a
slight current of air created, they flared and fluttered, but as the
pointed tip of each candle was burned away and the little cups of molten
wax formed around the wicks, they shot forth their flames. One by one
they came, like stars as night rapidly falls; more quickly they came,
and as the last one flared up and revealed the tree in all its sparkling
brilliancy, bated breathing ceased, and with a sudden chorus of many
childish expressions of delight and much noisy handclapping of their
parents in appreciation of the spectacle before them, the little school
room was filled with din that was taken up by the icy night wind and
wafted for miles across the snow and mingled with the swish of the
treacherous currents of the Columbia river, or mounting higher were lost
amidst the phantomlike whispering of the soughing pines on the rugged
mountain side.

There were among those who had assembled there that Christmas Eve many
who had in their earlier childhood attended many Christmas tree
entertainments, both community and family trees, but none were present
who could recall ever having seen one more beautiful. Their minds flew
back for just one fleeting moment to scenes in the past, trying in vain
to recall the most beautiful tree they had ever seen, that they might
compare it with the one they now beheld, and wondered at the possible
effect the sight of such a one as this would have upon the home folks.

Travis Gully was chosen to distribute the presents, and this he soon
accomplished. As each person's name was called they arose and the parcel
was passed to them, and when the last of the packages had reached the
hand of its excited owner and had been opened and admired, they were
passed to curious onlookers for their inspection and comment. The tree
was denuded of all its gaudy decorations. The candle holders, with their
short bits of candle, were distributed among the children, and the long
strings of popcorn and sparkling tinsel, together with the cotton, were
carefully stored away in a box for future use. While mothers secured
their wraps and shook to a state of wakefulness many sleepy little tots,
each step they took resounding with the crunch of peanut shells with
which the bare floor was strewn, the first Christmas tree the desert had
ever known had come and gone.

The men went out, and hitching their teams, drove to the entrance for
their families, and as each stepped inside the building to say
good-night and wish for his neighbor a Merry Christmas and Happy New
Year, he took a final look toward the back of the room and shuddered.
One smoky lantern hung on a nail near the tree, now robbed of all its
tawdry loveliness; sagebrush, just a skeleton of a thing, once made
beautiful for a transient moment but now back to it original state, a
product of the desert, a diabolical fiend clothed in its haunting gray.

Gully with his family were the last to leave, and the hour being late,
the drive home was made without comment by either he or his wife. The
older children chattered away about what they and their friends had
gotten from the tree. Little Joe, tucked snugly away among the blankets,
one chubby hand clutching the now almost empty mosquito net stocking,
the other, with fingers stuck fast together, was thrust beneath his head
amidst a mass of towsled locks of sunburned hair, now smeared with red
dye from a moist stock of peppermint candy, slept unconsciously
throughout the trip home.

Christmas morning, when it dawned, was accompanied by a terrific
blizzard that kept Travis Gully and his family indoors. But being happy
with the success of the Christmas tree, they were content to stay by the
fire and discuss that event and plan for the weeks of fair weather that
they hoped would follow the storm.

Gully realizing that his family was comfortable, his only care was for
his horses. These he had provided with as good protection as he had been
able to construct after his return from the harvest field, but he knew
that the flimsy structure he had erected and on three sides of which he
had piled sagebrush as a windbreak, could not long withstand such a
storm as was now raging. Upon going to the barn he discovered that the
brush had already blown away and he set to work to replace it and to
make it more secure by weighting it down with numerous old discarded
railroad ties that had been hauled out for fuel. The stinging fine snow
and icy blast of the blizzard made his task a most difficult one, and he
was repeatedly forced to go to the house to thaw out his frosted fingers
and toes.

As evening approached the fury of the gale increased, and huge
snowdrifts formed around the little home and completely cut off exit by
means of the kitchen door. The front door opened directly facing the
blizzard, and at its every opening the two small rooms were filled with
the cold wind and drifting snow. The shrieking and howling of the wind
warned Gully of the wild night through which he and his family had to
pass, and he made ready by providing an abundance of sagebrush for fuel.
He fed and blanketed his horses early, and after spreading the straw for
their bedding, he left them as comfortable as was possible under the
circumstances.

Supper being over and he and his family seated comfortably around the
roaring stove enjoying the genial heat that was now filling the rooms,
and laughing merrily at the novel experience of being snowbound out in
the desert. Incidents of other Christmas nights back in the old home
were recounted by both Gully and his wife, to which the children eagerly
listened. Laughing and chatting, the evening was spent in this snug
little retreat, while outside the storm raged.

One by one the children became sleepy and were tucked away for the
night, and the fastening of the front door was made more secure by
having a crude bench turned on end and braced against it, and the cracks
around its casing, through which the cold wind was driving the snow, was
stopped by an old piece of canvas that was fastened at the top with
nails and allowed to extend down to the floor. Thus fortified against
the elements, Travis and Minnie Gully returned to their places near the
fire and sat for a long time in silence, listening to the regular
breathing and dreamy mumbling of their sleeping children. For them the
storm had no terrors.

The wife placing her hand upon her husband's knee aroused him from his
reverie, and she expressed her satisfaction with their changed
condition, not that their material wealth had increased, but that she
had been taken into his confidence and had become a factor in his life.
In the old home she had been content to be the mother of his children,
the keeper of his house. But now things were different. She was appealed
to in all affairs, her suggestions were asked for the expenditure of the
few dollars he had earned, she was consulted as to the plans for the
improvement of their home, and she was happy in the thought that her
ideas were of value, and were of assistance to him. She was experiencing
her awakening, and while it was not as startling nor as sudden as his
had been on that first day when he had determined to have a home of his
own, it was just as real, and she was spurred on to new hopes and new
ambitions, and was happy in their contemplation.




CHAPTER XII.


The wail of the wind grew louder as the night advanced, and the constant
peppering of the particles of snow as they were being hurled in never
ceasing volleys against the tar paper with which the outer walls of the
building were covered could be distinctly heard. The old dog came from
his accustomed place beneath the kitchen table, and going behind the
stove seated himself amidst the shoes and stockings that had been placed
there by the children. After sniffing the air he yawned, curled himself
up, tucked his head with a contented sigh, blinked his watery eyes and
was soon snoring contentedly.

Scarcely had he dozed off when suddenly he sprang to a sitting position,
and pricking up his ears, emitted a vicious growl. Gully, fearing that
he would awaken the sleeping children, spoke to him, commanding him to
lay down and be quiet. This order he disregarded, and hurriedly went
into the kitchen, with hair bristling. Suddenly the startling yap of
several coyotes was heard above the din of the wind and pelting snow. A
pack of these skulkers, driven from their lairs by hunger and the biting
cold, had in their desperation overcome their fear of mankind, and
emboldened by numbers, had entered the very dooryard in search of food
or shelter.

Gully, after assuring his now thoroughly frightened wife that they were
harmless, took the lamp, and going to the window pulled aside the
curtain and allowed it to shine on the outside to frighten them away. At
the same time he recalled the fact that little Joe's three chickens were
roosting insecurely in a box in the barn and would fall an easy prey to
the coyotes should they return. Taking his coat and hat, he pulled aside
the canvas covering from the door and slipped out into the storm,
returning in a few moments with the box containing the chickens, and put
them in a place of safety in the kitchen.

Saying nothing to his wife about the fierceness of the blizzard, he
resumed his place by the fire, and wondered if their little shack would
withstand the strain. He thought of his poorly protected horses and how
they must be suffering with the intense cold, and consoled himself with
the thought that he had done all within his power to make them
comfortable, even to covering them with the sadly worn blankets that
could be used to an advantage on his own poorly provided bed. As for
him, he could stay awake and keep the fire burning, and provide warmth
for himself and family. With this thought he suggested to his wife that
she retire, as the hour was growing late, and he would replenish the
fire and follow as soon as he assured himself that all was well.

To this arrangement she protested mildly; she felt that should anything
go wrong her place was by his side. After assuring her that everything
was safe and that he would call her if she was needed, she finally
consented, and going to where the sleeping children lay, placed each
little straggling arm beneath the cover, and after smoothing their
pillows she placed their scattered garments on the foot of the bed for
additional warmth, and preparing her own bed, in which little Joe was
sleeping soundly, she partially undressed and lay down.

Travis Gully, left alone, sat dreaming by the stove, while outside the
blizzard raged and tore at the walls of his home. Its intensity was
increasing, he thought, or it might be that his loneliness made its
varied sounds more audible. Blast after blast was hurled against the
structure, and its every timber creaked and groaned with the strain. The
canvas covering at the door became inflated and collapsed at irregular
intervals, flapping lazily against the door, rising and falling like a
sail amidst errant breezes.

Gully was soon lulled to drowsiness by the warmth of the stove and
varied sounds produced by the gale, and was soon dozing peacefully in
his chair. How long he remained in this position he never knew. He was
suddenly aroused by a call from his wife, who asked as to the cause of
an unusual sound that had awakened her. Gully, thus awakened, noted the
chilliness of the room, and renewed the fire, after which he listened
intently for a repetition of the sound. He had not long to wait. A
sudden fierce blast made the building quiver, and he could distinctly
hear a lashing, tearing sound on the north wall.

Approaching the window to ascertain, if possible, the cause, he noticed
the crunching sound of the trodden snow upon the floor, and felt the
cold wind. He instantly realized what had happened. The wind in its
maddened fury had torn the tar paper from the outer wall and was driving
the finely powdered snow through the cracks and was forming it in
slender drifts across the floor. The break was slight at the time of its
discovery, but each new onslaught increased the size of the rent and was
opening new inlets for the snow and icy wind.

Gully knew full well that to repair the break from the outside would be
impossible, as the paper would be torn from his hands, and to drive
nails in the dark, with numbed fingers, was out of the question. The
havoc that was being wrought by the wind was rapidly growing in extent,
and snow was being driven into the house through new openings at every
gust. Sheets of paper were being torn off and could be heard rattling
away across the snow and ice, being driven before the wind. Prompt
action of some kind was imperative. The bed occupied by little Joe and
his mother being built against the north wall of the room, it was
necessary for them to move, as the snow was pouring in and covering the
bedding, which would soon be made damp by the melting snow.

Joe was placed in the remaining crowded bed with the other children and
Minnie Gully, hastily dressing, came with the broom to sweep back the
advancing snow drifts.

The now vacant bed was hurriedly cleared of its bedding and the frame
work torn from the wall to give access to the openings. Travis Gully
worked feverishly, filling the cracks in the wall with paper and torn
rags, pressing them in securely with a case knife, his wife bringing for
this purpose every available scrap of material. The unused bedding was
tacked up to temporarily stay the advance of the snow and wind. The
melting snow in the room required constant sweeping back, the fire was
kept burning brightly and the battle raged on. Not a complaint or wail
of discouragement escaped either Gully or his wife. With set faces and
determination they fought back the storm, and a smile of satisfaction
greeted each successful effort, as inch by inch the cracks in the wall
were closed and the advance of the enemy checked.

The children having been awakened by the unusual commotion were told to
keep quiet and stay covered up, as everything was all right. Being thus
reassured, they were soon fast asleep. Daylight came with the Gullys
victors, but brought with it no abatement of the storm. The blinding
snow obscured the vision and no idea of the extent of the damage done
could be had.

Exhausted by the loss of sleep and the excitement, Minnie Gully had sunk
into a chair near the stove. Her husband, noticing her tired look, tried
to persuade her to lie down and rest for a while, but this she refused
to do, so throwing an old coat over her shoulders to keep out the chill,
he left her and went out to investigate the condition of his horses.
These he found had fared much better than he had hoped. The drifting
snow had been blown into the sagebrush windbreak and formed a solid and
almost impenetrable mass, behind which the horses, protected by their
blankets, stood in comparative comfort.

The task of digging from his meager supply of hay, now almost covered by
a huge snowdrift, a sufficient amount for their morning feed was a hard
one, but upon its completion he felt fully repaid by the hearty manner
in which it was eaten. Upon his returning to the house he found that his
wife and daughters were up and busily engaged preparing breakfast. They
asked eagerly as to the condition of the horses, and upon being assured
that they had fared splendidly, they laughed and joked over their wild
night's experience.

All through that day and the day following the blizzard raged without
any appreciable lull in its terrific force. No effort was made to repair
the torn paper on the outer wall. The cracks that had been hastily
filled with paper and rags were gone over and made more secure, the
blankets that had been used as a shield in their emergency were taken
down and dried, and the crude bed that had been so ruthlessly torn away
from the north wall was temporarily reconstructed on the opposite side
of the room and held out inviting prospects to Gully, who was now
beginning to feel more keenly the effect of his long vigil of the night
before.

All efforts at accomplishing anything on the outside were abandoned, and
meals were prepared and served at irregular hours. The chickens had
taken kindly to their new quarters, and becoming quite tame, were a
source of amusement to the children. Travis Gully devoted his time to
the care of his horses and providing fuel, the latter occupation
requiring most of his time, as the enormous quantity consumed soon
exhausted the supply near the house, and as more could not be gotten
while the storm raged he was forced to dig out the old railroad ties
from the wind break at the barn and to use them for fuel.

The storm spent its fury on the desert dwellers sometime during the
third night. The lull came while Gully and his family, now inured to its
sound, were soundly sleeping, and when they awoke the following morning
they lay for several moments listening for the roar of the wind; not
hearing it, Gully knew that the long wished for calm had come. Dressing
himself, he kindled the fire, and calling to his wife that the storm had
ceased, he went out to view its work.

The sun had risen, but was unable to penetrate the haze of thin clouds
and snow left floating along the horizon, and looked down on the
desolate scene without warmth. The air was cold and penetrating, huge
piles of snow had drifted behind every stationery object, and in places
where the ground had been cleared of brush and grass the snow was swept
entirely away and the wind had eaten its way into the sandy soil and
scattered it over the adjoining snowdrifts, giving them a yellow, dingy
appearance. Loose sagebrush that had been left piled and ready to burn
had been taken up and blown before the wind until finding lodgement
against some object, had become the base for the formation of additional
snowdrifts that extended in long mounds in the direction the wind had
blown. The whole landscape had a changed and unnatural appearance.

Gully could see the homes of some of his neighbors, but they seemed far
off, and no signs of life were visible except in one or two instances
where streams of thin, blue smoke was issuing from their stove pipes.
Not a horse nor cow could be seen upon the range, and the ever present
hawks that were wont to soar at dizzy heights above the plain were
missing. Noting these changes in detail, Gully wondered if these same
conditions existed throughout the vast area. After feeding his horses,
he returned to the house, where his breakfast awaited him.

A few days after the passing of the storm the sun resumed its
brilliancy, but with little increased warmth; the days were clear and
the nights frosty. No effort was made by Gully toward venturing away
from home. He replenished his supply of fuel and covered the exposed
cracks in the wall of his shack by nailing over them laths. The space
between the cracks where the tar paper had been torn away was left bare,
and the new boards thus exposed glared in the bright sunlight.

During the time they had been forced by the storm to remain in the house
many letters had been written to the home folks, in which a description
of the Christmas tree and the blizzard had been given. These Gully was
anxious to get to the post office, as well as to receive the mail that
he felt sure was awaiting his coming.

Deciding one morning that he would try to reach the village, he set
about arranging his plans to go the following day. To undertake to drive
through he knew would be useless, as the snow was drifted so badly he
could not follow the road. As the village could be plainly seen from his
house and there were no fences to obstruct his way, he thought it best
to take one of his horses on which to pack out some provisions, and go
straight across the wide snow covered plain.

Knowing that the trip, without mishap, would require the whole of the
following day, he decided to start as soon as it was light enough to get
his bearings. All preparations for the trip were made the night before,
the little bundle containing his lunch, the letters that were to be
mailed, and a list of the purchases that were to be made were placed
where they would not be forgotten, and when Gully awoke the following
morning he quietly arose, and after feeding his horses prepared for
himself some strong, black coffee, which was all the breakfast he
required, and without awakening the members of his family started on his
trip.




CHAPTER XIII.


It was a strange sight to behold, in the dull gray of the winter
morning, a man floundering through the snowdrifts, leading behind him an
unwilling horse that could hardly be induced to leave its unattractive
but comfortable stable. In Travis Gully, garbed as he was, the horse
could not be expected to recognize its owner. Over his hat he had tied a
large red handkerchief that held the brim down over his ears and caused
a peak at front and rear like an old fashioned cockaded hat, his
mackinaw was bound around his waist with a piece of rope, and strips of
burlap wound around his legs extended over and completely hid his shoes.
His appearance was more that of a typical tramp than the sturdy
homesteader he really was.

Owing to the many difficulties encountered, caused principally by the
sagebrush that lay hidden beneath the snow into which his feet sank at
every step, he did not reach his destination until shortly after noon.
There were many in the village who expressed their surprise at his
undertaking such a trip. None of his neighbors had been in, and no word
had been received from the district that lay far to the south as to what
the result of the blizzard had been. It was feared that there had been
great suffering among the homesteaders, as it was well known that many
of them were poorly prepared for the rigor of such a storm.

After attending to his business no time was lost in starting on the
homeward trip. With his few groceries securely wrapped in two compact
bundles and fastened to each end of a rope, they were thrown across a
comfortable canvas pad and lashed to the horse's back, the weight being
as nearly equally divided as was possible, the crude pack was adjusted
and the tedious retracing of their tracks begun.

Gully had not taken time to eat his lunch, but had placed it in the
pocket of his mackinaw, intending to eat it as he traveled, thereby
avoiding the loss of time. The mail that he had found waiting for him
was tied in a packet and placed securely in his inside pocket, that it
might be kept dry in case he was overtaken by another blizzard. He had
not read any of the letters or even glanced at the headlines of the
little home weekly, several issues of which had accumulated at the post
office, and as he trudged his weary way through the deep snow he tried
to imagine to himself what messages they bore, whether their contents
were joyous or sad, and in his wandering thoughts he compared his
present plight with the winters he had spent in the East and asked
himself if he would be willing to exchange the present hardships and
inconveniences for the old condition, and laughed at the thought.

"No, I will not go back to the life of a renter under any circumstances.
I have hardly started on the task of making a home," he told himself,
and the thought of abandoning the dream was ridiculous. "Minnie and the
children are well and happy, and even if we did not raise good crops for
the first year or so, think what it will be when the irrigation ditch
comes through," and as he discussed these questions in his mind he ate
his lunch, never stopping for a moment.

The horse, now that he was headed in the direction of home, kept pace
with its master, and with his nose at his elbow was ready to receive the
occasional piece of crust that was given him, and not satisfied with his
scant allowance, nipped at his sleeve and teased for more.

Upon looking back Gully noticed that the pack had slipped and stopped to
replace it and to tighten the rope. He then saw that evening was
approaching, and glanced back toward the village to estimate the
distance he had covered. His own home he could plainly see, and he noted
the smoke as it poured from the stovepipe and realized that this meant
the preparation of a warm supper with which he would be greeted upon his
return.

He pushed on. The constant snagging of the burlaps in which his feet
were encased, as he sank deep in the snow and sagebrush, had torn it
away until his shoes were exposed, and as he wore no rubbers, his feet
were wet and numb, and he knew that later the cold would become more
severe. The sky was overcast with clouds, and he realized the dangers of
being lost on the desert on such a night as this promised to be, so he
put forth his every effort to reach his home before the darkness fell.

The horse, now eager to reach home and enjoy the long deferred feed and
warmth of the stable, was crowding his master's footsteps and threatened
at every faltering movement to be upon him. Gully was soon forced from
fatigue to give up all hopes of reaching his home before dark, and was
satisfied to think that he was near enough to be guided by a beacon
light that he felt sure would be placed in the window. Stopping for a
few moments to recover his breath, he looked longingly toward the little
black dot that could be dimly seen against the background of snow,
knowing that it was but a mere speck on the desert. Yet it was his
refuge and contained his world.

As he rested and watched the shades of evening settle and creep down the
distant mountain side, he took his horse's nose between his hands and,
caressing it, enjoyed the warmth of the hot steaming breath. Then he
cast one more glance in the direction of his home; it had faded from his
view and was lost in the corresponding darkness, but in its stead a
small twinkling light gleamed feebly across the snow. It was scarcely
larger than the flame of one of the Christmas tree candles and was many
miles away; yet it warmed his heart as no other flame could have done.

Speaking encouragingly to his horse, they resumed their toilsome
journey, and never faltering or stopping, followed the guidance of the
little light for another hour, and Gully staggered into his yard, his
trip ended. But conditions had been reversed; the horse had led him
home. Wearily he removed the pack, and placing it upon the ground near
the kitchen door, was in the act of reaching for the mail to hand to his
wife when his strength gave out and he collapsed. Numb with the cold,
and with his trousers frozen fast to his shoes, he was helped into the
house. The horse, upon gaining his freedom when his master's hand had
released its hold on the rope, went to its place in the barn and munched
hungrily at the hay that had been placed there to await his coming.

The warmth of the room and a cup of steaming hot coffee soon revived
Gully, and after being provided with warm dry clothing he ate supper
with his family and listened in a dazed manner to the reading of the
news from home. But the stupor induced by the exposure and tremendous
exertion finally overcome him, and he was forced to retire.

After Minnie Gully had assured herself that her husband was comfortable
and sleeping soundly, she quietly slipped from the room, closing the
door that led into the kitchen as she came out for fear that the chatter
of the children might disturb him. Clearing away the dishes from the
supper table she brought out the letters and papers that had been
received that day and carefully reread every line of the letters from
home. An occasional smile would brighten her countenance as she came
upon some bit of homely advice or some suggestion from her dear old
mother, suggestions that would have been applicable to the Minnie Gully
of old, the tired, haggard daughter her mother had last seen, but to the
robust, cheerful woman she had now grown to be they were amusing.

After having read the last of the letters she dropped her hands upon the
table before her and sat staring at the open pages, reading between the
lines. How plainly she could see the old home, the very room in which
this letter was written. 'Twas evening, probably Saturday. Yes, it was
Saturday, for there was father's Bible and scattered notes. He had been
preparing his sermon for the morrow. His spectacle case was laying on
the loose pages. He had got up and moved his chair to the opposite side
of the table, and was seated by mother, who with toil stiffened fingers
was laborously writing this letter. How plain it all was, and how her
heart ached, not from homesickness nor from a desire to see and be with
them, but rather to cry out to them and tell them what they had missed.
They, in their crowded communities, even in the rural districts, knew
nothing of the wild delights of perfect freedom and unlimited space. She
had always been crowded; she knew it now. She had never known or felt
until now the exhilerating thrills of doing something, doing something
worth while. Fighting, yes, that was the word; fighting the elements,
doing battle with unadorned nature, free from the artifices of mankind.

Oh! if she could only make them understand the inexpressable joy of
conquest. The joy of breathing pure air; breathing it out in the open;
air that had probably never come in contact with the nostrils of a
living creature. Even though the air at times might be laden with sand
that stifled and choked, it was dust that had been torn from a virgin
soil, and was uncontaminated from having been trodden under foot by a
hurrying multitude of human beings. And the mountains--how she loved
them--she never tired of their ever changing beauty and grandeur. Still
retaining the hold on the letter, Minnie Gully arose from the table, and
going to the outside kitchen door, threw it open and stepped out. Not
until she was met by the cold air and the blackness of the night did she
realize how completely she had been lost to her surroundings.

Laughing aloud at her foolish flights of thought, she hurriedly tossed
back the few strands of hair that had been displaced by the cold breeze
and returned immediately into the room. She gathered up the letters and
scattered papers and put them away, after which she joined in the
conversation and games with the children; but the thoughts of the home
folks remained with her. She wanted them to feel as she felt and to reap
some of the benefits of this land of health, and be a factor in its
development.

Long after she and the children had gone to bed she lay and thought of
her girlhood friends, whom she knew would live their prosaic lives
without ever having known the joys, miseries, delights and sorrows that
enter into the daily life of a pioneer, and she wanted to help them; she
went to sleep with visions of herself as a great benefactress
distributing happiness to thousands of her kind.

The passing of the blizzard marked the turning point of the winter, and
the weather throughout the month of January was nice, and while the snow
did not disappear, there was only an occasional flurry added nothing to
the quantity on the ground. The social meetings at the school house were
not resumed after the Christmas tree, owing to the extreme cold, but the
neighbors visited with each other and met frequently at the store in the
village. At such times when two or more were together the principal
topic was the blizzard. Although the country was comparatively new in
its settlement there was always the proverbial "oldest inhabitant" who
could recall "Just such another winter," but to those who actually knew,
it had been by far the worst blizzard the country had ever known since
the advent of the white man.

There was a legend told by the Indians of the Northwest of the winter of
the long ago when the snow was so deep in the mountains that the deer,
driven from their natural haunts in the mountains, had crossed on the
surface of the frozen Columbia river in search of food and died by the
thousands on the plain. This, to a certain extent, was verified by the
occasional finding of antlers, bleached white by years of exposure to
the rays of the desert sun.

The matter of irrigation was now seldom mentioned. That the party of
Government surveyors who had worked on the project the summer before had
left with their equipment at the first approach of winter was known, but
as to whether they were to return, or had completed their investigation,
was left to conjecture.

With the arrival of February came the first real spring weather. A
chinook wind came, and after blowing for two nights and a day, had
melted the snow to such an extent that the only traces of it to be found
was where it had drifted into an abandoned badger or coyote den and
escaped the warm breath of the chinook. There being no frost in the
ground the moisture created by the melting snow sank deep into the soil
and was stored away for future use. The sun, as it rose higher with each
lengthening day, dispensed its increasing warmth, thereby reviving the
earlier varieties of plant life with startling rapidity.

Gully having cleared a number of acres of sagebrush, was anxiously
awaiting seasonable weather for plowing, that he might sow his grain
early and get it up and well rooted before the spring winds came,
thinking that by adopting this method it would survive. There was plenty
to do before the ground was in a condition for plowing. Seed grain and
feed was to be hauled from the wheat growing district of the Big Bend
country, and a supply of provisions procured, that a trip to the village
would not be required of the team during the plowing and seeding time.
The cistern was to be filled and as much more ground made ready for the
plow as was possible before the rush.

Plans for the accomplishment of all this had been carefully made by
Gully and his wife, and they were eager to begin. As the roads were in
excellent condition while the sand was wet and settled, Gully borrowed a
team to work with his own from one of his neighbors and went for his
seed grain, the trip requiring two days.

Upon his return from this trip he and his entire family drove to the
village. There was no great amount of shopping to be done, as Gully's
funds were about exhausted, but one of the merchants in the town had
promised to supply him with provisions until the harvest season. The
family was taken along that they might enjoy the outing, and as the
weather was bright and there was no dust or blistering sun, the trip was
often looked back to as one of the most pleasant they had ever taken.




CHAPTER XIV.


By the last of March the grain had all been sown and the first of the
planting was beginning to force its tender shoots through the surface.
The sun was growing brighter with each day and everything pointed to an
early spring.

Travis Gully, with his wife and children, toiled early and late, making
the best of the favorable season. Grudgingly they stopped for their
meals and time for their horses to feed. Night brought no diminishing of
their labors; brush was piled and burned, and even trips to the well for
water were made by moonlight.

It became the custom of the settler that when one of them went to town
to bring out the mail for the neighbors who lived along their route
home, and to call and deliver it when passing. Almost daily mail came to
the Gullys by this means, letters from people with whom they had been
but slightly acquainted, asking for information in regard to the
Northwest, of the chances for a man with but limited means, and the
possibilities of their procuring a piece of the free land for a home.

Gully made no effort to reply to all these inquiries, nor did he feel
justified in holding out alluring prospects to the writers, although he
himself had absolute faith and confidence in the ultimate success of
his undertaking. He was not certain as to whether all the anxious
seekers for a home would be willing to endure, or could withstand, the
hardships incident to the establishment of a home in the desert.

He would sit and talk the matter over with his wife during the evenings
and at other spare times, and they agreed that while it would be nice to
have some of their old friends as neighbors, the pleasure of their
coming would be marred should conditions prove unsatisfactory upon their
arrival.

They could recall a few of those among their former friends whom they
felt assured would be easily convinced of the splendid future this
country had, but there were others, many others, who they knew would
expect to find conditions such as would guarantee immediate profitable
results from their efforts. Of this latter class they were afraid, as
evidence of their kind having been there and tried, failed and gone
their way, was at every hand visible, and they did not care to be held
to blame for their disappointment.

So they finally decided to write a letter to the editor of their little
home paper, that it might be published, a letter setting forth bare
facts. Conditions as they existed, without embellishment, the good and
the evil alike, and let those who might read choose for themselves.

The preparation of this letter was a source of both worry and amusement
to Travis Gully and his wife, and required several nights for its
completion. Worry that in their enthusiasm and optimism they might make
it too favorable in its tone, that they might infuse into it too much
of their individual hopes and aspirations of which they had dreamed
until they had become almost a reality. And again they would burst into
hearty laughter at the recounting of some of their experiences, never
realizing that these little incidents must be lived through to be
appreciated.

When the letter was written, and after having been read and altered and
rewritten a number of times, it was finally pronounced satisfactory and
sealed, ready for mailing. Nearly a week elapsed before an opportunity
to send the important packet to the post office came, and then only by
the merest chance.

The news of the activities of the Government surveyors in the region the
summer before had been spread broadcast throughout the East, and
unscrupulous land boomers had announced that the reclamation by the
Government of the vast area was an assured fact, some even going so far
as to announce the exact amount of the appropriation made by Congress
for this purpose and so, as a result of this, and also to the fact that
the railroads had again put on a homeseekers excursion rate, the early
spring brought an unusually large number of prospective settlers into
the community.

They came in parties, toiling their way across the level stretch of
country, now still moist from the melted snow, showed no evidence of the
clouds of sand and dust that would follow after a few short weeks of
sunshine. The surface of the unplowed ground was thickly carpeted with a
specie of fine grass, known as sheep grass, that always came first in
the spring, to be followed by the more succulent bunch grass.

Myriads of tiny plants were pushing their way through the surface and
many were bursting into full blossom before they had lifted their dainty
heads more than a few inches above the grass roots. Many and varied were
their shapes and colors, each vieing with the other in hastening to
bloom, that it might flaunt its beauty for the longest possible time
before being forced to close its petals by the ever increasing heat of
the sun.

To those of the tourists who came at this season of the year the
prospects were most inviting. Never had they, in their homes in the
East, had such a range of vision, such an unlimited expanse to sweep
with their bewildered eyes, and the kaleidoscopic changes came so
rapidly, as they turned to admire it.

It was like a dream. Starting with the snow capped peaks of the
mountains, they could follow the scene downward past the snowline, over
the barren space that intervenes between it and the timber, which starts
in with its varied shades of green, the peculiar, yellowish green of the
tamarack, that seldom grows at an altitude of less than three thousand
feet. Intermingled with this would appear the spots of dull brown,
showing the clumps of sarvic berries and choke cherries, the favorite
haunts of the bear and deer. Towering above these thickets the slender
white trunks and branches of the quaking asp could be plainly seen.
Farther down the shades of green become darker as the forests of fir,
pine and cedar come within the range of vision. Flaming patches of
sumach adorn the edges of the rocky spots that occasionally occurred in
the picture. On downward the dull gray of the sagebrush marks the upper
rim of the breaks of the Columbia river, then a blank of smooth rock
wall that drops for hundreds of feet to the water's edge. The river
itself is hidden from view by the undulating hills that lay immediately
adjacent to the plains. Here the scene changes from its wild rugged
beauty to one indicating the presence of mankind. The vast expanse of
sagebrush is dotted here and there with square patches of a new and
different shade of green, the green of the freshly growing grain, each
of these being marked by the presence of a newly constructed home. The
green of the grain fields and the bare, unpainted walls of the homes
refuse to harmonize with the color scheme of the desert and are easily
distinguished as not being a part thereof, and do not figure in the
picture. Passing them by with a hasty glance, barely sufficient to note
their remoteness, one from the other, the beholder allows his gaze to
gradually take notice of objects nearer at hand, and finally to lower
his eyes, with a sigh of satisfaction, and looks with wonder into the
faces of the little desert flowers blooming happily at his very feet,
and asks himself what connection there is between these two, the glacial
peaks and the tiny desert flower, so different in every way, and yet
both so necessary for the completion of the picture.

Travis Gully and his wife anxiously awaited the arrival of the copy of
the paper in which their letter was to be published and given to the
world, and when it came they reread every word, and felt reassured that
it contained no misleading statements, no invitation to others to come
unprepared to take up the hardships of the life of a homesteader, but
the entire article teemed with the elements of hope and optimism that
showed their faith in a successful end.

During April and May the influx of homeseekers was at its height, and
almost daily parties of prospective settlers stopped at the Gully home
for information as to directions and locations of pieces of land they
wished to secure. Gully's first year's experience had given him
knowledge of conditions that had enabled him to overcome to a certain
degree some of the difficulties with which he had to contend. During his
enforced idleness of the winter just passed he had planned the course he
proposed to pursue during the ensuing year. He had decided to introduce
some of the dry land farming methods that had been successfully tried
out in other sections of the Northwest, an idea of which he had gleaned
from some Government Bulletins that had been given him by the postmaster
of the village.

As a result of his experiments along these lines, and due to a most
favorable season in the way of absence of hard winds and seasonable
showers, Gully's homestead presented a most creditable appearance. His
field of wheat was by far the best in the neighborhood, and as he had
planted nothing but the most hardy varieties of corn and vegetables his
garden promised to be a success, and as a result of the showing he was
making, his place became one of the points of interest to which most of
the visitors were directed by the people of the village, or to which the
real estate agents always brought their clients, and would exclaim:
"What this man has done in this country others can do."

Spurred on by his success and the ever increasing feeling of
independence, Travis Gully toiled on thruout the spring. The constant
recurrence of visitors to view their home was a source of diversion to
the Gullys, and a means whereby many dollars came into their possession.

They made no charge for the hospitality extended to the strangers who
came their way, but the offering of a glass of water or, as was often
the case, a lunch and an hour's rest to the tired, dusty travelers who
could not but see and appreciate their condition, was always rewarded by
liberal offerings of change, made in most instances to the children.
Thus the immediate requirements of the family were met and a small
amount saved.

As the summer approached and the unusual showers became less frequent,
the fitful gusts of wind started the restless sand, but too late to harm
the grain that was now beginning to assume the golden tint that foretold
an early harvest. The garden was beginning to wilt beneath the hot
sunrays, but the ingenuity of Gully saved it. At the root of the melon
vines and other plants empty cans were imbedded into which the waste
water was poured and allowed to filter slow through, and by this method
sufficient moisture was given the plants to mature them, and the yield
was abundant.

The favorable season in the desert region had renewed the hopes of those
who had chosen to make it their home, and scenes of unusual activity
were apparent at every hand. New tracts of land were being cleared and
plowed, and new buildings sprang up overnight; their glistening bare
walls could be seen in many directions.

The services of a Miss Anderson as teacher for the little school had
been secured, and though the season was late for starting, it was
opened, and each school morning, early, the Gully children went joyfully
across the sagebrush plain to the little school building, where they
were joined by some half dozen other children who came from as many
different directions.

The glint of the sunrays on their brightly shining dinner pails flashed
heliographic warning of their approach long before the small pupils
could be seen. The Sunday School was reorganized and the meetings of the
literary society resumed. The hardships of the past winter were almost
forgotten and were seldom referred to.

The middle of the month of June brought the harvest season. The grain in
the desert maturing and ripening several weeks in advance of that in the
grain belt to the north, thus affording the homesteader an opportunity
to harvest their grain at home before leaving for the grain fields for
their regular season's run.

Gully, whose harvest at home had yielded exceptional returns for which
he found a ready market among his neighbors, was undecided as to whether
to make another trip into the Big Bend country or remain at home and
improve his place. But the desire to have a well, with abundance of
water, which would give him an opportunity to irrigate and develop his
home, soon caused him to decide to go. He had not forgotten his
experience of the fall before, and his firm resolve never to leave his
family alone in the desert again, but conditions had changed since them.
They were better provided for, and there were neighbors, many of whom
would have to leave for the winter, but still there were among them many
who would leave their families behind. Besides he had bought another
team and what they could earn, together with his earnings, would enable
him to secure the coveted well, and he would not have to leave again.

As for the work, he was better equipped now and would know what to
expect and consequently make the best of it. Thus he reasoned, and after
fully determining to go, he wrote to the grower for whom he had worked
the previous fall and arranged for work during the coming season.

The summer now being on, the heat of the sun was terrific, and no effort
was made to accomplish anything during the day. When trips to the
village became necessary the start was made early, and the home coming
frequently postponed until after sundown, to avoid as much as possible
the midday drive over the hot dusty roads. Rains were a thing of the
past now, and the desert began to assume its accustomed dry, parched
appearance. Many of the newcomers who had moved in during the early
spring, when conditions were most favorable, were now becoming alarmed,
and questioned the wisdom of their choice, and had it not been for the
positive evidence of the possibilities of the district as seen at the
Gully place, many of them would have become discouraged and given up in
despair.

To many of these unfortunates the village was the only source of
comfort. They would congregate there during the day and discuss the
various subjects pertaining to home building in the wilderness. Many of
them had had no experience at farming even under the most favorable
conditions, and these presented a most pitiful appearance and woebegone
manner. Fresh from within the confines of shop or office and launched
upon a life of hardships and exposure, upon a sea of blistering sands,
sizzling sagebrush and bunch grass, it was no wonder they blistered,
peeled, freckled and tanned and seemed to shrivel and slouch when they
had lain aside their neat fitting business suit and donned their
overalls. It was a cruel test of stamina and manhood, and a surprising
few that withstood it.

Many of the earlier settlers adhered to the belief that help would come
to them through irrigation, and the fact of the surveyors having been in
the field the summer before was related to the new settlers with
convincing arguments that it had to come. Still no one had ever heard
the slightest intimation of what the surveyors had accomplished in the
way of favorable results or the nature of their official report.

The fact of this silence was looked upon by many as a good omen, and
wild rumors were set afloat that the survey had been successful, and the
plans for the installation of the gigantic system were then being
prepared. On one occasion, while gathering driftwood along the shores of
the Columbia, a homesteader saw a man working among the rocky cliffs far
above him. He hastily drove home and reported his discovery to his
neighbors, who added their ideas to the importance of this discovery,
and by the next day it was a matter of common talk upon the streets of
the village that work had started on the foundation for a huge power
plant, to generate electricity for pumping. And so it went, every
mysterious move or unusual occurrence immediately became the subject for
speculation, and was supposed to have some bearing on the reclamation of
the land with which they were now battling to bring into a state of
productiveness.

Travis Gully was looked upon as a wizard, and his accomplishments under
the existing conditions were the wonder of the neighborhood. Each little
real estate office and many of the stores contained specimens of the
stalks of grain, corn or other varieties of products grown by him. Many
articles appeared in the papers published throughout the territory
telling of what he had accomplished under his system of farming, and he
frequently received communications asking for information as to the
methods or kind of seed he had used. To all such he could only reply
that his success was as much of a surprise to him as to others, and he
took no special credit to himself. But it pleased him to think that it
had fallen to his lot to prove to the world that his faith in the
productiveness of the soil was well founded.

To Minnie Gully the effect of their success for the year was entirely
different. She knew, or thought she knew, that it was due to the
superiority of Travis' management. "Had he not studied the matter, and
learned the exact time for plowing and seeding? Had he not so arranged
the clearing of the land as to leave the sagebrush intact upon the high
ground, that it might break the force of the wind, thus protecting the
tender plants? And who but he would have had the forethought to save
every condensed milk can that had been emptied, and had even brought
hundreds of others to utilize in his novel method of irrigation for the
vegetables and few nicely growing fruit and shade trees? Had she not
saved every particle of waste water, even to the water used for the
weekly laundering, and she and the children poured it carefully into the
cans at the roots of the plants and covered them that the sand might not
drift in and absorb the precious moisture?"

It was not chance to her. She felt that if they had acquired the
distinction of being the most successful homesteaders in the district,
they were entitled to it, and she prided herself on the fact; and she
resolved that in the event of their securing a well, with abundance of
water, even though irrigation never came, she would show the world
further proof of what could be done, and would devote her life to making
their home an ideal one.

Her blood would surge through her veins, and with flushed face and
sparkling eyes she would go out into the yard and approaching one of the
growing trees, then mere switches, would fondle its few green leaves and
look upward, as if measuring the vast expanse above to see if she might
imagine the height to which it would attain. She would go to the grain
stack, and rubbing out in the palm of her hand a few of the well filled
heads, blow away the husks and chaff, and admire the plump red grains,
finally casting them to the patiently waiting chickens, and return
singing joyously into the house and resume her household duties, a
different Minnie Gully of a short year before.




CHAPTER XV.


By the last of July the heat had become so intense that it was decided
to close the school until the cooler weather in the fall. The children
had made good progress, and as Miss Anderson had taken up a homestead
near by, her services for the winter months were assured. So it was
planned that when the school was closed she was to visit her home for a
few weeks, returning before the harvest season, and was to remain at the
Gully home until his return from harvest, after which she was to take up
her abode upon her own claim. This arrangement pleased Gully, as it
assured him that his family would not be alone during his absence.

The few remaining weeks before his departure Gully devoted to the
improvement of his house. Material for this purpose was obtained by his
having purchased a building erected upon a claim a short ways from his
own by Jack Norton, a young man, who having become discouraged, had
proposed to accompany Gully to the harvest fields and to use the
proceeds of the sale of the building, together with his earnings while
harvesting, to purchase a return ticket to the East, thereby abandoning
his claim.

The price paid by Gully for the material in the building was
insignificant, but added very materially to his unpretentious home when
reconstructed in connection with it, and assured him against the
recurrence of his experience of the winter before.

The conditions under which Travis Gully made his second trip to the
harvest fields were entirely different. Now he knew where he was going
and exactly what to expect upon his arrival. The horses he drove were
his own, and he reserved the right to have absolute control of them
during the entire trip. He had been requested by his former employer to
bring as nearly as possible the same crew as had come on the former
occasion. In this he was successful, with the exception of one of the
party who had become discouraged and left the country soon after the
passing of the severe blizzard of the winter before.

The iron molder, the pressman, and the professor were there, and as the
progress each had made on their homestead was fair, it was a more jovial
party that had left on this occasion. The start was made from the Gully
home, where the party had assembled the evening before, and instead of
the tear stained cheeks and pitiful sighs that had marked their first
departure from the well, there had been a happy gathering of all the
neighbors for miles around who had assembled at Travis Gully's home to
bid the harvesters farewell. This gathering was not only for those who
were going with the Gully party, but was for all the men of the
neighborhood who were going forth to replenish their funds ere the
winter came.

Each had brought their lunch basket, and the scene of the feast at the
Christmas tree was reenacted, only under more favorable circumstances
and on a much larger scale. The festivities continued until far into the
night. Rollicking games of blindman's buff and others of its like were
played out in the open under the brilliance of the huge, desert moon.
Young and old alike joined in the spirit of the games, and merry peals
of laughter proclaimed their evident enjoyment.

When the time came for the merry makers to go to their several homes,
and after the final good-byes had been said, those of the party who were
to remain overnight and start the following morning chose their sleeping
places, and unrolling their blankets, lay down and were soon lulled to
sleep by the sound of the distant singing and talking of the departing
guests which was wafted back by the cool night air for miles across the
silent desert. The sounds were broken at intervals by the sharp staccato
yap of the startled coyotes.

The following morning the men were all astir just at the break of day.
The horses were fed and harnessed and everything made ready for the
start. Ample lunch was put up to last the entire party until they
reached their destination, and when breakfast had been eaten the start
was made.

The sun had not yet appeared, but the jagged ridge of hills to the east
was plainly outlined, and Gully, now being thoroughly acquainted with
the lay of the country and not caring to lose time by making a long
detour to reach the main road, went directly across the plain to the gap
in the hills that he knew would afford him an exit.

Minnie Gully and the children, as well as their guest, Miss Anderson,
who had now returned from her visit home, were out to see them off. The
old dog was leaping frantically at the horses' heads as if he too
understood the importance of the occasion. His loud barking and frisky
capers caused little Joe to shriek with laughter, and amidst all this
din and shouting of good-byes they rolled away.

Jack Norton, who had remained at the Gully home from the time of the
sale of the building on his own claim until its removal and
reconstruction as a part of the Gully residence, was seated with Gully
on the driver's seat when the party started on their journey.

Knowing the road as the party now did, the trip was not nearly so
tiresome as on the former occasion. Time passed much more rapidly, and a
constant flow of conversation and quips and jokes were kept up by those
of the party except young Norton who, though usually full of life and
ordinarily a good companion, was on this occasion sullen and morose.
Travis Gully was quick to note this change in Norton's demeanor and
watched him closely to see if he could find its cause. Thinking perhaps
it was due to his disappointment at his failure at success as a
homesteader, he jibed him good-naturedly upon his giving up so easily.

Jack Norton turned, and taking one more long look at their starting
point, allowing his gaze to wander out across the desert and after a few
minutes pause answered Gully's remark by saying: "It might be that I
have not given up." Travis Gully, who rather liked the young fellow,
slapped him on the back and exclaimed: "That's the spirit. You might
take a notion to come back with us. Well, if you do, your claim will
still be safe. You know you have six months off." Jack Norton did not
reply to this. He evidently did not know or had not thought but what his
temporary absence from his claim would forfeit it. He sat silent for a
few moments, looked back in the direction from which they had come, and
remarked, "Looks good to me," and was noticeably more cheerful during
the remainder of the day.

The early morning start and favorable conditions enabled them to cover
the worst of their journey the first day, and the camp for the night was
made far up in the grand coulee, within a few miles of where they would
emerge upon the plateau where the grain fields began.

A small stream trickled down from the face of the bluff that formed the
east wall of the coulee. The spring from which it flowed was
inaccessable, so it was necessary to catch the water in pails as it
dripped from the rock ledge far above, for it disappeared as soon as it
reached the sandy bottom of the coulee.

Beautiful grasses grew at the bottom of the cliff, where the water
wasted away, and rare specimens of ferns adorned the face of the rock
over which it flowed, far above the reach of man. The place had been
noted by those of the party who were on the trip the fall before, and
the professor had expressed a desire to obtain some of the ferns for
specimens during their stay in the camp. Knowing that they had ample
time, as they were not due at their destination for two days, and that
they could reach it the following afternoon, they decided to remain in
camp the forenoon of the following day and rest their horses.

It was just before sundown when they went into camp, but knowing from
past experience that the twilight between those towering walls was
short, they hurriedly accumulated a sufficient quantity of sagebrush for
fuel during the night, and after placing their only water pail beneath
the drip of the trickling stream, awaited its filling for water with
which to make coffee.

After this was procured and the coffee set to boil, Travis Gully led his
horses to the patch of grass and allowed them to browse while the water
dripped into the pail, and as it filled he gave each horse in its turn a
drink. The evening shadows were slowly creeping upward and could be
clearly outlined upon the face of the cliff that formed the west wall of
the coulee. An occasional bird fluttered into one of the crevices that
marred the face of the cliff, seeking shelter for the night. The only
sound that disturbed the oppressive silence was that produced by the
horses cropping the succulent grass and the drip, drip of the water in
the pail.

The conversation at the camp fire had ceased. Gully noticing this
glanced toward the small group of men assembled there in search of the
cause; apparently there was none. The lunch box had been brought from
the wagon and stood open near the camp fire; the blanket rolls had been
thrown into a pile off to one side, and reclining against this, with his
back toward the fire, young Jack Norton sat and gazed wistfully down the
coulee. Gully noted the expression on the young man's face and wondered
at its seriousness. He had never questioned Norton as to his affairs,
and such knowledge as he had gained of the young man's life had been
volunteered by him.

That he was from the south, Texas he thought, and that he had left his
home the year before, when he had reached his twenty-first birthday. No
reference had ever been made by him as to his relatives or home. He had
come into the neighborhood where Gully met him with a party consisting
of several different families, none of whom had known or seen him until
he happened to drive out from the station with a number of prospective
settlers under the guidance of a real estate agent who had located the
majority of them.

His pleasing personality had won him much favor at the literary society,
where he took an active part. Being the possessor of a splendid voice
his singing was highly appreciated, and Travis Gully recalled the fact
that Miss Anderson, the school teacher, had at one time expressed the
opinion that his education was far above the average. Yet knowing as
little as he did, Gully's heart went out to the lonely young fellow, and
he attributed his failure as a homesteader to the lack of advice and
encouragement, so he determined, if the opportunity presented itself,
and it probably would on this trip, to speak to him and to try and
persuade him to remain on his claim and try again the following year.

Darkness had now fallen, and when additional fuel had been thrown onto
the dying embers of the camp fire and flared up, illuminating the
surroundings, Gully called to Jack Norton to come and lend a helping
hand with the horses and to another member of the party to get the pail
of water that had accumulated, after which he returned to the wagon, and
when his horses had been fed he joined the others at the fire.

No time was lost. After supper the blankets were spread and all were
soon sleeping soundly. Nothing disturbed their slumber. The prowling
coyote, scenting the remains of the supper on the cool night air, sent
up its mournful wail to the dim stars, and the flutter of birds wings,
as the owls routed them from their refuge in the rocks, were the only
sounds to be heard.

The campers were aroused the next morning by the restless pawing of the
horses who, realizing that they were in a strange locality, were anxious
for their feed, that they might be on the road. Travis Gully was
awakened by one of his companions calling to him and saying that he was
afraid something had gone wrong with the horses. Springing from beneath
his blankets, he hurried over to where they were tied, but could find no
cause for their nervous actions. He gave them their morning allowance of
hay and after they had quieted down and begun eating he returned to the
camp, and it being then broad daylight, he raked together the charred
ends of the partially burned sagebrush and started the fire. Calling to
his companions to "Roll out," he took the pail and started to catch some
water at the dripping spring; as he did so, he noticed that Jack Norton
was not in camp.

His neatly rolled blankets were laying at the point where he had chosen
to make his bed. Gully knew that he had slept there, for he had spoken
to him after going to bed. Thinking that he had probably gotten up early
and had strolled a little way from camp, he gave the matter no further
concern. Upon his return from getting the water his companions asked him
if he had seen Jack; replying that he had not, but that he had noticed
his absence and that he supposed he had gone for a walk, they passed the
matter by and proceeded with the preparation of the coffee for
breakfast.

No hurried preparations for their departure were made, as they intended
to remain in camp until noon. The sun was several hours high before its
rays reached the depth of the coulee, the walls of which cast their
shadows across its full width. It was a delightful place to camp and
while away a few idle hours. There were no trees or brush under which to
lie and enjoy the shade, and the only spot of green that gladdened the
eye was that of the grass at the foot of the cliff, but it was this very
novelty that made the location so fascinating. Laying prone upon their
backs they could gaze into the blue sky without being dazzled by the
brilliancy of the sun or having a thing to obstruct their view, like
viewing the heavens from the depth of a well without that same cramped
or crowded feeling.

After awaiting Jack Norton's return for a reasonable length of time
without his coming, breakfast was eaten, and the coffee pot replaced
near the fire that it might be kept warm. Travis Gully took the pail,
and leading two of his horses to the grassy spot, was allowing them to
graze while the bucket was being filled when someone called to him:
"Bring the horses up here, Mr. Gully; there is lots of water."
Recognizing the voice as that of young Norton, Gully tried to locate
him, but the resounding echoes along the coulee walls made it difficult
to catch the direction from which the call came. The professor, who had
strolled over near the cliff and was picking up and examining the pieces
of rock that had fallen from above, had also heard Jack Norton's call,
and knowing that it came from the coulee wall above, was searching the
face of the cliff in order to locate him.

Gully, seeing the professor's gaze centered on the cliff, knew at once
where the boy was and called to him to come down, lest he fall and get
hurt. To this Jack replied that he would soon be down, and as he moved
they could easily distinguish his form, a mere speck it seemed at that
dizzy height, flattened out with his back to the wall as he worked his
way cautiously along the slippery ledge over which the water flowed. His
hands were filled with ferns and plants, and he shouted jesting replies
to the anxious watchers as they called to him to be careful. After a few
moments he disappeared behind a jutting point; a few minutes later only
the top of his head could be seen protruding from a crevice; after a
half hour he came into camp, disheveled, tired and hungry, but all
excitement over his adventure.

He ate his breakfast while Travis Gully and the others each took their
turn at telling him of the dangers that lurked in those cliffs in the
way of loose boulders, hidden crevices and rattlesnakes. Gully expressed
himself in no uncertain terms about his leaving camp without first
having told them of his intention, and pictured to him the possibilities
of a fall or other accident that might have befallen him and they, not
knowing where he was, could render no assistance. Jack Norton submitted
gracefully to this scolding and explained that he had heard the
professor express a desire to obtain some of the specimens of ferns, and
as he too was interested in the geological formations of the coulee he
could not resist the temptation to explore the bluff.

He had left camp before daylight and gone down the coulee in search of a
place where he might scale the wall; after he had reached the ledge he
assured them it was no trouble to work back to the point where he was
discovered. His only regret was that he had caused them any uneasiness,
and that he did not have more time for his investigations, as the
locality afforded splendid opportunities for geological research.

He had brought back with him some beautiful specimens of rare ferns and
other plant life for the professor, and his pockets were bulging with
pieces of various kinds of stone with which, he told them, he proposed
to amuse himself later.

The professor was profuse in his thanks for the ferns, but expressed his
regret that he had taken such a chance in getting them for him, and all
the while his face beamed with his appreciation of the motive, the
desire of the student, that had prompted young Norton to explore the
coulee. He too could devote many happy days with these environments to
the gratification of this same desire.

The party resumed their journey immediately after the noon lunch was
eaten and camped that night at the home of the wheat grower for whom
they were going to work during the harvest season. When they entered the
harvest field two days later, to commence the season's run, it was the
same old scenes and endless days of toil and strain with which they had
contended on their former trip, and nothing occurred to break the
monotony.

The professor and Jack Norton became inseparable companions, and planned
many excursions together at some future time, when they proposed to
explore the coulee. The idea of abandoning his claim and returning to
the East was given up by Norton, and he talked incessantly of the
wonders of the coulee and the desert. Travis Gully smiled at the young
fellow's enthusiasm and encouraged him to renewed effort with promises
of assistance to construct another building on his claim and with such
other help as he might require.

The party of homesteaders were not worried by the thoughts of the
conditions at home as they had been during their first absence. They
wrote and received letters regularly, and in every instance the reports
received from their homes were most encouraging. Minnie Gully's letters
to her husband were filled with recitals of incidents that showed very
plainly that she was very much alive to his interests and had assumed
the management of affairs on the homestead during his absence with a
thoroughness of detail that was surprising. "I have bargained," she
wrote, "with a new neighbor for two pigs and a half dozen more
chickens," this neighbor having brought chickens and pigs into the newly
settled district without first having investigated the source of the
supply of feed for them, and was now compelled by its scarcity to sell
some of his stock. Gully's wife, seeing the opportunity, had traded some
wheat for the chickens and pigs, and as she wrote in her letter, had
"made the place look more like a farm." Miss Anderson, she continued,
"had proven herself a jewel. She did not see how she could get along
without her. She had taken complete charge of the children and was
teaching the girls to sew and cook, while she was leading a life of
ease." Travis Gully read her letters with an amused smile and wondered
at the change in her that had taken place. The constant flow of home
talk kept him from getting homesick. And so the harvest season was
passed, and when the morning came for the harvesters to return to their
homes each had planned his work for the coming winter and was eager to
begin.

Travis Gully was to see the realization of his dream of a well on his
claim and was anxious to reach home that he might complete arrangements
with the well drillers and have them begin work before the snow fell.




CHAPTER XVI.


When the party reached the Gully home upon their return they found the
members of their families had assembled there to await their arrival.
Minnie Gully and Miss Anderson had prepared a good supper, which was
waiting, and which was heartily enjoyed by the returned harvesters. They
did not linger long at Gully's, however, as the men were worn out by
their long siege and were anxious to reach their own homes.

The second morning after their return Gully drove to the village in
search of a man to drill his well. In this he was successful, and
completed the deal before his return. The selection of a site for the
well and the assembling of the machinery occupied his time for several
days following. As the well drilling crew consisted of three men besides
Jack Norton, who had arranged to stay with Gully until the well was
completed, it would entail considerable additional work for Mrs. Gully,
so Miss Anderson agreed to remain and assist her during their stay. In
return for this service Gully was to haul the lumber and erect a small
house on her claim.

With these arrangements all complete and the arrival of the driller the
work progressed nicely, and in less than a month from the time of his
return from the harvest field, Gully's well was completed. The flow
that was struck by the drillers differed but little from that reached in
the dozens of other wells that had been sunk at various points
throughout the area; the only variation was in depth, and this was due
to the difference in elevation. The flow was abundant, as was proven by
a test that failed to lower it, and the water was the purest.

The sinking of the well had almost exhausted Gully's supply of funds,
and fearing the recurrence of another severe winter, he was on the alert
for employment. While hauling the lumber for the erection of the houses
on the claims of Miss Anderson and young Norton he had learned of the
intention of a large company who held extensive land interests in the
desert to clear and prepare for seeding several hundred acres during the
winter. Securing the address of the company, he wrote to them, proposing
to take the work under contract.

The small shack was soon erected on Miss Anderson's claim near the
school house and school was opened for the winter. With her comfortably
settled her earnings as teacher were ample for her requirements, and a
sufficient amount was left to hire the necessary improvements made. This
work was given to Gully, who cleared several acres, fenced it, and put
her down a cistern similar to the one he had constructed on his own
place. In the performance of this work he was assisted by Jack Norton,
who had now settled down on his own claim, a determined and confident
homesteader.

The attendance at the little school had more than doubled since the
winter before by the arrival of additional families with children. It
had become necessary to erect another school house some miles distant to
accommodate the increased population. This new school district was in
charge of our old friend the professor, and the meetings of the Sunday
School and literary society were so arranged as to alternate between the
two districts, and debates and old fashioned spelling bees were
conducted with the separate districts as contestants.

Thus was the social life of the community kept alive and much simple
pleasure added to the lives of the homesteaders. The arrival of a few
young people in the neighborhood added to the dignity of the social
functions, and as distance was a matter of secondary consideration with
these hardy pioneers, it was no uncommon thing during the winter months
to see a wagon being driven from the home of one settler to that of
another, picking up a load of jolly people, both young and old, that
were for some point, it might be ten miles distant, where a surprise
party or some such gathering was to be held. They were always
accompanied by an abundance of lunch.

Ida Gully, who was not attending school, as she had grown to be quite a
young lady, was a great favorite, and was always eager to attend these
gatherings and was usually accompanied by Jack Norton on these
occasions.

The winter season was now well advanced and there had been no snow; the
nights were growing colder but the days were yet clear and warm. Travis
Gully had given up hopes of hearing from the company to whom he had
written in regard to clearing their land and was working on his own
place. He did not have sufficient funds to erect a pump and windmill
over his well, but had substituted an old hand pump in hopes that he
could make it answer his purpose for securing water for domestic use
until the irrigating season came. He had installed this makeshift of a
pump and was trying to devise some scheme whereby he could make its
operation less laborious by attaching a longer lever, when upon looking
up from his work he saw a party of men approaching in a vehicle that was
being driven along the road that led to his place.

The advent of a stranger being no longer a matter of interest he
proceeded with his work after looking to see if he could by chance
recognize the team. A few minutes later the barking of his dog announced
the approach of the vehicle, and he saw that they had driven within his
inclosure and were coming toward the house. Leaving his work at the
well, he went to the house, where he awaited their coming.

Gully did not recognize any of the occupants of the vehicle, of whom
there were four. He supposed that they were some persons who were
looking over the country, probably with the view to investing, as they
did not look like the type of settlers he was accustomed to seeing.
Three of the men had the appearance of business or professional men. One
of them was well advanced in years, but the remaining three were very
much younger. One of these he recognized, as they drew nearer, as a man
whom he had seen on frequent occasions when he had visited the village,
and supposed that he was only the driver.

The party had by now driven up to the yard and Gully stepped out to meet
them. Upon being asked if he were Mr. Gully, and after answering in the
affirmative, the elderly man took from his pocket a card which he handed
to Travis Gully, who, glancing at it, recognized the name of the company
to whom he had written. He invited the visitors to "get out and come
in." This they said was not necessary, as they had only a limited time
in which to state the purpose of their visit, which they did by
explaining to him that they had gotten his letter and had come with the
view to looking the proposition of clearing the land over, and if they
found him ready to undertake the work and his terms satisfactory they
were prepared to enter into an agreement with him. First, however, they
wished to visit the land in question, which they proposed to do before
returning to the village.

Taking from a wallet a blue print of the locality, they traced the lines
and looked over the section numbers for a few minutes, and then asked
Gully as to the roads leading to their lands. He gave them directions
and stated that roads across the plains were not necessary, as a person
could not get far out of the way.

They explained further to Gully that they had brought with them from the
East tents and surveying instruments which had been left behind in the
village and asked that in case of an agreement being reached with them,
if he was in a position to accommodate them with meals during the few
days that would be required to survey the land they wished to put into
cultivation. Gully explained that his means of accommodation were crude
and limited, but they were entirely welcome to such as his home
afforded.

After arranging with him to come to the village with his wagon the
following day, when they would talk the matter over, and if satisfactory
would have him return with them and their equipment, they drove away in
the direction of their land.

Travis Gully stood and watched them for a few moments, his mind filled
with the problem of the terms of the contract that he knew he would be
called on to submit the following day. His wife having noticed the
presence of strangers and seeing the thoughtful attitude of her husband
after their departure came to him, and after learning the nature of
their business, was greatly relieved and much delighted at the prospect
of his securing the big contract. They both realized, however, that the
success of the venture would depend very largely upon the continuance of
the favorable weather, and spoke of the probability of it remaining
fair.

Returning to the well where he took up his interrupted work, Gully
discussed the proposition of the contract with his wife. Never having
undertaken anything of the kind, he was at a loss how to begin. He knew
what it was worth per acre to clear and plow the land and approximately
how long it would take, everything being favorable, but he could not
get it in tangible form. Finally his wife suggested that he call on
young Norton, who could probably assist him as to arranging the details.
This was a happy thought! Gully had intended to give Jack employment if
he got the work, so why not let him be a party to the deal, and let him
handle the business part of the transaction? He would see Norton and
talk the matter over with him, he told her.

It was now getting well on toward evening and Ida had gone to Miss
Anderson's to await the dismissal of school, as she frequently did, and
would return with the children when they came home; and as Jack Norton
usually walked home with them, Gully awaited their return in hopes he
would do so on this occasion. In this he was not disappointed, for a
short time afterwards the children were seen returning from school, and
Norton was accompanying them home.

Upon Jack Norton's arrival Gully told him of what had occurred, of the
coming of the strangers and the arrangements he had made for the morrow,
and told him if he would remain until after supper he would like to talk
the matter over with him. Jack listened attentively to what Gully told
him, but could not understand why he should be consulted in the matter.
Thanking Gully for the invitation he told him he would be glad to assist
him in any way he could.

Continuing his work at the well, Gully did not again refer to the
matter, and Norton went to the house, where he amused little Joe and the
other children by romping with them until they were called to their
supper. After the supper was over and Gully and Norton had strolled to
the barn. Gully told him of his desire to have him take an active
interest in the proposed deal, and explained why. He told him plainly
that he needed the assistance of someone who was better equipped in the
way of an education than he himself was, that they might look after the
business features, and he made young Norton an offer of a partnership
under the conditions of which Jack would greatly profit should they get
the work.

Jack Norton listened to the plans and proposal that Gully had to make.
After Gully had finished he turned to Gully and asked: "Do you mean that
you want me to take hold of this affair and look after your interest,
and is it for this purpose that you are making me this liberal offer? If
such is the case, Mr. Gully, I will tell you now that although I were
only working for you by the day, as a laborer, I would still have your
interests at heart as much as if I were your business partner."

Gully being taken by surprise at the young man's earnestness, replied
that such was his intention. "If you care to take an interest in the
transaction, I need you to look after the accounts, the handling of the
funds for the purchase of supplies that will be necessary, and securing
the help that will be required, for you are worth more to me as a
business partner than on a daily wage," he told him.

Norton smiled, and extending his hand to Gully, said: "That being the
case, I will help you," and added: "May I go into town with you
tomorrow?"

[Illustration: _For weeks they toiled with blistered palms and aching
backs._]

"Certainly," replied Gully, "I want you to draw up the contract, and be
present at the signing."

"Then you have drawn no agreement yet," asked Norton.

"No," replied Gully.

"Well, we will go to the house and see what can be done. We will at
least have something ready in the way of a proposition to offer; and
say, Mr. Gully, have you given them an idea of the charge per acre you
are to make for this work."

"No, I had not fully determined what it would be worth, and depended on
your assistance in making an estimate," replied Gully.

"Well, we will figure that out too when we get at it," and so saying,
they returned to the house, and clearing off the table, sat down with
pencil and paper to draw up the form of their first contract.

To the uninitiated the process of removing sagebrush from and plowing
land would be simple enough, and under ordinary circumstances and over a
small area it would be, but in this instance it was different. The land
was not a great ways off, a few miles at best, from Gully's home, but
too far to go and come each day, as the working hours during the winter
were extremely short, and too much time would be lost on the road, and
besides, the amount of the land to be prepared was unusually large for
one undertaking, as an entire section, some six hundred and forty acres,
were to be gotten ready for seeding at the very earliest possible time.

Gully and Norton had taken all this into consideration, and the extra
preparation that was required for the work was an additional expense
that must be considered. They knew that should they get the contract
they must establish a camp on the land in question from which to carry
on their operations. There must be shelter erected for both those
engaged in the work and the stock that would be required for plowing,
for they knew that the snow might come at any time. Gully did not expect
another blizzard as severe as the one encountered the winter before, as
he had learned that they were not of yearly occurrence, but he had told
Jack of the terrible one they had experienced on that occasion, that in
case one did come they would not be unprepared.

Long into the night they worked, figuring out each little detail and
drawing a diagram of the land. They allotted certain parcels of it to
separate individuals on whom they expected to call for assistance. They
knew that any of their neighbors on whom they called would be only too
glad of the opportunity to earn the money by clearing their allotted
portion. To those of their acquaintances who had no horses was assigned
the task of gathering and piling the brush for burning.

The arrangements as planned by Norton brought Gully to the front as a
public benefactor, and the clearing of the land a community affair. He
so arranged each little detail as to make Travis Gully appear as the
moving spirit in this distribution of the opportunity for earning a few
dollars among his neighbors, and so well did he contrive to eliminate
himself from all but the responsibility that his own connection with
the work was almost entirely lost sight of.

Mrs. Gully and Ida sat quietly by and listened to the discussion of
their plans long after the children had retired. At times Norton's
enthusiasm and interest in the work he was doing would become so great
he would forget his surroundings, and with shirt sleeves rolled back and
neck band unbuttoned, he would sit drumming upon the table with pencil
poised, ready to record the result of some mental calculation, muttering
to himself. Unconsciously he would use expressions that were foreign to
the Gullys, who would watch him closely.

Travis Gully and his wife would wait patiently until Norton announced
his solution of the problem, but with Ida the effect was different. She
would watch his every movement, and as his thoughts became more
concentrated the strain on her would become more tense and she would
partially arise from her chair, with hands clenched until the nails left
their imprint in her palms, and it would seem that she must call to him,
and upon his first movement to record some figures or to announce some
clause that he wished to insert in the contract, she would sink back in
her chair, and glancing around nervously, resume her bit of fancy work,
that she was learning under Miss Anderson's instructions.

Travis Gully was too much absorbed to note his daughter's actions, but
it did not escape the quick eyes of the mother, who suggested to her
that perhaps they had better retire and leave her father and Jack to
finish their work alone. Minnie Gully had never thought of Ida as
anything but a child, and she had not taken into account the change this
life in the open had wrought upon her oldest daughter. She watched her
as she carefully folded her bit of embroidery in obedience to her
mother's suggestion that they retire, and as she watched the knowledge
was forced upon her that she was the mother of a fully developed, robust
young woman, and the thought of the additional responsibility this
knowledge brought with it was made more gratifying by others of
comradeship. She now had a companion for the molding of whose character
she alone was responsible.

With a parting warning to the men, to "remember you are to start to town
early in the morning and not to stay up too late," she and Ida went to
their room. Gully and Norton needed no such warning. The fact of their
going to town was a prime factor in the necessity for their working as
they were, and as for staying up late, their work had to be completed
before they could retire.

As the work progressed, after the ladies had left them, Travis Gully was
surprised at the knowledge of such work as Norton evidenced, and he
realized that he had done wisely in taking him into his confidence and
gaining his assistance. He listened without interruption to Jack
Norton's plans as he outlined them, and to the results of his
calculations as to the expense incurred and profits derived from the
transaction as they were read with such an apparent familiarity with
figures that he did not question their correctness.

There was one question uppermost in Gully's mind that would persist in
its recurrence, and that was: "Who was this Jack Norton, this waif of
the sandy desert, who with the last few hours, with apparently no other
incentive than a desire to help one who had befriended him, had
developed into a thorough business man, with unlimited capacity for
facts and figures?"

While Travis Gully was asking himself these questions his wife, in the
adjoining room, was busily racking her mind with the one thought: "Was
Ida interested in Jack, and if so, to what extent, and had he noticed
it?" She would know at the first opportunity. She would ask her, but she
must be careful, and she smiled; Ida was such a child.

Jack Norton, oblivious to the thoughts that were filling the minds of
his friends, worked on at the formulation of his plans. It had been
months, it seemed like years to him, since he had been given an
opportunity to work at something worth while. It was true that the
amount in dollars and cents involved in this entire transaction would be
at best but a few hundred, but it was business, and recalled to his mind
other days when he had worked out larger plans; yes, very much larger,
where thousands of dollars were involved.

He laughed whimsically to himself after he had handed the final product
of his hours of work to Travis Gully to read. It was a recapitulation of
the whole transaction, condensed and simplified in a manner that he was
sure would bring it within his understanding, and as Gully read, his
brow contracted with many wrinkles as his brain groped for an
interpretation of the mass of figures, Jack Norton compared these
existing conditions with other scenes in his past, when he had entered
noiselessly through swinging glass doors and over dustless carpets into
the presence of the older Norton, his "Governor," and submitted for his
inspection a sheet of about the same dimensions containing, not a
written agreement whereby one or more men do "agree to remove the
sagebrush from, plow and make ready for planting certain lands beginning
at, etc.," but a neatly prepared statement of his college expenses,
supplemented with a request for an additional allowance for golf,
yachting, etc.

When Travis Gully had finished reading the paper Norton had given him he
handed it back, asked one or two questions about things he did not fully
understand, and upon their being explained, said: "It's all right as far
as I can see." Norton took the paper, folded it neatly, and placed it on
the table, and after assembling the scattered sheets upon which he had
been figuring, he placed them in a neat pile, using an empty coffee cup
for a paper weight, he handed Gully the folded sheet, together with the
pencil with which he had been working, and after asking what time he
proposed to start for town in the morning, remarked that "He guessed he
would go home."

To this Gully objected, telling him there was no need of his going; that
he could sleep there and they would get an early start. This was agreed
upon, and a few minutes later the Gully home was in darkness.




CHAPTER XVII.


Gully and Norton reached the village the following day about the middle
of the forenoon, and driving directly to the one hotel of which the town
boasted, found the strangers awaiting their arrival. The old gentleman
was walking impatiently to and fro on the narrow board walk that did
duty as a porch, and the two younger men were idly glancing through some
well worn back number magazines with which the writing table in the one
waiting room of the hotel was strewn.

After tieing his team Gully approached the old gentleman who, having
recognized him, had stopped his restless pacing and was nervously toying
with his watch fob. Accompanied by Jack Norton, whom he introduced, he
mentioned that "He regretted being so late, but the distance was great."
This apology was offered more for the purpose of conversation than
because he felt that it was due. The old gentleman acknowledged the
introduction of Norton and remarked that their lateness had caused him
no inconvenience, but added that he would like to get it finished as
soon as possible.

He invited them to enter the hotel, where his companions were waiting.
These, upon recognizing Gully, bowed slightly, but remained seated when
Norton was presented. The latter having noted their lack of interest in
Gully merely bowed in acknowledgment, and remained standing. Upon a
suggestion from the old gentleman that they repair to the room which he
was occupying to discuss their business, his two assistants arose,
stretched themselves, and lowering their trouser legs, which they had
thoughtfully drawn up to prevent their bagging at the knees, they
strolled leisurely toward the stairs to ascend.

Jack Norton, who had noticed the actions of the younger men, one of whom
could not have been much older than he, smiled indulgently as he thought
how they, in their ignorance, did not deem it necessary to extend to
them common courtesy, and mentally resolved to open their eyes on the
first occasion that presented itself before their departure. Dropping
back to allow the older man and Gully to precede him on the stairs, he
had just started up when the youngest of the strangers turned at the
head of the stairs and asked if it was necessary for "that fellow Norton
to be present." Jack Norton stopped and awaited Travis Gully's answer.
This was not long in coming. "It certainly is," he said, "Mr. Norton is
my associate in this deal, and he is the one who will do the talking."
This statement from Gully did not seem to create the impression on the
young man that Gully had hoped, and as he turned and continued his
leadership toward the room, Gully waited and taking Norton by the arm
said "Come on, Jack." Norton only smiled and accompanied them to the
room.

Once inside the room, with the elderly man seated by a small table and
Gully occupying the one remaining chair, the young strangers reclining
lazily upon the bed, Jack was left to take care of himself, which he did
by remaining standing with his hat in his hand. He realized that he was
at a disadvantage. His name had not been mentioned in the original
letter to the company, nor was he referred to during the visit of the
strangers on the day before.

The fact of his unexpected stay overnight at Gully's had deprived him of
the opportunity to change his clothes, and he had worn his overalls and
flannel shirt to this conference; but this fact did not annoy him in the
least, for he felt that he had judged the calibre of the younger members
of the party correctly, and he rather enjoyed the novelty of being
underestimated by them on account of his wearing apparel. He was
thoroughly familiar with the type of business man that he knew the old
gentleman to be and felt no resentment toward him for his brusque
manner. He had a bargain to drive, either for himself or the persons
whom he represented, and the accomplishment of this was his object, even
thought it took precedence over the demands of common politeness.

There was no loss of time in coming to the discussion of the subject of
the meeting, and without any preliminary remarks Gully was asked if he
had prepared any bid on the work that he wished to submit, and in case
his offer was accepted, what would be the nature of the agreement he
would be willing to sign.

As this volley of questions were fired at him unexpectedly, Gully did
not immediately reply, but reaching in his pocket, he drew out the paper
Norton had prepared, and after unfolding it answered that "He had
brought with him this paper, that would give them an idea of what would
be required and the probable cost of the work."

Jack Norton, realizing that there was data embodied in the memorandum
that he did not care to have come into the possession of the strangers
just yet, stepped forward, intercepting the paper as it was being passed
across the table to the old gentleman, took it, and refolding it, placed
it in his own pocket, remarking, with a smile: "I think, if you
gentlemen will allow me, that I can expedite matters by explaining
existing conditions without the necessity of delving into figures just
yet."

The two men reclining on the bed, aroused by his action and speech, were
now sitting up. The youngest, who had been introduced as Mr. Earl
Stevens, had started to arise and interfere, when Norton, glancing in
his direction, arrested his movements, and he had remained seated.

Jack Norton, realizing instantly that he had the situation well in hand,
could not resist the temptation to launch his first shaft at Stevens. He
continued: "Your friend Mr. Stevens is no doubt a stenographer, and
perhaps he would like to make notes during our conversation."

Stevens flushed and admitted that he was not, and the old gentleman said
he did not deem it necessary.

Travis Gully, who was wholly unprepared for this byplay on young
Norton's part, sat quietly by and awaited for him to continue.

Excusing himself for a moment, Jack Norton stepped out into the hall,
and entering an adjoining room, the door of which was standing open, he
immediately returned with a chair, which he placed at the table, and
began:

"In the first place, Mr. Palmer," this being the old gentleman's name,
"what is the nature of the improvements that you propose to make on this
land?"

"Well," Palmer began, "we intend to have it cleared of brush and
prepared for sowing to grain."

"What amount of land do you propose to have put into a state of
cultivation?" Norton asked.

"One whole section this winter, and probably more later," replied
Palmer.

"You have visited this land and are familiar with the conditions, are
you not, Mr. Palmer?" asked Jack.

"Yes, I was there yesterday."

"Knowing that the land is isolated to a certain extent and that there
are no buildings on it or water for the men and stock who may be
employed by you, do you propose to make the necessary improvements in
the way of shelter and water, or does the contractor have to provide
these requirements?" was Norton's next question.

"We had not contemplated improving the property to that extent until we
had gotten some returns on our first planting," answered Palmer, "but
should the prospect for a good yield look encouraging the company might
put on substantial improvements in the way of buildings and wells in
preparation for the coming harvest."

"Then by your reference to the company, I am to understand that you and
these gentlemen who are accompanying you are not the sole owners of this
land. Am I right?" asked Jack, with a look in the direction of the two
men on the bed.

"I am the agent of the owners, and these two young gentlemen are
surveyors who have accompanied me for the purpose of establishing the
lines with the view to fencing, and to take notes of the topographical
features of the land, which they hope at some time in the future will be
irrigated," explained Palmer. And he continued: "These gentlemen have
come prepared to remain until their work is completed. As for me, I
shall return as soon as the details of the preparation of the land for
seeding have been settled." And drawing from his pocket a bundle of
papers, extracting one from among them and laying it upon the table, he
leaned back in his chair and added: "My credentials."

Palmer took the slip and glancing at the figures on it, turned it over
and made some calculations, and seeming satisfied, asked if they had
prepared an agreement.

Norton replied that they had simply outlined it, and if the primary
feature, the price, was satisfactory, the other details could be worked
out later, as he understood from Mr. Gully that they were to return with
them provided an agreement was reached.

"Very well," answered Palmer, "if you gentlemen will remain and take
lunch with us, we will be more fit for the long drive."

They both thanked him and accepted the invitation. Gully suggested that
it would save time if he loaded their equipment before lunch and be
ready to start as soon as it was over. With this object in view, he and
Norton left the room, remarking that they would get the team and return
immediately.

Travis Gully watched young Norton closely as they crossed to where the
team was tied, but made no remark, as he knew that Jack was thinking and
would soon express himself in regard to the interview that had just
closed.

As they were preparing to climb into the wagon to drive to the hotel,
Jack stopped with one foot on the wheel and said, "Do you know, Mr.
Gully, that I believe I've seen that man Palmer before," and then he
added, "That fellow Stevens is a cad. Well I kept him out of it,
anyway."

Gully made no reply to Jack's remark about Palmer, but he thought
Stevens was a "Smartalec."

Norton, knowing that his opportunity for talking privately with Gully
would be gone after they had joined the others at the hotel, apologized
for taking the paper as he did, explaining that Palmer would see at a
glance what a less experienced man would have to figure out, and there
were certain figures on that paper that he did not want him to have
until he had learned the extent of his authority.

Gully told him that he had acted just right for he supposed that the
paper was to be submitted as it was, and he told Jack that he would
leave the arrangements of the details entirely in his hands.

It still lacking a few minutes to lunch time, they drove to the store
where a few purchases were made by Gully that had become necessary from
the fact that the strangers were to be his guests for a time. When this
was finished and the amount of the bill had been figured, Jack Norton
asked that it be receipted, and paid the cash. Gully remonstrated with
him and asked his idea for doing so.

"We are partners are we not?" asked Jack.

"In some things," Gully replied, "but--"

"Never mind the buts," laughingly interrupted Jack, "remember you have
the wagon and teams, while I have put in nothing and besides, their
being there will make more work for Mrs. Gully and Ida. Understand that
I intend to be a partner in every sense of the word."

Gully made no reply to this, and loading on their supplies, they drove
to the hotel and taking on the tents, baggage and instruments of the
strangers, tied their team and entered the hotel to await the call to
lunch, which was soon announced.

The start after lunch and the long drive to the Gully home was devoid of
interest. Norton had given up his seat with Gully to Mr. Palmer, and had
contented himself with a less comfortable one in the rear of the wagon
among the boxes and baggage. The strangers who had put aside their
business suits and had donned their khaki, were being jostled and jolted
in a most heartless manner by the rough wagon as it rumbled along,
clattering over stones and bumping over the sagebrush that obstructed
the road.

Conversation was a burden to these men, who fresh from the East, were
accustomed to more convenient means of transportation. Young Norton, who
was secretly enjoying their discomfort, was inclined to be social, and
in his efforts to entertain them, kept up a constant stream of
conversation. He told them of the advantages of the locality, of the
prospects of its being irrigated in the very near future by the
government, and how, if they were wise, they would secure a claim before
it was too late, and remain on it. He gave them a glowing description of
his trip to the harvest field, and recounted his experiences while
there, and as they showed unmistakable evidence of being bored he would
point to the claim of some homesteader and tell them where they had come
from and how long he must remain on his claim before he could make final
proof.

The noise of the wagon prevented Jack from hearing how Travis Gully and
Mr. Palmer were passing away the time. He could occasionally see one or
the other point at some object in the distance, and he supposed that
they were getting along nicely. As for him, Jack Norton frequently
remarked years after that he never had a better time, nor the road seem
so short.

They did not arrive at Gullys in time to establish their camp that
night, as the road they had driven out necessitated slow driving. After
the wagon had been unloaded and the horses cared for, supper was
announced and the strangers accompanying Travis Gully to the house, were
introduced to his family. Norton, who remained until after supper,
knowing that Gully was not prepared to furnish beds for the three men,
invited the two surveyors to accompany him to his shack, where he would
make them as comfortable for the night as he could. He was careful not
to mention the distance nor the scarcity of comforts at his home.

The surveyors accepted his offer of hospitality for the night, and
before they left to accompany him, it was arranged that they were to
return for breakfast the following morning, and the day would be devoted
to preparing their camp, and a trip to the company's land.

It was less than two miles from Gullys to Jack Norton's shack, but to
the surveyors who had been made tired and sore by the long rough ride of
the afternoon, the walk through the darkness across the sage covered
plain, with its numerous obstacles in the way of tufts of bunch grass,
scraggling sagebrush and abandoned badger holes, into and over which
they were constantly stumbling and falling in their efforts to follow
Jack, who, taking advantage of the shorter route, had purposely left the
road. To them the trip seemed interminable, and when they finally
reached Norton's home they staggered in, and after he had lighted the
small kerosene lamp, looked wistfully at the crude bed which Jack
pointed out to them with the remark: "It does not look very inviting,
but I suppose you gentlemen are tired enough to enjoy even these poor
accommodations."

To which Thomas Dugan, the eldest of the two strangers, answered: "I
feel tired enough to sleep anywhere," and added, smilingly, "I wish you
boys could see some of the places where I have bunked while surveying
with the U. S. Geological survey party in Alaska."

Norton's interest was immediately aroused, but knowing the hour to be
growing late, and feeling rather played out himself, from the long hours
of the night before, only remarked, "I would like to hear about it
sometime, Dr. Dugan."

Norton then asked his guests if they felt as though a fire would add to
their comfort, if so he would kindle one, as it would not take a great
while to warm the room.

Earl Stevens replied that all he wanted was "To get to bed."

"Very well," answered Jack. "How about you Mr. Dugan, are you chilly?"

"Not in the least," Dugan answered.

"Then you and Mr. Stevens may occupy my bed. I am sorry I have such
limited quarters that to provide you with separate apartments is
impossible."

"But how about yourself, where are you to sleep?" asked Dugan.

"Never mind about me, I am provided for," laughed Jack, and reaching
under his bed drew out his roll of harvest blankets.

"These," he said, "have been my only resting place for many long weeks
during the harvest season just passed, and I rather enjoy the prospect
of another night tucked comfortably away in their folds."

Earl Stevens, who during this time had been busily unlacing and removing
his leather leggins and removing his outer garments, was now ready to
retire, and with the remark, "Any port in a storm," he rolled over to
the side next to the wall and crawled beneath the cover.

Dugan, after asking Norton if he could be of any assistance to him, in
preparing his bed, and upon Jacks assurance that he could manage it
alone, soon joined Stevens.

Jack Norton, after putting out the light and bidding his guests
good-night, was soon snoring contentedly. If they were not comfortable,
restless or his snoring disturbed them, Jack was unaware of the fact,
for he did not awake the following morning until the sun was well up.

When he arose and went to the one small window with which his house was
provided, and drawing back the piece of calico that Miss Anderson had
neatly hemmed and with which she had presented him as a part of his
furnishings, the room was filled with sunlight. His guests were sleeping
soundly and were not awakened until the noise made by filling the stove
with sagebrush aroused them.

Jack lighted the fire and asked them if they were ready to get up. Dugan
immediately arose and after dressing, followed Norton out to the bench,
where he was provided with a brimming basin of ice cold water with which
to bathe his face. Jack laughingly told him "The ice water was another
reminder of his trip to Alaska."

Stevens, who soon followed, was also provided with this primitive means
of performing his morning ablution, and seemed much refreshed after its
completion. Upon being asked as to how they had rested, both he and
Dugan replied, "Splendidly."

Norton realized that breakfast was probably awaiting their arrival at
the Gully home and not wishing to cause any additional delay, pointed
out Gully's house, and asked his guests if they would mind going there
alone as he had some chores to do, before he could come, but would
follow as quickly as possible.

There being no objections to this, Dugan and Stevens left in the
direction of Gully's. Jack Norton watched their departure for a few
moments. He had made up his mind from the first that he did not like
young Stevens but had decided that Dugan was a good sort, and was
anxious to have an opportunity to know him better, and to hear of his
experience while in Alaska. Going into the house, he straightened out
the interior and supplying himself with pencils and paper for his use
during the day, followed his guests to Gully's.

Mrs. Gully was just serving breakfast when Norton arrived, and he noting
that the places at the table were all filled, insisted upon her not
arising to prepare a place for him, that he "Had much rather wait and
eat with the children." As the girls and Joe clamored with their mother,
that Jack's wishes in this respect be granted, she smilingly answered,
"Very well then, just as you and Jack say, but run along now, and let us
eat in peace."

Jack was out near where the equipment of the strangers had been
unloaded, preparatory to raising the tents, when a few minutes after,
Ida came to where he was standing and asked if he had eaten breakfast
so soon, she not having been in the room when Jack arrived, Norton
answered that he had not, and that he proposed to wait and eat with the
homefolks as he had gained her mother's consent to such an arrangement.

Ida expressed herself as pleased and said she had avoided meeting the
strangers and seeing him outside had taken this opportunity to ask him
how he had managed to care for the two men as she knew his house was
small.

Jack told her that they got along nicely, and he supposed that they had
rested well, as he had heard no complaint and he related how he had led
them across the sagebrush in the dark and expressed the opinion that if
anything would induce sleep, such a trip as he had given them surely
would.

Ida laughed merrily at Jack's description of the manner in which the two
surveyors had stumbled along in the dark, but asked if it was not
equally hard on him.

Assuring her that he was familiar with the route over which they had
gone they chatted on until Joe came running from the house calling to
them, "Mamma said come to breakfast." As they went to the house in
response to this summons, they passed Gully and the strangers, who were
on their way out to where the equipment lay.

Travis Gully, calling to Jack to wait a moment, came back and told him
when he had finished eating, to send Joe out and let him know, as he
wanted to arrange some plans for the day with him privately. Norton
promised to do so, and as he turned to rejoin Ida, who was waiting,
found her embarrassed and annoyed by the constant staring of Stevens,
who had stopped to await Gully's coming, but as she did not mention the
matter, Jack did not let her know that he had noticed it.

After his breakfast was eaten, Jack sent Joe to tell his father, and
when Gully, after excusing himself for a few moments, left the
strangers, and came to the house, where Jack was awaiting him in the
kitchen. He told him that he had been thinking the matter of the
contract over, and thought it a good idea to have a talk with some of
their neighbors and make sure of their help before binding themselves to
an agreement.

"How do you propose to manage it?" asked Jack.

"I thought you might take one of the teams and go see such of those as
you could, while I get the tents up, and upon your return we could drive
over and see the land," answered Gully.

Jack thought for a moment before he replied to this proposition. "I'll
tell you," he finally said, "tomorrow night the literary society meets.
We will attend the meeting, leaving these men here. They would not be
interested, and while we are there we can take the matter up with those
we want to see."

"But how about the contract?" asked Gully. "Ought it be signed, or can
it wait a day or two?"

"Let it wait," replied Jack.

So they went together where the strangers were waiting, and in a short
time, two tents were raised, and made fairly comfortable, and the
strangers had taken up their quarters. Mr. Palmer, with a rough board
table, and his suit case containing maps and papers occupying one, and
Dugan and Stevens with their surveying instruments, the other.




CHAPTER XVIII.


It was now approaching the Holiday season, and there was as yet no
indications of a severe winter. There had been sufficient frost to kill
the grass, but stock was doing nicely on the range and little feeding
was required.

No especial arrangements had been made for the seasons entertainment,
everyone seemed to be interested in the progress of the preparations for
work on the big contract. It was generally known that it was secured by
Gully and Norton and the neighbors were anxiously awaiting the time for
actual work to begin.

The call for help among them on the night of the literary meeting, had
been gladly responded to, and almost daily requests for work were being
received from persons who lived many miles distant.

The deal had been successfully consummated and Mr. Palmer had returned
to the East. The surveyors Dugan and Stevens were eagerly endeavoring to
complete their part of the work, in order to return to their homes in
time for the Holiday festivities.

Travis Gully and Jack Norton who had secured additional teams, were
busily hauling material for the erection of shelters, and feed, to the
point on the company's land, that had been selected for the
establishment of the main camp.

Fresh water was to be hauled daily from Gully's well in a huge tank that
had been constructed for this purpose, and everything was to be gotten
in readiness for work to begin immediately after the new year.

Jack Norton and Dugan became great friends, and the latter spent many
nights with Jack when they would sit for hours by the roaring sheet iron
stove, while Jack listened in boyish eagerness to the older mans
accounts of his experiences while in Alaska with the Geological survey.
Dugan soon discovered that Jack's hobby was geology, and he could talk
learnedly on that subject, so it welded their friendship all the
stronger.

Miss Anderson came almost daily after school, to assist Mrs. Gully in
preparing a few trinkets for Christmas, and they would sit at night and
plan for Ida's future. Miss Anderson was especially anxious to keep Ida,
who was peculiarly adapted to, and took such an interest in fancy needle
work under her care and instruction, and she also taught her how to
prepare and serve such dainty dishes as the means at their hand
permitted.

Minnie Gully could see, and appreciated Miss Anderson's interest in Ida,
for the girl had never until now, had an opportunity to learn, and no
one could find fault with Miss Anderson as a teacher.

In fact, Ida was rapidly developing into a very able young lady and was
beginning to show the traces of refinement that she had no doubt, as
Miss Anderson expressed it, inherited from her mother, although the
latters natural inclinations in this respect had lain dormant up to
within the last two years. She was proud of Ida and missed no
opportunity to refer to the progress her pupil was making.

The lines having been all established and nothing left but the
topographical map of the land to be completed, and most of the data for
this having been obtained, the greater part of young Stevens work
consisted of draughting and the compilation of the data. He did not join
in the conversation with the men, and his only occupation while not at
his work, seemed to be seeking an opportunity of forcing his attentions
on Ida Gully.

In this he was frustrated by the young lady herself, who avoided him
except at such times as he came to his meals. Occasionally he came to
the house during the evening, ostensibly to talk with her father, but
usually ignored Gully, but he gained no opportunity to speak with her
except in the presence of either Miss Anderson or her mother.

On one such occasion he asked Miss Anderson why so able a person as she
should waste her talent by remaining in such a wilderness, and then
fixing his gaze on Ida, busily engaged on her fancy work, quoted:

    "_Many a rose is born,
      To blush, unseen,
    And waste its fragrance;
      On the desert air._"

Miss Anderson replied that she would not consider her time or talent
wasted if she could restore to the world just one of these desert roses
to which he referred, in all its native simplicity. For, she continued,
without such talent as I possess, to protect it, the contaminating
influence that surrounds the desert, might invade the retreat of the
rose and cast its blight upon it.

Stevens was not expecting this thrust, and parried by saying that the
contaminating influence, civilization, to which Miss Anderson evidently
referred, would probably invade their retreat within the near future,
for from what he had seen and learned, during his stay in the locality,
the country would soon make rapid strides and would become an active
agricultural center.

"We certainly hope so, and with that expectation, we shall continue to
prepare ourselves to blend with the changed conditions, when it does
come. But for the present we are contented," she answered.

Ida cast an appreciative glance at Miss Anderson and secretly resolved
to place herself completely in her hand, in hopes that she too might
acquire her dignified manner and conversational power.

At last the work of the surveyors was finished, and the tents were
lowered and packed with their instruments, ready for their return. Gully
was to drive them to the village. Dugan and Stevens had spent the last
night of their stay with Jack, in his shack, under the same conditions
they had the first, with the exception that they now knew Norton--Dugan
to respect and Stevens to fear this young man who had surprised them
both with his apparent business ability and his gentlemanly manner.

Travis Gully drove away with the two men, after the family had bidden
them goodbye. Norton and Miss Anderson were present to pay their
respects to the departing guests. Norton requested that they lose no
opportunity to speak a favorable word for the reclamation of the desert,
and Miss Anderson expressed her hopes to young Stevens that his
predictions for the future of the country would come true.

The affairs at the Gully home soon resumed their normal stage after the
departure of the surveyors, and as the preparations were completed for
the work of clearing the land to be started, the matter of the holidays
was taken up, and numerous suggestions for a befitting Christmas
celebration were made. As only a few days remained before the time would
arrive, hasty action was required.

At Sunday school the next Sunday, the matter was discussed, and a
committee consisting of Miss Anderson, Jack Norton and The Professor
were appointed to take charge of the affair, and all felt satisfied that
in these competent hands success was assured.

The Holiday vacation of two weeks which Miss Anderson and the Professor
gave their schools gave ample time for the preparations and a splendid
time was had at the entertainment, but to those who were present the
Christmas before at the old sagebrush tree, there was something missing.
They could not define what, but the same neighborly feeling did not
exist. This was probably due to their increased number and the
introduction of new characters among them.

Snow began to fall in small flurries during the Holidays, but not in
sufficient quantities as to interfere with the plans for work.
Immediately after the New Year Gully moved with his family to the
company's land where Mrs. Gully and Ida were to cook for the men
employed on the work.

The fall of snow, though light, interfered with plowing, but the removal
of sagebrush progressed rapidly. This was accomplished by hitching two
or more horses at each end of a steel rail, procured at the railroad,
and by means of which the sagebrush was dragged or broken from the land.
The men and children followed this contrivance, gathering the brush and
piling it ready for burning.

Everything progressed splendidly, the favorable weather kept the range
open and thus the supply of feed for the horses was conserved. Most of
the land was cleared of brush before the season for plowing arrived, and
when it came, which was at an exceptionally early date, every team was
available for this service and was put to work.

Travis Gully, whose duty it was to keep supplies in the way of
provisions and water at the camp, was kept constantly on the road,
either to the village or his well. Jack Norton looked after the
allotment of parcels of land to be plowed and kept track of the work
accomplished by each of those engaged. This, together with the accounts
and correspondence incident to the work, required all of his time, but
under his able management the work was so systemized that it was
completed some weeks in advance of the time specified in the contract.

Encouraged by this fact he suggested to Gully that they put in a bid
with the company for seeding and fencing the land, which they did and
were awarded the contract for this also.

It was a very successful winter for both Gully and Norton. While they
had been most liberal in their payments to their neighbors who had been
employed by them, the final accounting showed flattering results.

Travis Gully had sufficient funds to install a much better pumping plant
at his well than he had dreamed of. Instead of the windmill he purchased
a gasoline engine and one of the most recently invented pumps, the
capacity of his pumping plant was sufficient to furnish water for
irrigation of forty acres.

Jack Norton bought a wagon and team for his own use, and made extensive
improvements on his claim, among which was a well with a windmill, and a
much needed addition to his house.

The seeding of their own places to grain, was but a small task as
compared to the one they had just completed, and was soon accomplished.
As the spring season advanced and the young grain came up and began to
show a faint tinge of green that was noticeable at a distance, Gully and
Norton decided to visit the companys land and view the results of their
work.

The prospects there were even better than at their own homes. The grain
having been sown earlier, was farther advanced and made a much better
showing. As the two men strolled over the immense field of young grain
they could recall to their minds the scenes in the harvest fields that
they had witnessed the fall before, and shifted the scene of action to
their own immediate neighborhood.

Jack Norton, in his pride at the promising outlook, wrote to Mr. Palmer
and gave him a glowing description of what the probable outcome would
be.

A few weeks passed during which time Gully planted a number of fruit
trees and prepared a nice field of alfalfa which had just begun to come
up. Knowing that the snow fall had been light during the winter and
noting the absence of the seasonable showers of the spring before, he
watched the small amount of moisture which the ground had contained, and
saw it rapidly being absorbed by the increasing heat of the sun, and
least the growth of his young alfalfa be retarded, he set his engine to
going and gave the patch a thorough wetting. His trees were beginning to
put forth their tender leaves, and as the ditch through which the water
flowed to the alfalfa passed near the trees, it watered them also.

The desert never looked more beautiful. The absence of severe wind
storms during the spring and summer before had allowed the sand to
remain smooth, just as it had been left beaten by the rains. Upon
arising one morning, Gully noted far to the west, an occasional puff of
dust, and then a spiral column of sand would mount heavenward and attain
a height of several hundred feet, and scattering, would cause the air to
become murky and hazy.

Travis Gully's heart sank within him, for he knew too well the meaning
of these signs. That it foretold a desert sand storm he knew, and his
only hope was that it would not be a severe one. Saying nothing he went
about his work, knowing from his experience during the first year in the
region that it would be hours before its extent would be known.

The children went to school as usual, but Gully kept constant watch on
the approaching storm. By noon he knew by the increased movement of the
clouds of dust that it was to be a terrific storm, and advised his wife
of the fact. She suggested that he take the wagon and go to the school
and bring the children and Miss Anderson home, which he did. On his way
to the school he thought of Jack Norton, and knowing that there had been
no real desert storms since he came, decided to drive by his place and
warn him of its approach.

He saw Jack clearing more ground, working contentedly in blissful
ignorance of the impending calamity. Calling to him to come to the fence
Gully told him of his fears and advised that he lash down his windmill
and make such other preparations as he saw fit, as the storm would
probably last for several days.

Norton thanked him, and looking in the direction of the clouds,
remarked: "I saw that coming, but thought it might mean a good rain."

Gully smiled and answered: "Just the opposite my boy, and if you do not
feel like being housed up alone for several days you had better hitch up
your team and come over to my place until the storm passes."

"O I guess it won't be quite that bad," answered Jack, "but if I see
that I cannot weather the gale I'll try and work my way over, thank
you."

Gully drove off to the school house, and as he did so, he shouted back,
"Better take my advice, Jack, and go on over to the house."

Norton waved his hand and returned to his work.

When Gully reached the school house he told Miss Anderson of the
impending danger, and advised her to dismiss school at once as he feared
some of the children who lived at a distance would have difficulty in
reaching their home if not given time to do so before the storm reached
them.

Miss Anderson who had never witnessed one of these sand storms was now
thoroughly alarmed at Gully's apparent earnestness, did as he had
advised, and cautioned the children to hurry to their homes if they
would avoid being caught in the storm.

After hurriedly placing the school room in order and securely fastening
the windows and doors she was ready to go to her own home, when Gully,
informing her of the probable duration of the storm, insisted on her
going home with him and the children. This she did and they had hardly
reached the Gully home when the fitful gusts of wind started the
restless sand in motion, and before night, the storm was raging. It was
impossible to see any distance for the blinding sand and dust.

All night it raged and as there was no sign of its abatement, Gully
ventured out to attend to his stock the following morning. It recalled
to his mind the winter of the terrible blizzard and it was just as
severe, except that it was driving sand instead of snow, and they did
not have the cold to contend with.

Miss Anderson expressed herself as truly thankful that she had taken Mr.
Gully's advice, and came home with him and the children. She tried to be
as cheerful as possible but she now understood what had retarded the
settlement of this beautiful country with which she was fascinated.

She tried in vain to interest Ida in her fancy work, but this young lady
persisted in standing at the window looking out in an effort to
penetrate with her gaze, the mass of sand and dust, always looking in
the direction of the school house and watching the road that lead to
Jack Norton's home.

Miss Anderson who noticed this, went to her and placing her arm around
the girl, asked, "What is it dear, does the storm frighten you?"

"No," answered Ida, "I was thinking of those in the desert who are alone
and wondering if they were safe."

"To whom do you refer?" asked Miss Anderson. "None of those that I can
recall are alone."

Ida's eyes instantly filled with tears and she exclaimed, "O Miss
Anderson, had you forgotten Mr. Norton? He is alone and I know he would
have been here by now if something had not happened to him."

"Why bless your dear heart," exclaimed Miss Anderson. "I had forgotten
him, but you may rest assured nothing has harmed him and it is probable
because he is busy taking care of his stock and other property that he
has not been over. This storm would not stop him, I am sure." And thus
she comforted the much perturbed girl, but to herself she thought, "I
knew it would come to this, and I do so hope that the feeling becomes
mutual. Jack is so nice and I know I can prepare this dear child to make
him a wife befitting the station in life to which I know he belongs."

After this little scene at the window Ida clung closer to Miss Anderson,
and while she had not confided in her, she felt that she understood and
the bond of sympathy between them was established.

The storm continued for two days, and when it had exhausted itself and
before the atmosphere had cleared sufficiently to see any distance, Jack
Norton came tramping across the plain to the Gully home. He was greeted
with shouts of welcome by Joe and the younger girls. Coming into the
front part of the house, he asked if all were present, and how they had
stood the storm. He told Gully that he had wished a thousand times that
he had come with him the first day.

Travis Gully asked if he had been able to note the effect of the storm
on the growing grain. Norton replied that he had not, for as he
expressed it, "I have not been able to overtake the grain yet. The
ground at my place is swept perfectly clean."

Gully arose and went to the window, looked out for a minute, and turning
to young Norton, said, "Let's take a walk, Jack."

Norton, without replying, followed him out, and they walked down across
the alfalfa patch. Occasionally they stopped and examined the ground and
then came back to the trees.

In a few minutes they returned to the house and as they entered, Gully
was heard to remark: "Well, it's a good thing I put water on when I
did."

"What is it Travis," asked his wife. "Is everything ruined?"

"No indeed," answered Gully. "I find that my alfalfa and trees have not
been injured in the least. The water I put on the ground has held the
sand and I now have the secret of farming in this country."

"I shall get me an engine immediately," put in Jack. "Alfalfa, fruit and
stock raising beats wheat anyway."

"Do you suppose the wheat is all ruined?" asked Miss Anderson.

"I am afraid so," Gully replied.

"Gee," exclaimed Jack. "What a letter I have got to write Mr. Palmer
now. Well, it is not our fault."

They were right. The wheat was all killed and it was too late in the
season to replant had they the means of doing so. A few days after the
passing of the storm Gully and Norton drove to the company's land to
view its effect.

Not a sprig of grain could be found, and the soil had been blown from
the surface to the depth of the plowing. The whole tract presented a
most disheartening appearance. Both men expressed the deepest regret and
sympathy for the unfortunate owners who had sustained such a loss and
agreed that they should be notified of their misfortune.

The letter was written by Jack, who in a plain, straightforward manner,
explained to Mr. Palmer what had befallen the grain, and added that they
were not alone in their misfortune, as those of the homesteaders who had
no well equipped with machinery for irrigation, were also heavy losers.
The more fortunate, however, among whom was included, their mutual
friend Mr. Gully, who could get water on the ground, had suffered but
little. He suggested to Mr. Palmer that he take the matter of irrigating
their land from a well, equipped with pumping machinery, up with his
clients.

Sometime later Jack received a letter from Mr. Palmer, thanking him for
the interest he had shown in their behalf, and assured him that in due
time the company would realize the necessity of doing as was suggested
in his letter. Sinking wells and drawing their water supply from the
abundance that, it had been proven, lay beneath the surface.




CHAPTER XIX.


It was a bright November morning three years later that two heavily
loaded automobiles were tearing their way along the Scenic Highway that
had been constructed from St. Paul to Seattle. Each car contained three
passengers besides the drivers, and piled high on the running boards and
strapped on the back of each car was the baggage and camp equipment of
the party.

At a point in the desert along the eastern boundary of which the Highway
ran, it paralleled the railway, and ran thus for several miles, and was
intercepted by roads leading from homes that could be seen farther back
across the sagebrush covered plain. These homes were not numerous, but
each in the bright sunlight that caused the shimmering, dancing mirage
to hover over the patches of dark green alfalfa and orchards that
surrounded them, showed the tourists plainly that the conquest of the
desert, in some instances, had been accomplished.

On this particular morning, a wagon, drawn by four splendid horses and
loaded high with bales of alfalfa that still retained the green of the
field from which it had been cut, so perfect had been the process of
curing, was being driven from one of these homes by a man by whose side
sat a chubby faced boy of some eight or nine years.

The wagon had just turned into the highway a short distance ahead of the
rapidly moving cars, and as they approached with their horn coughing a
dusty warning, the driver drew out to one side to await their passing.
The first car rushed by and disappeared in a cloud of dust, and the one
in the rear, seeing the trouble the driver was having with his now
thoroughly frightened team, came along beside the wagon more slowly and
asked if they could be of assistance in straightening out the tangled
horses.

Travis Gully, for it was he and Joe who were on the wagon, said if
someone would go to the head of the leaders until he could get down, he
thought he could manage them until the car had gone by. One of the men
sprang from the car and was advancing to seize the horses bridles, when
looking up, he stopped short for an instant and reaching his hand up to
Gully, exclaimed, "Well, well, if it isn't Mr. Gully. How are you?"

Travis Gully, taking his attention from the horses which had now quieted
down since the car had stopped, looked at the man on the ground for an
instant, and bursting into a laugh as he recognized Thomas Dugan the
surveyor, he half climbed and half fell from the wagon, and grasped
Dugan by the hand and shook it cordially.

By this time another occupant of the car, who proved to be Mr. Palmer,
came forward, and after greeting Gully, inquired as to the health of the
rest of the family. Upon being assured that they were doing nicely, Mr.
Palmer said, "I am certainly glad to hear it. We will probably be out
your way tomorrow. We left Spokane early this morning and are going
through to Wenatchee for lunch. The owners of the land you cleared are
in the car that just passed."

Dugan had helped Joe from the wagon, and was commenting on his growth,
when Mr. Palmer asked Gully if they could assist him with his horses, if
not they would go on as they wished to overtake the other car in the
village just ahead.

Gully assured him that he could manage the team, and with the promise
that "we will see you tomorrow or the next day," Mr. Palmer and Dugan
entered the car, and proceeded on their journey.

Travis Gully watched them as they disappeared down the road in a cloud
of dust, and wondered what motive could be bringing them back to the
land on which they had already lost so heavily, but, with the hope that
they probably had some information relative to the irrigation project
that had now almost become a forgotten subject, he placed Joe back on
the wagon and climbing back to his own seat, spoke to the horses and
drove on to the village, with his load of hay.

Travis Gully had prospered, and his dream of a home just as he wanted
it, was fully realized. He had not developed all of his land, because
the original forty acres upon which he had pumped water from his well,
had proven so productive that it was more than he could handle alone, so
he did not see the necessity of developing more.

His home, as it was, seemed an ideal place. The trees which he had
planted at the root of which he had buried tin cans, were now affording
ample shade and serving the purpose of a wind break for his house--not
that the wind had any terror for him now. It did not harm him now as he
had mastered the situation and was reaping the reward of his
perseverence.

He could now gratify his cherished ambition for nice horses and his
alfalfa fields and paddocks were the play grounds for some beautiful
colts he was raising. Numerous cattle roamed at large over the open
sagebrush range, and fattened on the succulent bunch grass, coming daily
to the Gully home for water. They all bore the Gully brand and were a
source of income to him.

His wife and family were happy, and retained their health as all those
who lived in this favored country did. Ida was now a finished young
lady. She had gone to school in one of the coast cities, a school, the
selection of which had been left to Miss Anderson, who had accompanied
her during her first term.

Jack Norton had fulfilled his threat made the morning after the storm
three years before, to install a pumping plant on his place, and under
the guidance of Gully was doing well. Miss Anderson, though never having
put down a well, was residing on her claim, and with what she earned
teaching the little school, was comfortable and happy. The main source
of her happiness, however, was in watching the course of the lives of
Jack and Ida, there was no longer any doubt or secret of their devotion
to each other. It had come about as naturally as the other changes had
come, and was looked upon as a matter of course. There had been no
ardent wooing, no rivals with which to contend, just a companionship
that had grown dearer as the year passed, and the time for its final
culmination in a marriage had been set for the coming Holiday season.

Minnie Gully was happy. She had never known that such happiness was
possible. She only asked for one other blessing and that was that her
parents would come and share their home. She and Travis had written
repeatedly, making this request, but always the same answer came from
the old people. They felt that they were too old to make the change, and
wanted to spend their remaining days among the surroundings they had
known so long.

When Travis Gully returned from the village on the evening of the day
that he had come so unexpectedly upon Mr. Palmer and Dugan as they were
passing in the car, he eagerly told of what had happened, and upon his
telling his listening family of their intended visit to the company's
land within the next few days, they all expressed their satisfaction at
the changed conditions that would enable them to extend to the visitors
the hospitality that they had been denied on their former visit.

Mrs. Gully and Ida, with true feminine instinct, immediately began to
plan, and offer suggestions for the most befitting way in which to
entertain. In this they were at a disadvantage, as they did not know
whether they intended to make a visit of several days, or would return
immediately after looking over the land. In any event, they decided that
they would prepare for them one splendid meal, the material used in the
preparation of this meal should be from the products of their desert
home, and with an unlimited supply of fresh eggs, young and tender
fowls, vegetables and milk and butter, the feast promised to be a
bounteous one.

In the mean time Joe had recalled the fact that Mr. Dugan promised him a
ride in the automobile, an experience he had never enjoyed, and he was
excitedly telling his sisters how much faster it ran than Daisy his pony
could go.

The morning after Gully had brought the news of the probable coming of
the party he went to Jack Norton's to acquaint him of the fact and he
and Jack discussed the probable cause of their visit, and agreed that it
must be for the purpose of irrigation, as they had never attempted to
cultivate the land since the first year that had proven such a dismal
failure. So they decided to get together that evening and prepare a
concise statement of their experiences and methods that would contain
all the information for which the land owners would probably ask.

For Gully and Norton this would be a comparatively easy task, for they
had kept an accurate record of the items that effected the peculiar
conditions in the locality in which they lived, and had applied them in
a manner that had been very largely responsible for the success they had
attained. The accumulation of this data, such as the varieties of seed
to be used, time for planting and the conditions under which water
should be applied to the land had been brought about by the
introduction into their literary society, which still held regular
meetings, of the reading weekly of a paper prepared by some homesteader
as an educational feature.

Miss Anderson was also told of the return to the neighborhood of Mr.
Palmer and Mr. Dugan, and returned from school with the children that
afternoon to learn more of their coming.

And when young Norton drove over to the Gully home after supper that
evening, his arrival completed the circle of faces that had gathered at
the same place on the day of the surveyors departure three years before,
and the thought that was uppermost in the minds of those present was:
"What will they think of the change that has been wrought?"

It was agreed that should the party of visitors arrive the following
day, and their arrival could be plainly noted from both the school house
and Norton's home, Jack was to come over immediately and Miss Anderson
was to accompany the children home. After plans for their reception had
been completed, Jack with Miss Anderson accompanying him in his buggy,
left the Gullys, and after seeing her safely home, the night being fine,
Jack drove for several miles along the dusty road in the bright
moonlight, and as he allowed the horse to choose his own gait, he took
no notice of his surroundings or the distance he had come.

He wondered to himself what motive had prompted his actions, he might
have remained at Gully's and spent a happy hour or more with Ida and
plan for the future with her, as was their custom when together. But
tonight he wanted to be alone.

The announcement of the unexpected return of Palmer and Dugan had
recalled his experience with these men on the first day they had met at
the hotel and he smiled as he thought of the opportunity it had afforded
him to match wits with them, and the satisfaction he had derived from
the occurrence.

Since their departure he had not allowed his mind to be diverted from
his one purpose, the subduing of the desert sands and the forcing of the
land to yield as his analysis of it had proven it capable of doing. He
had, on two occasions during the past two years, accompanied the
Professor on a trip to the Grand Coulee and had spent days of delightful
research that had resulted in more firmly convincing him that the
country as a whole was a wonderland.

But this night, while alone on the desert, driving aimlessly along a
most miserable road, his mind would dwell on his old home, on his past,
and his old Dad, whose only child he was, of how he had left and had now
for over four years, kept his whereabouts a secret, just to satisfy a
hastily made resolve to make proper restitution for a boyish prank. Now
that he was in a position to make good this resolution, another factor
had come into his life--Ida Gully.

At the thought of Ida, Norton's blood tingled, and tightening up his
reins suddenly, stopped his horse. "I am foolish," he said to himself.
"I must return and get some rest," and turning his horses head toward
home, thought how proudly he would stand by Ida's side and receive
congratulations of Palmer and Dugan for they should know of their
engagement, and he would watch with pleasure, the expressions of
astonishment their faces would betray when they noted the stately
bearing she had acquired, and heard with what grace and ease of manner
she acknowledged their expressed wishes for her future happiness.

Reaching his home Jack cared for his horse, and going into the house saw
that it was almost midnight. He smiled and said, "Quite a visit I have
had with myself," and lost no time in retiring.

Owing to the expected arrival of the strangers and the part he was to
have in their entertainment, Jack had not planned any work for the
morrow, so he lay and rested the following morning, much longer than was
his custom. Upon arising, he went leisurely about preparing his
breakfast. After eating he attended to his horses, and left the barn
door open so that all except his driver could go at will into the
alfalfa field. Returning to the house he dressed more carefully than
usual, for he realized that the Gullys, whose real guest he was to be on
this occasion, would put forth exceptional efforts in honor of the
strangers arrival. His toilet completed to his satisfaction, he
concluded that he would drive over to Gullys, in advance of the arrival
of the party, and have an opportunity to explain to Ida his hasty
departure of the night before, feeling that his appearance a little
ahead of time would not be a breech of etiquette under the
circumstances.

Upon his arrival at the Gully home, he found the family assembled out in
the yard, looking in the direction of the village a few miles out from
which, along the Scenic Highway could be distinctly seen the dust being
raised in clouds by two moving objects.

Travis Gully turned at Jack's approach and pointed in the direction of
the moving objects, and remarked: "Guess they are coming, all right."
Jack answered that he supposed it was them, and bidding Mrs. Gully and
Ida good-morning, approached Ida, and taking her by the hand led her
into the house.

Gully upon noticing that Jack had left his horse tied where the
automobiles would probably be driven, and fearing that he might become
frightened, took him to the barn, and after seeing that he was cared
for, was just returning to the house as the first of the cars came up
the driveway that led to his gate.

Gully went out to meet them and recognizing Palmer and Dugan as the
occupants beside whom a stranger sat. As they drove up and greeted him
and introduced the third member of the party, Gully invited them to get
out and await the arrival of the other car, and then go into the house.
This they did, and as the driver of the car prepared to move ahead to
make room, he, through force of habit no doubt, sounded his horn.

Jack Norton, who was still in the house, was startled by the familiar
sound of the auto horn. It was the first intimation of their arrival he
had been given, so busy was he talking to Mrs. Gully and Ida. Being
anxious to greet Mr. Palmer and Dugan, he asked the ladies to excuse him
and went immediately out to the group of men who had now entered the
yard. Recognizing his acquaintances he approached them with outstretched
hand and was laughing and chatting. As the second car drove up and
stopped, he turned slightly and seeing Gully approach to welcome them,
continued his conversation with Dugan.

The clicking of the latch on the gate, after the party had entered,
reminded him that it was time for him to meet the new comer, and as he
started to turn, someone remarked: "You have a nice place here, Mr.
Gully." Jack Norton's face blanched, and the words of greeting stuck in
his throat, for just one instant, and turning quickly around with a cry
of "Dad," stood face to face with his father.

The elder Norton stopped as if paralyzed, but instantly recovering
exclaimed, "Jack, my boy," seized Jack in his arms and pressing his head
back, the father brushed Jack's hat from his head and pushing his hair
back, began rumpling and towseling it, just as he was wont to do when
Jack was a small boy. Then recovering himself, glanced behind him as if
in search of some thing, and simply said, "I must sit down."

Jack Norton and Mr. Palmer assisted the old gentleman to the house,
where they were met by Mrs. Gully and Ida, who had witnessed the meeting
of Jack and his father, but not understanding the meaning of the strange
proceedings, had started to come out, thinking something was wrong. They
had only reached the door when they met Jack and Mr. Palmer, and
returned to prepare a comfortable place for the stricken old gentleman
they were supporting between them.

Ida, immediately sensing that the occurrence had in some way materially
affected Jack went, as soon as the old gentleman was comfortably seated,
to Jack, and placing her hand upon his shoulder, inquired what was
wrong. Jack laughingly assured her and told her that everything was far
from being wrong, that the old gentleman was his father, and that they
had met by the merest chance, adding that he would explain in a few
moments, as soon as he was assured that his father was all right.

Mrs. Gully hastily secured a glass of cold water, which revived the old
gentleman, and the rest of the party came in with Travis Gully and Mr.
Dugan. Introductions immediately followed the entrance into the room of
the strangers, and as Mr. Norton had sufficiently recovered to be able
to arise, he went to where Jack and Ida were standing, and with an
amused twinkle in his eyes asked of his son: "Am I entitled to an
introduction to this estimable young lady, Jack?" Jack was plainly
embarrassed by his thoughtlessness in not having taken Ida to his father
at first, and introduced his father to her, with apologies for his
oversight.

The occurrence had taken place in so short a time and so unexpectedly
that the importance of it, except to Jack and his father, had not had
time to impress those present.

Travis Gully was at a loss to understand the situation, but felt sure
that an explanation would be given in due time. His wife's greatest
concern was that the excellent dinner which she had prepared for the
expected guests was in a fair way of being spoiled by the delay caused
by the occurrence. The simple fact of Jack and his father having met
after an extended separation did not impress her as being very
extraordinary. As for Ida, she realized fully the meaning of the
happening, but did not take into account the probable effect it would
have on the future as far as she and Jack were concerned. She had
noticed, however, that Jack had introduced her to his father as Miss
Gully instead of Ida, and in her simplicity she had not known that he
had but conformed to the usages of polite society. She had never heard
him speak of her as Miss Gully except in jest, and she was annoyed.

The party of strangers, accompanied by Gully and Jack, the latter
clinging to his father's arm, had again gone out in the yard and were
admiring the beautiful scenery of the mountains that could be seen at an
advantage at the noon hour under the bright glare of the fall sunlight.

Jack and his father stood apart from the rest, and Jack was pointing
with apparent pride in the direction of his place, while his father
stood in an attitude of listening to his evident enthusiasm.




CHAPTER XX.


Burns Norton, Jack's father, was of Irish descent, and had been born and
raised in the south. His father, who had been a prominent cotton broker
before the war, had amassed a fortune that consisted principally of
stocks and bonds, with occasional bits of land scattered throughout
various southern states, that had been acquired by him through deals of
such magnitude that frequently the land was absorbed and reverted to him
in lieu of cash that he had advanced to his clients.

The war was the cause of the loss of the fortune thus acquired, and the
elder Norton, Jack's grandfather, had died soon after its close a poor
man, having turned over to those who had tried to help him survive these
strenuous times all the property, real and personal, that he possessed.
Among the tracts of land thus acquired was one which consisted of
several hundred acres situated in what was known as the Panhandle, in
Texas, then arid and considered worthless except for range purposes.

When he had turned the deed to this over to his creditors, the board of
appraisers handed it back with the remark: "That is too far away. It is
valueless and we will not take it into consideration," and then added:
"Put it away for your boy; it may be worth something by the time he is a
man."

Burns Norton was just past fifteen when his father joined his mother,
who had never recovered from the shock sustained when their fortune was
lost, and with this tract of barren waste land, covered with curly
mosquito grass, as his only property inheritance, he was set adrift in
the world.

He accompanied a party of human derelicts, who drifted hither and
thither during the reconstruction days following the close of the war,
and finally landed in Texas, where he worked on a stock ranch, and rode
the old Santa Fe Trail from Quanah, Texas, to Topeka, Kansas, for years.
As time passed, and the Fort Worth & Denver Railroad was being
constructed, it passed through this land of Norton's. He had never
mentioned the fact that he owned the land to any one, and it had been
fenced as a part of an immense pasture, and when he went to the owners
of this pasture and demanded that his land be thrown outside by the
removal of their fence, they questioned his right to the land. Young
Norton had no difficulty in proving his ownership, and went immediately
to work improving it, and from this start sprung the immense wealth he
now controlled. It was this experience that had prompted his investment
in the land he had come to inspect at the time he discovered his lost
son Jack, living over the life that he had led when he was Jack's age,
and he understood where the adventurous disposition had originated, and
he did not blame the boy. In fact, he had never blamed Jack for
anything. He had been an indulgent father, and even now he was gratified
by the boy's spirit, and although he felt that he had been badly treated
he did not reproach him.

Mrs. Gully came to the door and called to her husband that dinner was
ready, and he invited his guests to come in. Mr. Palmer and Dugan, who
felt more at home than the rest, answered the summons promptly, and as
they were passing the well they noticed a barrel of fresh cold water
which stood temptingly near, and jokingly called to Mrs. Gully that if
she would provide them with a towel they thought they would enjoy
washing outside as they had done on their former visit.

Ida brought them towels and tin basins, and the entire party prepared
themselves for their dinner at the well while Gully explained the
workings of his pumping plant.

Jack and his father were the last to come to the well, and as Mr. Norton
splashed his face with an abundance of cold water he laughingly told
Jack that he did not blame him for being so enthusiastic about the
country if that was a fair sample of their water, "for," declared he,
"although it seems to have been sitting here for quite a while, it is
still sparkling and cool."

Jack assured him that he had never seen or heard of a bad well of water
in the country. Going into the house, they were seated at their dinners,
while Mrs. Gully and Ida served. It was a revelation to these tired
business men, this good wholesome food, that had been brought fresh from
the soil and cool pantry and served in the simplest homelike manner, and
they did justice to Mrs. Gully's and her daughter's culinary art by
eating most heartily.

After the meal was finished, Mr. Norton called to Jack and told him to
look in the front of the car in which he had come and bring him the
small satchel that bore his name on the tag. Jack secured the satchel,
and upon his return and handing it to his father, the latter took from
it a box of cigars, and after passing them around said that if the
ladies had no objections, they would visit a while, and postpone their
trip to the land. "You see," he continued, "with the discovery of this
young rascal," with a fond look at Jack, "there has been a great burden
relieved from my mind, and I want to enjoy it in my own way, for there
is no dependence to be put in his next move."

Mrs. Gully replied that she would be pleased to have Mr. Norton feel
enough at home to choose his own method of celebrating the restoration
of his son, but she did feel that she must protest the remarks about
Jack, for they had always found him a most dependable young man.

The old gentleman smiled at her defense of Jack, while that young worthy
arose from his seat, and with mock gravity thanked her for her effort in
his behalf, and turning to his father, quoted:

    "I stand at the bar of justice,
      Condemned in the cause that you plead;
    My only defense the simple request
      That you judge by the motive, not deed."

Mr. Norton, now in the best of spirits, turned to those present and
asked: "Shall we listen to his plea?" A chorus of voices exclaimed: "Go
ahead; let's have the story."

It was a trying moment for Jack Norton. He had not expected events to
take this turn, but he saw that his father expected an explanation of
his conduct, and there was no alternative. It must be made in the
presence of those who had assembled at the home of his dearest friends,
the Gullys, and he knew that in view of the relations that existed
between him and the family, an explanation was due.

Withdrawing his chair from the table, he placed it conveniently near for
Mrs. Gully to be seated by her husband, and securing a seat for Ida, he
stood directly facing her and began the recital of his story.

"I do not know," he began, "that it was Dad's original intention that I
should inflict upon you innocent persons present a recital of my boyish
prank that has resulted in this self imposed exile for the past four
years, and I wish to impress on your minds before I enter into details
that I am not making a plea for sympathy or setting up a plea of
extenuating circumstances.

"For the suffering that I have caused him I am sorry, and I too have
suffered. No one will ever know the hours of torturing remorse and
regret through which I have passed. My own sufferings I have borne, I
hope, with fortitude, as will no doubt be attested to by my very dear
friends, the Gully family, who have never heard me mention in the
slightest way my affairs, and who have been most considerate of my
feelings in not asking, as they had a perfect right to do, for any
information relative to myself or family, and for this evidence of
their faith in me I wish to thank them most heartily.

"With the circumstances attending my leaving him, Dad is thoroughly
familiar. I had just returned from the Agricultural and Mechanical
College of which my home state, Texas, is justly proud, and had joined
him in Galveston, where he had moved his family to reside permanently
after his retirement from the land and stock business, and at which
place my poor mother lost her life at the time of the disastrous tidal
wave which almost destroyed the city.

"Dad, at the time of the terrible occurrence, had gone on a short trip
to the northern part of the state to look after business interests, as
he frequently did. Why I escaped and was not taken with my mother I
never could understand, but by some caprice I was saved and cared for as
an 'unknown' until Dad returned, which he did as quickly as he could.

"After a search which lasted for days I was finally located by Dad, who
has always been a most kind and indulgent father. Upon this occasion of
my return from college, the event being my twenty-first birthday, I
found him in a most generous mood, ready to grant my every wish. He took
me to his office, he having resumed business activities after the loss
of my mother, and led me through the various departments and told me
that he was anxious to take me in with him and have me become familiar
with his affairs, that I might succeed him, as he was growing old.

"I thanked him for this generous offer, but being imbued with the idea
that I was a thorough yachtsman, I changed the subject and began teasing
him to let me take his yacht, the 'Magnolia,' for a few days' cruise
with some half dozen of my boy friends.

"The 'Magnolia' was a handsome craft, thoroughly equipped and furnished
to accommodate ten or a dozen passengers, and as her crew usually
consisted of three men, I had planned to take her out alone, with my
friends as helpers, making two watches, there being six of us, and we
would cruise to the coast of Mexico and return in about ten days.

"The yacht was Dad's special pride and his only recreation, and he had
bought and fitted her up at a very great expense. He had interests at
various points along the coast and in Cuba, and this was his means of
combining pleasure and business, by visiting these interests twice a
year. I had accompanied him on all these trips, as he arranged to make
them during my vacation from school or college, and I felt that I was
capable of taking her out and returning her to her slip on the strand in
perfect safety.

"But Dad did not think so and told me I had better wait and accompany
him later, at which time he would be pleased to entertain my friends on
the cruise. This did not suit me, and right here I blame Dad for not
being more firm with me. At any rate, he finally consented to let me
have the yacht, but I was to take her regular crew to man her. This I
agreed to do, but did so reluctantly.

"Dad gave me an order to the watchman on board to have her provisioned
for a ten days' trip, and to be made ready for sailing the following
Monday, at which time she was to be turned over to me. Thanking him, I
hurried to the slip and gave the watchman Dad's orders. He took it, and
after reading saluted, and with the familiar 'Aye, Aye, Sir,' sounding
in my ears, I left him.

"It was then Thursday, and I had ample time to look up the members of my
party and acquaint them with the success of my appeal to Dad. There was
one among those who accompanied me on this memorable trip with whom I
hope I may never come in contact. When I told him of the conditions
under which Dad had given me permission to use the yacht, he laughed and
said: That's easy; just forget to call her crew, and we'll take her out
alone,' and I, feeling my newly attained manhood, answered: 'I'll attend
to that; just you be ready at the appointed time,' and left him. But the
seed had been sown that finally grew and produced the bitterest fruit I
or any other misguided lad could ever taste.

"I never mentioned the fact to the rest of the boys that we were
supposed to have others than ourselves aboard, as I knew there were
those among them who would have refused to accompany me unless Dad's
requirements were complied with.

"Well, to make a long story short, I did not call the crew, and as Dad
was called away to St. Louis the Saturday before we were to sail he
never knew of my failure to do so until after it was too late. I went
with him to the station as he was leaving, and he took my hand and
wished me a pleasant voyage, and handing me a generous check, he added:
'I shall expect you here on my return; be careful, Jack. Goodbye,' and
that was the last time I saw or heard from him until a few hours ago.

"We left the following Monday morning, and I will never forget the
feeling of importance I experienced as the yacht drew out from her slip
at the end of a hawser and was towed out into the bay by a noisy little
steam tug which I had employed for the purpose. I knew that I was
disobeying Dad, but felt perfectly sure of myself, and I had those among
my party who were well experienced in sailing; besides, Dad was gone and
would not return until we had completed our cruise. Then I would tell
him of what I had done, how successfully I had managed the 'Magnolia'
and he would feel proud of me.

"When we were well out into the bay they let go the hawser and the
little craft began to ride the swells. It was but a moment's work to run
up a bit of canvas that soon picked up the breeze, and rounding to, we
headed for Boliver Point Light, that marked the outlet to the Gulf, and
as we entered the channel through which the huge ocean going vessels
gained entrance to the bay, we navigated our craft successfully, and
passed several of these, besides numerous tugs, lighters and revenue
cutters, and this fact but convinced us more thoroughly of our ability
as seamen.

"I had not taken the helm yet, but at the request of one of my guests
whom I knew to be an experienced yachtsman, had allowed him to see us
safely through the narrows that lay between Boliver Point and the
Jetties. After clearing the channel and entering the gulf proper I
relieved my friend, and taking the helm, steered directly south, a
course that almost paralleled the Galveston Island, but as the miles
increased the distance from the southern end of the island became so
great that we were almost in the path of the South American liners.

"We were having a splendid time, and as the breeze was favorable, we
decided to put into a little coast town whose buildings could be plainly
seen glistening in the bright sunlight far ahead on the main land. We
made this port, and after going ashore for a few hours, decided to
follow the coast, laying close in, and to put into the next village,
Port Lavaca, where we would tie up for the night.

"I will not undertake to describe our trip, with its many stops and
things of interest that we came in contact with at these quaint little
settlements, half Mexican and half American, that lined the Gulf shore.

"Passing over the next two days of our cruise, we arrived at Matagorda
Bay, and being desirous of visiting the point at the extreme inner end
of the bay, where the little village of Indianola had been almost
completely destroyed by the great tidal wave, we put in at the entrance
and spent the night at the town of Matagorda, intending to visit the
scene of the devastated village the following day.

"In this we were disappointed, for during the night a terrific gulf
storm came up, and it became so severe before morning that we were
compelled to abandon our berths aboard the yacht and go ashore. The
next two days brought no signs of an abatement of the storm, and we were
advised not to venture out until a more favorable time. Two days in this
little fishing village caused us to lose interest in its novelty, and to
a very great degree cooled our ardor and inclination to continue the
trip.

"The third day was very much better, and we decided to abandon our trip
and return home, and as the force of the storm decreased in its
severity, we started immediately after noon, intending to round the
point of Matagorda Peninsula before night and put into the first harbor
we could make on the leeward side.

"We experienced no difficulty in getting well under way in the Bay,
although the wind was against us, and by beating up first the inland
shore and by tacking back and forth, we reached the point just at dusk,
but we found the gale was almost as severe as it had been the day
before, and we dared not venture too far seaward. As darkness came on we
undertook to round the point to gain the leeward shore of the peninsula
and thus be protected from the force of the wind.

"I was at the helm and had given instructions to my companions, who were
all alert to help, to haul down most of the canvas before we attempted
to make the point. They were busily engaged at this when we glided out
to where we caught the full force of the gale, and it required all of my
time and strength to hold her off the point. It was now quite dark and
it was impossible to distinguish the land. The light off the point was
plainly seen, but it lay so far out, to mark the course of large
vessels, I dared not attempt to round it, but must make the space
between it and land, which I knew was ample, but I misjudged the
distance and in a few moments we were hard aground on the shoals and
were in a fair way of pounding to pieces.

"Work as we would, she was immovable, except to plow further into the
slimy mud, gravel and oyster shells of which the shoals consisted. We
stripped her of every thread of canvas after trying to right her,
thinking by so doing she would hold together for the night, but it was
no use. We saw that she was doomed and prepared to leave her to her
fate.

"We could hear the surf breaking off to port, and knew that we could
reach land easily, so when she finally rolled over on her side and her
hatches went awash, we gathered what we could of our effects and went
overboard. I do not know how my companions fared after they entered the
water. I had no difficulty in reaching land, for after being hurled
shoreward by the waves a few times, I found that I was not beyond my
depth, and after being knocked down and almost strangled as the breakers
came in, I scrambled ahead and finally found myself beyond their reach.

"My first thoughts were for the safety of my companions, and I called to
see if I could locate them. The sound of my voice was drowned by the
roar of the surf, but in a few minutes I heard a voice calling very near
me, and it proved to be one of the boys. It was no time for
congratulating each other on our escape, so we set to work to try and
locate the rest of the party. One by one we heard them answer our
shouts, and as each came in they aided in the search, until the last was
found. None seemed any the worse for their experience, and as we were
wet and chilled, with no means of providing a fire, we did not know what
to do, so we decided to move a little way back, and by keeping in motion
dry our clothes as best we could, and at any rate keep warm.

"We agreed to remain until morning and see what condition the Magnolia
was in before we undertook to work our way back along the peninsula to
the mainland. As the night advanced, I could hear the groaning of the
timber in our disabled craft as it was subjected to the strain of the
storm, and I thought of what I had done, and of poor old Dad, and I knew
that the loss of the yacht would not hurt him as badly as my actions. I
called my best boyhood friend, who had come as one of the party, off to
one side and told him of my trouble, of how I had disregarded Dad's
wishes, and confided to him that if the Magnolia proved to be a total
loss in the morning, I would not return to Dad, and gave him a message
to deliver to him saying that I would not return or write until, by my
own efforts, I could replace the yacht.

"My friends tried to persuade me to give up the idea, as such action
would but add to Dad's trouble. But I was obdurate, and lest I be
persuaded to abandon my purpose, I left them a few hours after our
conversation without waiting to see the result of the wreck that had
been caused by my folly.

"After leaving my friends I followed the ridge of the peninsula back to
the mainland and continued to walk until about noon the next day, when I
was forced to seek rest, as I was completely exhausted. When I reached a
little village, I purchased a flannel shirt and overalls, and my
identity was lost. With the funds I had in my possession and the check
Dad had given me, I managed to work my way out here, and you know the
rest."

Jack Norton had not been interrupted during the time he was telling his
story. His hearers sat deeply interested, but when he reached the end of
his narrative it brought them back to their surroundings. After a
moment's silence, Jack's father, who had been seated with his chair
tilted back, came down with a crash, and seizing Jack by the hand
exclaimed:

"Why, Jack, the 'Magnolia' was not hurt. Your friends brought her into
port a few days later and she is now as good as ever."

Young Norton was dumfounded. "How did they do it?" he asked.

"By the aid of some fishermen and a small tug who sighted them in
distress the following morning. She had only keeled over in the mud, and
as there were no rocks upon which to pound she hung together and they
soon had her righted and under sail. So you see, my boy, you have had
all this suffering for nothing," explained his father.

"No, not altogether for nothing, for I have learned a very great lesson;
not to jump at conclusions and to abide by an agreement; and besides,"
he said, smiling, "I have acquired a home of my own and," stepping over
to Ida's side and taking her by the hand, assisted her to arise, "Miss
Gully has done me the honor to promise to share this home with me, which
more than repays me for my sufferings. I ask but one other favor in this
world, and that is your forgiveness and blessings, Dad."

It was now Jack's father's turn to be taken by surprise, but he was too
old a diplomat to be caught off his guard, and he wanted to know more of
the step his son was contemplating before giving it his approval, so he
bowed politely to Ida and answered: "As for my forgiveness, son, you
have it, but it would be strange if I should go out into the world to
look for a lost son and should return with both a son and daughter." But
he did not commit himself.

The rest of the party who had heard Jack's story and its happy ending
came forward to congratulate he and Ida, and express their hopes for
their future.

Travis Gully and his wife, who had not yet been able to fully understand
the situation, were happy because the outcome had seemed to please Jack,
and they knew that after the strangers had gone he would tell them all
about it in a way they could understand.

Mr. Norton arose from the table and asked Gully if he could find
accommodations for the driver of his car, as he would like to spend the
night with his son in his home alone. Mr. Palmer, he said, could take
the other car and the rest of the party and return to the village and
await his coming.

[Illustration: _The change wrought by honest toil and that magic word,
irrigation._]

Gully said that he thought there would be no difficulty in providing for
him, and so it was arranged. Mr. Palmer and Dugan, with the three
remaining members of the party, who proved to be some friends of Mr.
Norton's who had accompanied him on this trip with the view to investing
in land, were to return to the village and await Mr. Norton's coming.

After thanking Travis Gully and his wife for their hospitality, they
shook hands with them and the young people, and with promises to see
them again in a few days, left for the village.

Soon after their departure, Mr. Norton expressed a desire to visit
Jack's homestead.

"All right, Dad," exclaimed Jack, "we will run over there, and I will
return later and get my horse and buggy."

"I'll take care of them; you go with your father," said Gully.

Jack thanked him and he and his father drove off together. Just as they
were turning from the road that led to the school house Jack noticed
that Miss Anderson had just dismissed school, and asked his father's
permission to take her and the Gully children home in the car, to which
his father consented. Turning back into the road, they soon met them,
and as the car was turned around to pick them up, Jack called to Miss
Anderson and invited her and the children to ride; when she smilingly
approached the car and before she could express her thanks, Jack
introduced his father. Miss Anderson stopped short, and her bewildered
look amused Jack, who had stepped out to assist her and the children to
enter the car.

"Don't ask any questions now," said he, laughing.

"But," she began, "I do not understand."

"Of course not, but Ida will tell you all about it when you get home,"
answered Jack.

As Miss Anderson entered the car and took the seat beside him, Mr.
Norton remarked:

"This has indeed been a remarkable day, Miss Anderson; a day of
wonders."

The children were assisted into the car, and Jack, with Joe upon his
knee, sat with the driver.

After they had been taken to the Gully home, and the children scrambled
out, all excitement over their first auto ride. Miss Anderson, after
being assisted from the car, thanked Mr. Norton and expressed the hope
that she would be in a better position on the morrow to discuss with him
the important events that had occurred. "For you know," said she, "I am
still in the dark."




CHAPTER XXI.


Jack and his father then drove to his claim, and upon their arrival
there dismissed the driver with instructions to call for them the
following morning, and Jack added:

"Please tell Mr. and Mrs. Gully that we will not be over to either
supper or breakfast."

After the driver had gone, Jack turned to his father and said: "I have
learned, Dad, that one of the first requisites of a successful farmer is
the proper care of his stock, so if you will accompany me, I will care
for mine before we go into the house."

Mr. Norton followed Jack as he went about his chores and noted with
satisfaction the care he took in the performance of each in its turn,
and passed favorable comments on the appearance of Jack's horses, their
comfortable stables and abundance of feed.

Jack was proud of his father's interest in things, and with boyish
delight showed him over the place.

When they entered Jack's house, the old gentleman was in an excellent
mood, and had been joking his son about his prowess as a homesteader. He
viewed the interior with a quizzical gaze and seemed to locate
everything at a glance. He removed his hat and coat, and after hanging
them on a chair, rolled up his sleeves and began removing the lids from
the stove. Jack watched him for a moment, then took the bucket and went
to the well. When he returned, his father had the fire going.

"Pretty quick work, Dad," he said.

"It's not the first time, my boy," his father answered, and then he
asked: "Where's the coffee?"

"In the box on the wall; I'll get it in a minute," said Jack. But his
minute was too long, for his father got the can and was measuring out a
handful of the contents before Jack finished washing his hands.

Jack watched him prepare the coffee, after which he fried some bacon and
eggs, located some stale sourdough bread, and taking Jack's table cloth
from the table, set the dishes on the bare boards, and setting back the
chairs, pulled up a bench and an empty box, and looking at Jack nodded
toward the table and said:

"Grub's ready."

"Comin' up," answered Jack. "Want some butter?"

"Nope, not with bacon grease," replied the old gentleman.

After they sat down to the meal, Mr. Norton helped himself and remarked:
"This is the life." He quaffed the steaming coffee with a relish, and
looking across the table, asked suddenly:

"How about the girl, Jack, who are these Gullys?"

"I don't know, Dad," replied Jack in surprise. "I never saw them until I
came here, but they are mighty fine people."

"Naturally," said his father, "but what makes you think so; the girl?"

"Not altogether," said Jack, "I have reasons to know."

"In what way?" asked his father.

"In more ways than one," was Jack's answer.

"Specify," said the old gentleman bluntly.

Then Jack told his father of his first meeting with Gully, of how he had
sold Gully the lumber in his shack when he had become discouraged, and
had then accompanied him to the harvest field, of how Gully had
persuaded him to return and try once more, which he had done, and then
when the contract for clearing the land was under consideration, Gully
had taken him in on it and been the means of giving him a start.

He explained further that it had been under Gully's directions that he
had accomplished the success he had, and when he had finished, his
father asked:

"Is it out of gratitude for all this kindness that you propose to marry
his daughter?"

"No," Jack replied.

"Don't you know," continued his father, "that in the station in life to
which I can restore you, you can have your choice of hundreds of young
ladies?"

"This is my station in life," replied Jack, "and the best thing about
it, Dad, is that I did not have to have you put me here, and as for Ida,
she does not know any other life, and I hope she never learns."

"Is this Miss Anderson a relative of theirs?" asked his father.

"No; just a friend who has taught this little school ever since I came
here," answered Jack.

"A very able teacher," commented Mr. Norton.

"How do you mean?" queried Jack.

"This Miss Gully did not acquire her genteel manner from her parents,
did she? And you say this is the only life she has ever known," said his
father.

"Miss Anderson has taken a great deal of interest in Ida," said Jack,
"and she learns very readily."

"Will you postpone this marriage until you have made final proof on your
claim, and give me one year of your life?" asked his father.

"No, sir," Jack answered.

Burns Norton arose from the table and began to collect the soiled dishes
and pile them together, and as he started for a pan in which to wash
them, Jack said: "Let them go until morning, Dad." "All right, we'll go
to bed then," answered the old gentleman, and the subject of the Gullys
was not again referred to that night.

The following morning after Mr. Norton and Jack had eaten their
breakfast they went out and walked over Jack's claim.

Mr. Norton asked him many questions about the climatic conditions and
the possible future of the country. Jack answered his father as best he
could, and handed him the paper he had prepared, giving an account of
his experiences and observations, explaining to him that he had
assembled the data contained therein for the express purpose of
furnishing information to the owners of the land he and Mr. Gully had
cleared, but added that he had no idea at the time who the owner would
prove to be.

Mr. Norton glanced at the paper, and thanking Jack, said he would look
it over. He took specimens of the soil and told Jack if things looked
favorable he would arrange to have wells drilled on his land before
returning to the South.

Jack assured his father that he would make no mistake in doing so, and
upon hearing the auto horn, they turned and found that the car was
awaiting them at Jack's house. After returning and arranging things for
the day, Mr. Norton asked Jack how much time it would require to run
over to his land, as he wished to see it in order to get an idea of what
condition it was in and what improvements would be required.

Jack told him it would require but a few minutes, and they decided to go
before returning to the Gully home, which they did, and while there
Jack's father said to him:

"Jack, in view of the fact that you have made up your mind to marry this
Miss Gully and remain on your property here, would you be willing to
take charge of my interests?"

"Why, certainly, Dad!" Jack replied. "I only wish that I could grant
your request to accompany you home for a year, but I am afraid I could
not, in justice to all, do so."

Burns Norton turned to his son and taking him by the hand, said:

"I respect your feelings in this affair, Jack, and am glad that you gave
me the answer that you did last night, for I feel now that you have a
purpose in life, and the determination to see it through."

Jack simply said "Thank you, Dad," and they returned to the car and were
driven directly to the Gully home.

It being Saturday, there was no school, and Miss Anderson, who had
remained overnight at the Gullys, had not yet returned home when they
arrived. She had been told of the occurrence of the day before, of how
Jack and his father had been brought so unexpectedly together and the
circumstances under which they had been separated, and when Mr. Norton
and Jack entered the house upon their arrival she congratulated them on
the happy event and expressed the hope that Jack's experience had taught
him to confide in his father in the future.

Jack assured her that there would be no danger of a recurrence, as it
would take him the rest of his life in his effort at strict obedience to
atone for what he had done.

Mrs. Gully, with Miss Anderson's assistance, had prepared a splendid
dinner, which they told Jack was a reunion dinner, gotten up especially
for him and his father, and they were to be the guests of honor. His
father, they told him, was to be seated at the head of the table and was
to preside, and Jack was instructed that when dinner was announced he
was to escort his father to the place assigned to him.

When dinner time arrived, Jack did as he was bidden and after they were
all seated, he told his friends of how his father had played the typical
bachelor homesteader while his guest the night before, and they
suggested that they induce him to erect a shack on his land and become
one of them.

They laughed heartily at Jack's description of his father as a cook, and
agreed with him that it would be nice if he would stay.

Mr. Norton thanked them for their invitation, and said that nothing
would suit him better, as he was fascinated with their country, and was
sure that it had a great future; so much so, he added, that he had
determined to improve his holding, and would probably acquire more.

"But," he continued, "I am an old man, and have interests in other parts
of the world that require my attention, so I cannot remain with you. But
while I am here I want to thank you, Mr. Gully, and your estimable wife
for the interest you have taken in, and the kindnesses you have shown,
my son, for I have been assured by him that it has been very largely due
to your action and assistance that he has been able to make his
achievements so great.

"He has also told me, as you know, of the honor your daughter has
bestowed upon him by promising to become his wife. This knowledge is
very gratifying to me, for as he has chosen to become a farmer, he has
done wisely in selecting for his help mate one who is familiar with the
life of a farmer, and at the same time one who possesses the grace and
beauty that few are endowed with. I am proud of Jack's choice, and
gladly welcome her as my daughter."

"I feel," he continued, "that under the guiding care of such worthy
people as you and Miss Anderson, who Jack tells me has watched with
patient care the shaping of their destinies, these young people have
nothing to fear for the future.

"In a few days I shall return to my life, and I would like to change the
plans of these young people and take them home with me for a while. It
is but a few weeks until the date set for their marriage, and will cause
but little inconvenience, and I want them with me. What do you say,
Jack?" he asked.

Jack thought for a moment before replying, and then arising, he thanked
his father for what he had said and told him that his proposition had
come so unexpectedly they would have to ask time to talk it over, but as
far as he was concerned, he thought it might be arranged.

"Very well," said his father, "let me know as soon as you have made up
your minds, and I will tell you my plans."

After finishing their dinner, Mr. Norton remarked that he supposed he
ought to send word to Mr. Palmer and the other members of the party that
he would be delayed for several days, and give them an opportunity to
come out and inspect the country and return to Spokane with the cars, if
they so desired, and he called to the driver of the car he had been
using to tell him of his wishes and have him drive to the village with
his message.

As the driver came in response to his call, Jack asked his father if he
would let him deliver his message.

Mr. Norton, knowing that Jack was an expert driver, gave his consent and
dismissed the driver, telling him that young Mr. Norton would use the
car during the afternoon, and turning to his son, gave him the message
to deliver.

Jack listened attentively to his father's instructions, and when he had
finished, went hurriedly into the house calling to Ida and the children
to get their wraps and prepare for a ride to the village in the auto.
The children eagerly sought their mother's permission to accompany Jack,
and when this was given seized their wraps and joined Jack at the car,
where he and the driver were discussing the merits of the machine.

Mr. Norton and Travis Gully had gone to the barn and were inspecting
some of Gully's fine colts and discussing their points, a subject on
which Jack's father was an enthusiast. Ida was accompanied out to the
car by her mother and Miss Anderson. Jack expressed his regrets that
there was not sufficient room in the car for them to go also, but he had
unthoughtedly mentioned the trip to the children first, and now he could
not disappoint them.

Mrs. Gully laughingly replied that she had waited until the present time
without ever having ridden in an automobile, and she did not suppose
that she would suffer by waiting a little while longer, but she added:

"I do propose to have you give me a ride before the car is taken back to
Spokane."

Jack promised her a ride the following day, and after assisting Ida and
the children in, jumped into the driver's seat, and just as he was
starting Miss Anderson approached, and addressing he and Ida, who was
seated by his side, said:

"Make up your minds about your father's proposition to accompany him
home. I think it would be just simply delightful for you to do as he has
suggested."

"What do you think, mother?" Jack asked, addressing Mrs. Gully.

"Just as you and Ida say," she replied.

"You mean just as Ida says," Jack corrected, and laughingly added: "I'm
in with Dad on the proposition."

And with shouts of goodbye and with much waving of caps and hands they
started for the village.

Mrs. Gully and Miss Anderson watched them for a few moments, and turning
to go back into the house, Minnie Gully asked Miss Anderson her opinion
of the early marriage of Jack and Ida.

"I do not see that having it occur a few weeks ahead of the appointed
time would make any difference, and as Mr. Norton seems so anxious to
have them accompany him home, I would be glad to see them agree to his
proposition, but I believe I would leave the matter to them to decide."

Mrs. Gully agreed with her and added: "As we have made no provisions for
their marriage I think should they decide to do as he asks, it would be
best to allow them to accompany Mr. Norton to Spokane and have the
ceremony performed there, and Ida be given an opportunity to prepare
herself for the trip home with him."

"An excellent idea," answered Miss Anderson, "and it would be splendid
if you would accompany them as far as Spokane, be present at the
marriage, and assist Ida in her preparations."

Minnie Gully thought for a few moments before she replied to Miss
Anderson's suggestion about her going and finally said:

"How about Travis and the children? Who would care for them while I am
away."

"Don't worry about them; the other girls are plenty old enough to manage
things for the few days that you would be away; and besides, I will be
home, and I can come and assist them."

"Are you not going?" exclaimed Mrs. Gully, in dismay.

"I had not thought of going," answered Miss Anderson.

"Well, if I go you must accompany me," declared Mrs. Gully in a decisive
tone.

"We will not discuss our plans until we have heard from Jack and Ida,"
Miss Anderson replied.

In the meantime Burns Norton and Travis Gully had walked down into the
alfalfa field and had stopped and were earnestly discussing the future
of the two young people. Not the plans for their approaching marriage,
but of the bright prospects of this beautiful country in which they had
chosen to make their start in life, and the splendid opportunities it
afforded as compared with those that had been given to them when they
were their ages.

Jack and his party reached the village in a very short time--as Joe
expressed it, "by the time papa could have had the horses hitched to the
wagon"--and upon their arrival Jack left them and sought Mr. Palmer, to
whom he delivered his father's message. Mr. Dugan, who was on the street
at the time and had seen their arrival, was at the car talking to Ida
when Jack returned, and after greeting him Jack told him that the party
would probably be out to Mr. Gully's the day following, and he was
particularly anxious to have him come out, as he had a matter of
importance to discuss with him. Dugan was much surprised at this request
but promised to come.

Jack purchased a supply of candy and oranges for the noisy youngsters,
and they returned home after making a detour of many miles.

It was almost dark when the auto party arrived home, and the children
tumbled out of the car and ran into the house, all clamoring to tell of
the delightful time they had enjoyed. Ida was assisted from the car by
Jack, who was then preparing to drive over to his own home and care for
his stock, when he was told by the driver that Mr. Gully and Mr. Norton
had driven over in the buggy a short time before to look after things,
and were expected to return at any time. Upon hearing this Jack joined
the ladies in the house, and as he came in, he started in with the
children telling of their wonderful ride, but seeing the inquisitive
look on the faces of Mrs. Gully and Miss Anderson he asked them if Ida
had not told them, of their decision?

They replied that they had not had time to talk with her since her
return.

"Well, we're going with Dad," Jack announced.

"We are so glad," declared both ladies. "It will be such a delightful
trip for you both."

They did not get to inquire further into their plans, as Mr. Norton and
Gully came in from their trip to Jack's, and after supper was eaten Jack
and Ida made known their decision, and agreed to abide by any
arrangements their parents might make for their marriage and the trip.




CHAPTER XXII.


The following day Mr. Norton's companions came out from the village and
the entire day, although it was Sunday, was devoted to a trip over the
adjoining country, where the party was given an excellent opportunity to
judge for themselves what the country was like.

They expressed themselves as being favorably impressed and predicted
that at some time in the not very far distant future it would develop
into a great agricultural and stock center.

Mr. Norton and Jack, together with Travis Gully, who had accompanied
them on their tour of inspection, were brought back to the Gully place
and left, while the rest of the party continued their trip toward
Spokane, where they expected to take the train for their homes.

Burns Norton, after telling his friends of his intention of having Jack
and Ida hurry their marriage and accompany him home, explained that this
would probably delay his return for a week or ten days, but he hoped to
rejoin them at the end of this period in their homes in the south. He
bade them goodbye, as did Jack and the Gullys, and the party continued
their trip, leaving him behind.

As for Jack, he had so far figured out the details of his plans for the
wedding that he had persuaded Dugan to lay over in Spokane upon his
arrival there until he and Ida joined him, at which time he would have
Miss Anderson accompany them, and he wanted her and Dugan to attend them
at the marriage. Dugan agreed to this, and he now knew what the
important matter was of which Jack wished to speak. Jack, however, had
said nothing of this arrangement, not even to Miss Anderson.

For the next few days Mrs. Gully and Miss Anderson's time was taken up
in making preparations for Ida's departure. Old Mr. Norton entered a
protest against any preparations whatever, it having been decided that
Mrs. Gully's plan of having the marriage take place in Spokane being the
most feasible, be adopted, and she and Miss Anderson were to accompany
Ida. Mr. Norton insisted that all the necessary arrangements could be
made after their arrival in the city.

The days before their departure were not only busy days for the
ladies--the men too had all they could attend to.

Mr. Norton, after seeing the effect produced by the application of water
on this land, and realizing how simple a matter it was to secure the
necessary supply from the inexhaustable subterranean reservoir that
underlay the territory that constituted the desert area, did not
hesitate to invest a few thousand dollars in bringing about the
reclamation of his land. He arranged before he left to have a well and
pumping plant installed on each forty acres of his holdings.

Two of these wells were to be drilled during the winter that the work of
developing the first two units of his project might start early the
following spring. And he was farsighted enough to appreciate the fact
that when these two units were brought into a state of productiveness
they could be sold in fractions of ten acres each, which was sufficient
land to keep one man occupied with intensive farming, for an increased
value, sufficient to pay for the reclamation of the rest of his land.

This work he arranged for Gully to attend to until Jack's return, when
they would both be busy looking after the project.

At last the day came for the departure of the party for the city, and
all were ready and Ida and her mother had kissed each of the girls and
Joe goodbye, and Jack had faithfully promised Joe that they would have
an automobile when he returned, the party, consisting of Ida, her
mother, Miss Anderson, Jack and his father, were driven to the station
by Travis Gully, who saw them off on their trip and returned home to his
lonesome children, who had never been left by their mother before.

Upon the arrival of the wedding party in Spokane they were met at the
station by the thoughtful Dugan, who Jack had advised by telegram the
time of their departure and the number in the party, and then upon
seeing Dugan at the station, had evidenced as much surprise as the rest.

They immediately went to the hotel, where Dugan had engaged apartments
for them, and that night Ida and her mother attended the theater for the
first time in their lives. Miss Anderson, being escorted by Dugan, made
the party complete.

Two days later Jack and Ida were quietly married in the parlor of the
hotel where they had been stopping and Mr. Dugan and Miss Anderson were
their attendants, just as Jack had planned. A few hours afterward they
were on their way to Galveston under the care of Mr. Norton and Dugan,
who occupied the smoking compartment, while the young couple were left
alone to assume as much as was possible an air of indifference to the
actions of their fellow passengers, who had in some mysterious way
discovered the fact that a wedding had just occurred, and were enjoying
themselves at the young couple's expense.

Mrs. Gully and Miss Anderson returned to their homes the following day,
tired but happy and loaded down with trinkets, both useful and
ornamental, which Mr. Norton, Jack and Ida had entrusted to their care
for distribution among the family as a token of their best wishes.

Short messages and post cards mailed along the route were received from
Jack and Ida in almost every mail, but it was nearly two weeks before
the first real letter reached the home folks. They had been in Galveston
for several days, but father Norton had kept them on the go so
constantly they had not had time to write, and the letter, when it did
come, was filled with accounts of their many trips and delightful time
they were having. "Oh! mamma," wrote Ida. "Just think! I have been on
board the 'Magnolia,' the very yacht on account of which Jack left
home. There was some paint missing from the wheel, and Jack told me it
was where he had worn it off in his effort to keep her off the point,
but of course I know he was joking. He has promised me a trip in this
very boat, if we get time, but I have made him agree to call the regular
crew, and I mean to see that he does it too." Then after a bit she
wrote: "I am just dying for one breath of burning sagebrush; everything
here smells like fish or tar."

These letters from Jack and Ida always contained messages of love to
Miss Anderson, who received them in quiet happiness, as if her life's
work was completed when these young people were wedded.

Just a while after the Holidays Ida wrote: "By the time you receive this
letter we will have started on our return trip. We leave here for New
Orleans and from there we go to Chicago, and Jack has promised me one
whole week or longer, if I want it, with grandpa and grandma, and Jack
says he is going to bring them back with us."

When Minnie Gully received this letter she could hardly content herself,
and immediately wrote to her parents notifying them of the coming of
Jack and Ida, and renewed her plea for them to come.

Travis Gully was progressing nicely with the work Mr. Norton had
arranged for him to have done, and the first well was almost complete
when he came home from the Norton land one night and had just finished
his supper, when hearing a call at the gate, he went out and was handed
a package of mail by a neighbor who was returning late from the
village. Going into the house, he looked over the several letters, found
one for his wife from Ida, and handed it to her, saying: "See how the
youngsters are."

Minnie Gully took the letter, and looking at the address, the date of
mailing, and then carefully seeing if the stamp had been properly
cancelled, just as most women do upon receiving a letter, opened it and
read from Ida:

"We are well and happy; happy because we leave here tomorrow on the
final stage of our journey home. And listen to what I am going to tell
you, mother--grandpa and grandma are coming with us. This is no joke,
for their baggage is at the depot and we are to stay at the hotel
tonight. Jack said to please ask papa to meet us next Wednesday."

There was joy in that desert home that night. The final link in their
chain of happiness was being forged, and would be welded the following
Wednesday.

Travis Gully looked up and remarked: "Well, this is Monday night; day
after tomorrow; it won't be long. It will soon come."

And it did. Gully, with his own family, met them at the station and
those of the passengers who witnessed the meeting from the smoky car
windows knew that happiness reigned in that little desert village for a
time at least.

The following fall Mr. Norton and Dugan came back to attend Gully's
making of final proof on his claim, at which time he proposed to
celebrate. Why Dugan came was a question that was to be answered later,
but it was a well known fact that Miss Anderson had been receiving
numerous letters that bore a Texas postmark.

Burns Norton's project to irrigate one entire section of this desert
land was well under way, and the success of the venture was so well
assured that he had received many flattering offers from his capitalist
friends who had accompanied him on his former trip, to purchase an
interest in his holdings. These he promptly refused.

But the credit for the practical demonstrations that had grounded his
faith in the future of the country he gave to Travis and Minnie Gully,
the homesteaders.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Land of Lure, by Elliott Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAND OF LURE ***

***** This file should be named 36999.txt or 36999.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/9/36999/

Produced by Greg Bergquist, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
