The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Proper Limits of the Government's
Interference with the Affairs of the East-India Company, Attempted to be Assigned, by John Dalrymple

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Proper Limits of the Government's Interference with the Affairs of the East-India Company, Attempted to be Assigned
       With some few Reflections Extorted by, and on, the
       Distracted State of the Times

Author: John Dalrymple

Release Date: August 7, 2011 [EBook #37000]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROPER LIMITS ***




Produced by Richard J. Shiffer and the Distributed
Proofreading volunteers at http://www.pgdp.net for Project
Gutenberg. (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive.)





[Transcriber's Note: Every effort has been made to replicate this
text as faithfully as possible, including obsolete and variant spellings
and other inconsistencies. Text that has been changed to correct an
obvious error is noted at the end of this ebook.]




  THE PROPER

  LIMITS

  OF THE

  GOVERNMENT'S Interference with the Affairs
  of the EAST-INDIA COMPANY,

  ATTEMPTED TO BE ASSIGNED.

  WITH SOME FEW

  REFLECTIONS

  Extorted by, and on, the distracted State of the Times.

  By JOHN, EARL of STAIR.


               ----And beshrew my soul,
     But I do love the favour and the form
     Of this most fair occasion; by the which
     We will untread the steps of damned flight,
     And, like a 'bated and retiring flood,
     Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
     Stoop low within these bounds we have o'erlook'd,
     And calmly run on in obedience.


  LONDON:

  PRINTED FOR J. STOCKDALE,
  OPPOSITE BURLINGTON-HOUSE, PICCADILLY.
  MDCC LXXXIV.

  Entered at Stationers' Hall.




THE PROPER

LIMITS

OF THE

GOVERNMENT'S Interference with the Affairs of the EAST-INDIA COMPANY,
&c.


Each day's experience proves the fallibility of conjecture, even when
established on apparently the surest foundations.

Having stated, indeed materially and substantially proved, that the
annual peace expenditure of the state, if decently, not profusely, nor
even amply provided for, could not be performed for less than sixteen
millions five hundred thousand pounds; and having asserted, with truth,
that the annual receipts have scarcely, on the most productive years of
the public revenue, exceeded twelve millions; and the necessary
corollary, arising out of these propositions, being an annual surplus or
sinking fund to the amount (if at all proportional) of at least fifteen
hundred thousand pounds, as a provision for great civil emergencies or
future wars, without which no system of finance can be either
respectable or assuredly permanent; and it following of necessary
consequence from these premises, that the proper peace revenue, from
something more than twelve millions, which is its present amount, ought
to be raised to eighteen millions yearly:--these matters, I say, being
as I have represented them, I firmly believed the public affairs of this
country were tolerably embarrassed, and weakly imagined Ministers might
find full employment in extricating them, without courting, and eagerly,
through right and through wrong, aspiring and grasping at the management
of affairs fully in as great a state of confusion as our own. But I find
I greatly under-rated the cravings of the appetite of our late rulers,
who seem to have had stomach for all difficulties, however remote from
the natural and needful course of their public functions, and however
averse the parties interested were to trust their concerns to their
direction. In consequence of this canine hunger and thirst after
regulation, a bill was brought in and passed by a very great majority of
the House of Commons, to virtually consolidate the embarrassed concerns
of the East-India Company, in direct opposition to the desires of the
proprietors, with the no less embarrassed affairs of this unhappy
country. This bill has been thrown out by a wise and virtuous majority
in the House of Peers; but as the majority there was but small, and
threats are thrown out (in order to make it still smaller) against
Peers, for exercising their indispensable distinctive prerogative duty
of giving honest counsel to their King; and as the same majority,
leagued to promote their own advancement and the ruin of the state,
still exists and exults in the House of Commons; I doubt not but the
same strange destructive measure will be resumed. It therefore becomes
the business of every well-wisher to the prosperity of Britain, to
oppose and to refute the specious nothings offered to blind and to
conceal from the public the designs of a dark and fatal tendency
attached to it; and I think it my duty, moreover, and a justice due to
the creditors of the public in particular, at least, to such as shall
adhere to me, to protest and enter my dissent in their name against any
increase of the public debt, by the addition and incorporation of the
debts of the East-India Company with those of the public, in any manner,
whether openly, or by implication and management.

I now proceed to consider the reasons offered in vindication of the bill
by which so daring a violation of every thing the laws hold most sacred
was attempted.

The first plea that was insisted on, was, that the Company was bankrupt;
but this argument defeats itself. If they are bankrupt, the law has
provided a due course of proceeding: Ministers, or the Deputies of
Ministers, are not the proper assignees to the bankrupt's estate: the
trade is, moreover, by the civil death of the Company, open to every
adventurer. But this pretext of bankruptcy is but a flimsy disguise
easily seen through: Ministers are not so eager to obtain the
administration of the affairs of a bankrupt: the virtuous majority in
the House of Commons, increased without any visible cause, or known
success, or advantage of any kind, real or pretended, obtained to the
public from the cares of the late administration;--increased, I say,
from a small doubtful few in the disapprobation of the peace, to a
steady, triumphant majority of one hundred and fourteen in the business
of the East-India Company; gives no note or appearance of a present
bankruptcy in the Company's affairs; but to those that do not know the
incorruptible integrity and disinterestedness of the British legislative
bodies, gives an ugly hint and surmise of what is likely to happen in
future. Of bankruptcy I need say no more; it confutes itself.

The next plea is humanity, and a wish to restore in India a better and a
juster system of government, less rapacious, and less oppressive to the
natives. This is certainly a fair and generous object; but how do the
means correspond with the end, or, what solid proof have we that
excesses do exist, or, at least, have been carried to the singular and
unnatural extent each parliamentary declaimer is pleased to assign to
them? Having forced the Company to bear a share in all the foolish wars
Britain involved herself in, money must be found. The smooth swindling
methods of funding, without giving the creditors adequate securities
for either principal or interest, are not practicable in Cina.
Self-preservation enforced the necessity of violence, more obnoxious in
the beginning, but, perhaps, in the end, less ruinous than the soft, sly
deceits of Europe. Those violent measures, palliated by the necessity of
self-preservation, excepted, what remains but an _ex parte_ charge, in
Reports to the House of Commons, curious and voluminous indeed, but
without confrontation of the accused, or any other necessary preliminary
to condemnation, sought by private equity, or required by public
justice? We have only an inform mass of matter, where disappointment,
vanity, and malevolence, are too often prompted by management and design
to accuse, and every accusation is held forth as compleat evidence of
guilt. Indeed, some accounts scattered through the vast abyss of eastern
manners and customs, make by much the most useful and entertaining part
of this exceedingly tedious farrago; though in this part it falls far
short in beauty of style and composition, and probably does not much
exceed in veracity, the Arabian Night's Entertainments.--But grant that
wrongs and injustice predominate, who are to restore the golden age in
India? We know the late Ministry, their habitudes, and connections; from
Brooks's, then, it is fair to suppose the daring Argonauts were to have
sailed in search of the Golden Fleece: from Almack's our bold Pizarros
must have taken their course to civilize our new-acquired ministerial
Peru. Determined minds used to set fame and fortune on the dies
uncertain cast: soft souls, overflowing with Christian forbearance, and
the milk of human kindness suckt in at the gaming-table, from such
apostles, alas! I rather should suspect,

    With Ate by their side, come hot from hell,
    Shall in these confines, with a monarch's voice,
    Cry havoc! and let slip the dogs of war.

Yet I readily agree that it may be proper to send out a well-chosen
commission of visitation and inspection, with adequate and efficient
powers from Parliament; though I am greatly deceived, if they do not
find that matters are much exaggerated. The Reports to the House of
Commons from Committees are generally very false mediums to view the
object they treat of through: they are moved for common by persons
interested in the event, sedulously attended by them, and the materials
are too often modelled and made up according to their views, and to
serve their purposes. I have therefore ever greatly regretted the
abolition of the board of trade, the fair, candid judges in these
matters, or who might be made so. The argument from the abuse to the
use, is not a fair consequence; and I sincerely and earnestly recommend
the re-establishment of that board. From the revenues of the Duchy Court
of Lancaster now vacant, and a small gleaning from the enormous
overgrown sine-cures in the Exchequer, this may be done without expence,
and with great emolument to the Crown and to the public.

It is, besides, the height of absurdity, to think the Indians are
unhappy because they do not live under the same constitution as the
inhabitants of this island. The government in that country, for a very
long period of time, has been so unsettled, that no form of it that has
any stability, or affords any degree of protection to the subjects that
live under it, can be pronounced to be a bad one: in every other case,
the weaker are almost sure to be exterminated by those that are
stronger.

I should esteem it, in such uncertainty of doing any good of any kind,
extremely improper for the public to make a common cause with the
East-India Company, further than I have already stated, and likewise by
assisting them with some necessary pecuniary aid in their present
distress. The consequences of the public taking upon themselves the
direction of the Company's trade, or even of their territorial
acquisitions, I apprehend would be most ruinous. No nation has ever
attempted any thing of this kind without being greatly losers by it,
even where government was carried on principles infinitely more
favourable to such an enterprise than the free constitution of this
country admits of.

France has often been compelled, in order to preserve the trade to India
and their Companies from sinking, to interfere, and I believe is still
concerned in the national trade to India; but this is on mere compulsion
and necessity, and is, and has ever been, a very losing business to the
Crown of France. If this is so, then how much worse must it be here,
where the advantages taken of the public in every public business are
enormous: and indeed the uncertainty of the time of payment, and the
difficulty of passing the account, do warrant a demand of a great
latitude at any time; but at present, when the ordnance debentures are
at 30 per cent. discount, and the navy bills, which carry an interest
of 4 per cent. are at 17 per cent. discount, it is almost impossible to
say on what terms a contract with Government would be advantageous. In
more settled times, I believe, 25 per cent. on estimate, and near 50 per
cent. on arbitrary statements, did not vary much from the difference, to
the disadvantage of the public, betwixt public and private contracts for
the same performances.

In this view, and it is a just one, nothing but absolute necessity, and
the sure consequence of losing the trade altogether, could justify the
interference of Government beyond the limits already assigned, if even
these could justify it. But this necessity is happily entirely out of
the question at present: the Company anxiously desire to go on with
their trade: a forbearance of duties due, is all they ask, to the
extent of, I think, a million. If it was three times as much, Government
would be mad, if they hesitated in the alternative betwixt indulging
them in their demand, and taking their concerns into their own hands.
The affairs of the Company have been embarrassed before; they have
borrowed large sums from Government, which they have honestly repaid.
Their surplus in peaceable times is very large; and if tranquility is
any way durable in India, and the administration of the Company's
affairs is continued in the hands of that powerful genius of resource,
Mr. Hastings, I make no doubt they will extricate themselves with
honour, and do justice to every creditor they have. I am at least sure,
that this is giving the only chance of making them beneficial to this
country; and it is what the Company is highly entitled to.

I have often wondered upon what principle of policy one of our two great
commercial companies should be the _enfant gale_, the spoilt child of
every administration whilst the other was treated like the step-son of
the state, with every mark of jealousy and unkindness. The merits of the
East-India Company towards the nation are great and notorious. Whilst
every other country has been taxing their subjects, in order to support
their East-India trade, the English East-India Company has been the
support, to a good extent directly, and in a very great and eminent
degree indirectly, of the British finances; and in the late war the
Company maintained alone, in their dominions and enterprises, the
superiority which usually attended the British arms in every quarter of
the globe; and at last, in the acquisitions made by the Company's arms,
the material indispensable sacrifices to procure a necessary peace were
found. Indeed, their expences in the reduction of Pondicherry, and the
value of it, and of the other restitutions made to the French by the
definitive treaty of peace, seem to me a very onerous and most just debt
on Britain, and why they are not stated as such by the Company, I cannot
see any shadow of a reason.

It was under the direction of their own proprietary, uncontrouled by
parliament, that the Company rose to an unexampled height of wealth and
prosperity: since the interference of parliament, their affairs have
declined. Possibly now the patronage is so valuable and extensive, their
constitution may be defective, by the too immediate dependence of the
directors on the proprietors, who, by their brigues and cabals, overawe,
and often make abortive the best intentions of the directors. But
matters of charter and property are of so difficult and delicate a
nature, that it is hard to say, whether any attempt to remedy this might
not do more harm than good.

It is related, that Monsieur Colbert, Lewis the Fourteenth's very able
minister of commerce and finance, and to whose memory France stands much
indebted, called an assembly of the most eminent men in the French
king's dominions in the commercial line, to whom he proposed the
consideration, if any, and what advantages might accrue to commerce by
the interference of Government. The unanimous answer of the assembly
was, _Laisser le faire_, let it alone.

A new doctrine has been likewise attempted to be established in favour
of the late India Bill, viz. That measures are not to be so fully and
fairly canvassed as they ought, but are to rely and be supported by the
responsibility of the proposer of them. The presumption and absurdity of
such a proposition is too great to require an answer. The responsibility
of the proposer often would not procure him ten pounds; and as to any
thing sanguinary, God knows! the hazard is very, very trifling. Indeed,
the persons who avowedly, first by denial of justice to America, plunged
us into a war, and afterwards, by obstinately persevering in it, when
experience had evinced the success was impracticable, and who by so
doing have irretrievably (I fear) undone their country, enjoy in pomp
and serenity, even to ostentation, the honours and lucrative employments
heaped upon them. If justice is demanded for glory, for wealth, for
dominion lost, they pay you with an ideal jest: if you want more, a
ready vote of acquittal is at hand from a packt majority, united on the
most sordid principles, to promote each other's advantage, in open and
abandoned violation, on one part of the coalition, of the faith a
thousand times pledged to bring delinquents to justice, who now are not
only protected, but represented, with a falsehood and inconsistency that
degrades human nature, as great, wise, and virtuous ministers, by those
very men who not very many months stigmatized them as the base undoers
of their country.

His Majesty has, however, been pleased to nominate a new ministry: they
are young and untried: I wish them well; and my poor support shall be
theirs, if they deserve it. I hope their real essential bond of union is
at least less dangerous than that of their predecessors, viz. through
violation of charters to obtain the plunder of India for themselves and
adherents.

I should have thought a dissolution of Parliament necessary to have
preceded, in order to procure any stability in the settlement of a new
ministry. The reason offered against this measure was quite trifling,
viz. the delay of public business; for the Parliament would have been
dissolved, and a new one elected, in little more than the period of
usual recess at this time of the year; which recess was not intended to
have been shortened, if the late overthrow of the ministry had not taken
place. Should the indecent interruption of every thing that does not
promote their own continuance, still prevail in a majority of the House
of Commons, the delay of public business will be well compensated by the
facilities a new election will probably afford, and by the rapid
progress of measures beneficial and necessary to the public that will
take place hereafter, which, under the present jarring situation and
equipoise of parties, cannot, in my poor opinion, ever be carried on
with either certainty or dispatch.

But I still dread the continuance of the present distractions. The
politics of St. James's have had ill luck for common, and, by some fatal
ascendancy, have generally backwards trod the very paths they most
anxiously sought to shun. The faction has emissaries spread far and wide
to pluck allegiance from men's hearts. It will demand, on the part of
the King, an active, unremitting attention to replace himself in that
state of pre-eminence and influence the constitution allows, and even
requires. Let this never be out of mind. When his Majesty hunts the
stag, let him reflect that he is himself the hunted stag, the royal
hart held at bay by a fierce, unrelenting faction, who deny, or mean to
explain away, his dearest, clearest prerogatives. A prince so virtuous,
who never was even suspected to mean any foul play to the state, ought
to command in every honest service, and he will command no other, those
servants whom he is now obliged to sue to, and often is refused. The
onward path, ingenuous openness of fair sincerity and prudent oeconomy
in private life, lead to peace of mind, and to heaven's best gift,
independence; they martial kings to greatness, to awe, and affectionate
veneration. I know the delicate ground I tread; but I owe much to my
sovereign, and, above all, TRUTH; and I will pay the debt, tho' the most
ungrateful office, yet the surest pledge of real love and respect that I
can give. What have I to fear? I have lived too long; I never wished to
survive the glory of my country; and I cannot form a wish so mean as to
survive its liberties. Whig as I am, if liberty must expire, I hold its
Cuthanaria to be in a mild despotism. But in all the bills of mortality,
of human grandeur, never sure was so strange a catastrophe recorded, as
a king taken prisoner, and a great and glorious constitution squirted to
death, by the sportings of a set of prodigal, undone, gambling,
friblish, impudent Eton boys.

  _Jan. 1. 1784._


FINIS.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Notes:

The transcriber made these changes to the text to correct obvious
errors:

  1. p.  3 Stationers Hall  --> Stationers' Hall
  2. p.  9 brankrupt --> bankrupt
  3. p. 12 securites --> securities
  4. p. 19 tranquiility --> tranquility

End of Transcriber's Notes]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Proper Limits of the Government's
Interference with the Affairs of the East-India Company, Attempted to be Assigned, by John Dalrymple

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROPER LIMITS ***

***** This file should be named 37000.txt or 37000.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/0/0/37000/

Produced by Richard J. Shiffer and the Distributed
Proofreading volunteers at http://www.pgdp.net for Project
Gutenberg. (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
