The Project Gutenberg EBook of John Pettie, R.A., H.R.S.A., by Martin Hardie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: John Pettie, R.A., H.R.S.A.
       Sixteen examples in colour of the artist's work

Author: Martin Hardie

Illustrator: John Pettie

Release Date: August 14, 2011 [EBook #37088]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN PETTIE, R.A., H.R.S.A. ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)








  BRITISH
  ARTISTS

  JOHN PETTIE, R.A., H.R.S.A.



  [Illustration: Bonnie Prince Charlie (Cover Page)]



  IN THE SAME SERIES

    BIRKET FOSTER, R.W.S.
    KATE GREENAWAY
    GEORGE MORLAND

  A. AND C. BLACK  .  4 SOHO SQUARE  .  LONDON, W.


  AGENTS

    AMERICA          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                     64 & 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK

    AUSTRALASIA      OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
                     205 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE

    CANADA           THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA, LTD.
                     27 RICHMOND STREET WEST, TORONTO

    INDIA            MACMILLAN & COMPANY, LTD.
                     MACMILLAN BUILDING, BOMBAY
                     309 BOW BAZAAR STREET, CALCUTTA



  [Illustration: Portrait of John Pettie]



  JOHN PETTIE
  R.A., H.R.S.A.

  SIXTEEN EXAMPLES IN COLOUR
  OF THE ARTIST'S WORK

  WITH
  AN INTRODUCTION
  BY
  MARTIN HARDIE, B.A., A.R.E.

  [Illustration]

  PUBLISHED BY A. & C. BLACK
  4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON
  MCMX




LIST OF PLATES


                                    OWNER OF ORIGINAL

  1. Portrait of John Pettie        _Tate Gallery_

  2. The Vigil                                "

  3. The Step                       _Kenneth M. Clark, Esq._

  4. A Drum-head Court-Martial      _Mappin Art Gallery, Sheffield_

  5. Treason                                  "

  6. Rejected Addresses             _The Rt. Hon. Baron Faber_

  7. Ho! Ho! Old Noll!              _W. J. Chrystal, Esq_.

  8. A Sword-and-Dagger Fight       _Corporation Art Gallery, Glasgow_

  9. Two Strings to her Bow                   "

  [A]10. Bonnie Prince Charlie      _Charles Stewart, Esq._

  11. Disbanded                     _Fine Art Institution, Dundee_

  12. Portrait of Sir Charles
        Wyndham as David Garrick    _Sir Charles Wyndham_

  13. The Clash of Steel            _John Jordan, Esq._

  14. A Storm in a Teacup           _Colonel Harding_

  15. Grandmother's Memories        _Trustees of the late Alex. Rose, Esq._

  16. The Chieftain's Candlesticks  _By permission of the late Mrs. Morten_

        [A] _On the cover_




JOHN PETTIE, R.A.


Like many great painters, John Pettie was of humble origin. Born in
Edinburgh in 1839, he was the son of a tradesman who, having reached
some prosperity, purchased a business in the village of East Linton and
moved there with his family in 1852. The boy was born with art in his
blood, and Nature never intended him for the dull and respectable
vocation to which his father was anxious that he should succeed. More
than once, when despatched on an errand to storeroom or cellar, he was
discovered making drawings on the lid of a wooden box or the top of a
cask, totally oblivious of his journey and its object. A portrait of the
village carrier and his donkey, done when he was a boy of fifteen,
struck neighbouring critics as being almost "uncanny," and overcame even
his father's objections to art as a possible career.

Greatly daring, his mother carried off her son to Edinburgh, a bundle of
drawings beneath his arm, to visit Mr. James Drummond, one of the
leading members of the Royal Scottish Academy. "Much better make him
stick to business," was his verdict, after listening to the mother's
story. But his tone changed when he had seen the drawings. Not a word
was uttered while he turned them over; but then, handing them back, he
said: "Well, madam, you can put that boy to what you like, but he'll die
an artist!"

With every encouragement Pettie now entered the Trustees' Academy, where
he became a student under Robert Scott Lauder, R.S.A. Among Pettie's
fellow-students were George Paul Chalmers, W. Q. Orchardson, J.
MacWhirter, Hugh Cameron, Peter Graham, Tom Graham, and W. McTaggart.
They were destined to form a School which breathed new life into
Scottish art and inaugurated a fresh epoch. All of them gave free
expression to their own personality, but one and all made beautiful
colour their highest ideal.

In 1858 Pettie exhibited his first picture at the Royal Scottish
Academy; and in 1860 made his first venture at the Royal Academy in
London with "The Armourers," which was hung on the line. It was followed
in 1861 by "What d' ye lack, madam?" a picture of the saucy 'prentice in
Scott's "Fortunes of Nigel." With the exhibition of this picture his
success was assured, and the encouragement he received led him to leave
the North and seek his future in the greater world of London.

In 1862 we find Pettie sharing a studio in Pimlico with Orchardson and
Tom Graham. A year later, taking C. E. Johnson in their company, they
moved to 37, Fitzroy Square, a house afterwards tenanted by Ford Madox
Brown. I have before me a solemn agreement dated September 18, 1863:
"We, W. Q. Orchardson, J. Pettie, and T. Graham, agree to each other
that we shall pay the following proportions of rent for house, No. 37,
Fitzroy Square (W. Q. Orchardson, L66 13s.; John Pettie, L56 13s.; T.
Graham, L41 13s.), or in these proportions whether of increase or
reduction." Here they lived a happy Bohemian existence, with guinea-pigs
running about the studio floor; their cash-box an open drawer where
bank-notes, gold and silver were mixed in cheerful confusion with
bottles of varnish and tubes of colour; their general factotum one Joe
Wall, a retired prize-fighter, who had been model to Landseer and Frith.

To the two years spent in Fitzroy Square, and to the ten years
following, belong several of Pettie's finest works. His keen perception
of dramatic incident, his fine sense of colour, and his brilliance of
craftsmanship, soon drew the attention they deserved. In 1865 his
"Drum-head Court-Martial" was one of the pictures before which visitors
clustered daily when it hung on the Academy walls. It is a dashing
picture, full of spirit in idea and design; and the artist seldom
painted anything better, or more full of character, than the heads of
those commanders sitting in judgment.

In the following year, at the early age of twenty-seven, he was elected
an Associate of the Royal Academy, winning the coveted honour eighteen
months before his friend and companion, Orchardson. With "Treason,"
exhibited in 1867, he burst into a triumph of dramatic intensity and
glowing colour. The picture has a grip and unity of conception that
places it on a higher level than any of his previous works. To the three
following years belong such fine subjects as "The Sally" and "The Flag
of Truce," which, with "Treason," are now in the Mappin Art Gallery,
Sheffield; the "Tussle with a Highland Smuggler"; and "Touchstone and
Audrey." "Rejected Addresses," exhibited in 1870, has all Pettie's charm
of colour and fluent brushwork.

Among other comedies in little, touched with light fancy and the joy of
life, are "A Storm in a Teacup" and "Two Strings to Her Bow." The latter
is one of Pettie's happiest pieces of pure sentiment, persuasive in its
natural charm and its touch of romance. Light-hearted gaiety and the
ecstasy of existence sing in rippling music from lines and colours
vibrant with joy.

In 1874 Pettie was elected a Royal Academician, filling the vacancy
caused by the death of Sir Edwin Landseer. His first exhibits were two
of his finest works, "A State Secret," and "Ho! Ho! Old Noll!" The scene
in the latter is a tennis-court where two cavaliers are looking on with
a chuckle of amusement at the spirited caricature which a third has made
upon the wall. "Ho! Ho! Old Noll" is the work of a master draughtsman.
The light pose and easy grace of the cavalier who makes the sketch, the
foreshortening of his arm, the hand that holds the chalk--so lightly
that it seems to move--are all superbly rendered. Two years later, in
1876, he exhibited "The Step," a picture of a little girl with golden
hair, in a pale blue dress, dancing before her grandmother. The same old
lady, with spinning-wheel and high-backed chair, formed the subject of a
picture titled "Grandmother's Memories."

"A Sword-and-Dagger Fight," exhibited in the following year, is one of
many pictures that show Pettie's dramatic perception and his power of
representing physical exertion and momentary movement. Almost at the
same time was painted "Disbanded," a rough and ragged but stalwart
Highlander, without doubt a rebel of "the '45" on his return from
Culloden. This is one of many subjects for which the artist sought
inspiration in the novels of Sir Walter Scott. "The Clash of Steel,"
painted in 1888, obviously owes its origin to the first chapter of "The
Fortunes of Nigel." It depicts the time when the cry of "Clubs! Clubs!
'Prentices!" often echoed along a London street.

"The Chieftain's Candlesticks," of 1886, will puzzle those who do not
recall the scene in Scott's "Legend of Montrose." Angus M'Aulay, a proud
Highlander, on a visit to his friend, Sir Miles Musgrave, in England,
had six candlesticks of solid silver set before him on the table at
dinner--

     "Sae they began to jeer the laird, that he saw nae sic graith in
     his ain poor country; and the laird, scorning to hae his country
     put down without a word for its credit, swore, like a gude
     Scotsman, that he had mair candlesticks, and better candlesticks,
     in his ain castle at hame, than were ever lighted in a hall in
     Cumberland."

When the laird welcomed the Englishman on an unexpected visit shortly
after, his purse and credit were both at stake, for he had nothing of
more value than some tin sconces. But M'Aulay was helped out of the
dilemma, to his own surprise, by his retainer, Donald:

     "'Gentlemans, her dinner is ready, _and her candles are lighted,
     too_,' said Donald.

     "The two English strangers, therefore, were ushered into the hall,
     where an unexpected display awaited them. Behind every seat stood
     a gigantic Highlander, holding in his right hand his drawn sword,
     and in the left a blazing torch.... 'Lost, lost,' said Musgrave
     gaily--'my own silver candlesticks are all melted and riding on
     horseback by this time, and I wish the fellows that enlisted were
     half as trusty as these.'"

Another Scott scene, chosen from "Waverley," was painted in 1892, and
shows "Bonnie Prince Charlie" at the moment when the young chevalier is
entering the ballroom at Holyrood, with flowers strewn at his feet.
This, one of the last of Pettie's works, is one of the most brilliant
and energetic in its colour scheme.

The last years of Pettie's life were lean years for the painter of
genre. The period preceding 1890 marked the climax of the prejudice
against the "literary idea" in paint. It was a prejudice somewhat
unjust, for there is nothing to prevent the subject-picture from being
true art, any more than the subject-poem from being poetry. At the same
time there was a natural reaction after the banalities of the
mid-Victorian painters of genre on the one hand, and the over-wrought
preciousness of the pre-Raphaelites on the other.

Pettie had often painted portraits for his own pleasure, and in these
lean years they became to some extent a necessity. His portrait work is
naturally not so well known as his subject-painting, yet now and then
he produced things that in sheer power and interest of colour and
technique rank among his highest achievements. One of them is his own
portrait, now in the Tate Gallery, which is masterly in its brushwork,
with a Rubens-like quality in its rich impasto of brilliant colour, its
fine amber tones, and its translucent carnations. Another of his finest
portraits is that of Sir Charles Wyndham, in his character of David
Garrick at the moment of recognizing Ada--"If I had but known." It is
not only a brilliant portrait, but a magnificent piece of
characterization, summing up and seizing all the intensity of the
actor's emotion at the most dramatic moment of the play. It required a
great actor so to express, almost in silence, by the look of a moment,
that world of sorrow and regret. It was a great painter who could catch
and throw upon his canvas the poignant emotion of an "instant made
eternity."

The greatness of Pettie's art owes much to his strong personality. His
art was the immediate response to his own vigorous nature, and rarely
has an artist's temperament been more absolutely reflected in subject as
well as style. A painting of action was to Pettie, vigorous and robust,
as natural a fulfilment of his own spirit as was an exquisite dreamy
nocturne to Whistler, the fragile man of nerves and sentiment. Nature
and inclination led Pettie to the dramatic motive, the treatment of
anecdote, the representation of the "brute incident." He loved romance;
he delighted in costly stuffs, in frills and ruffles, silks and satins,
the glitter of a sword, the sheen of military accoutrements. His work
shows the possession of that quality which the formal critics of
literature call vision. He actually saw the things that he painted, as
they really were, in their own atmosphere, whether of the seventeenth
century or of fifty years ago, whether they were things of State, plots
and deep-laid treachery, or things of romance--the tragedies and humours
of life, whether in palace, camp, or country lane. His pictures are
quick and alive--_une tranche de la vie_. It is no mean art that can
give on one canvas the whole spirit and circumstance of a period in
history.

Though Pettie's subjects make a universal appeal, his claim to greatness
must rest on something higher than this. The great picture depends for
its greatness not on its subject, but on a combination of inherent
qualities of line, form, colour, and chiaroscuro. The greatest of these,
the very language of the painter, is colour; and in colour Pettie
excelled. As a young student in Edinburgh he used to visit George Paul
Chalmers at his lodgings, and stay talking with him till he had to
remain all night. So they would retire to bed, still talking, till they
fell asleep; and, says Chalmers' biographer, "their talk was all of
colour." Whether in shadow or light, Pettie's colour has, in a high
degree, those qualities of resonance and vibration which distinguish the
masters of this essential of the painter's craft. He loved colour not
only for its full brilliance, its magnificent contrasts, its satisfying
opulence, but also for its suave delicacy, its possibilities of subtle
orchestration. It is as a great colourist that he will live.

In a brief note like this, intended mainly as an introduction to an
admirable series of reproductions of Pettie's work, it is impossible to
picture the man, or to analyze adequately his work and his methods. I
should like, however, to add here two extracts from unpublished letters
by him, which have recently come into my hands and throw some light on
the man and his attitude towards his work. To a question about the
number of versions of his picture "The Laird," he writes as follows:

     "In April, 1878, I sold to Mr. E. F. White, the dealer, _three_
     canvases, one a blot of colour, my first idea, a few inches long.
     The second was a finished sketch, which was carried on at the same
     time as the picture; and the third, the picture now in Manchester.
     It was my habit at that time (and is so still, to some extent) to
     design my subject-pictures first by a blot of colour, then by a
     large study, generally half the size of the picture. On this I try
     any alterations or variety of effect during the progress of the
     larger picture, sometimes finishing as highly as the principal
     one."

The second letter, of March 11, 1873, shows him indignant at an opinion,
quoted to him by Sir Frederick Mappin, that he was getting into the
hands of dealers and hurrying his work under pressure from them:

     "Fortunately, or unfortunately, members of my profession who make
     any mark at all are the subject of much criticism and talk which
     is often presumptuous, wrong, or utterly foolish. None knew this
     better, I dare say, than John Phillip, your old friend. I have
     never desired the favour of critics and newspaper men, thinking,
     with Byron, that 'a man must serve his time to every trade save
     censure. Critics all are ready-made.' I have to look to members of
     my own profession for position and honour in it. It is therefore
     with me a matter of the highest importance that my pictures should
     be as good as I can make them, and thoroughly well studied. I
     should be unworthy indeed if money influenced me in the smallest
     degree as regards the _quality_ of my work.... In conclusion,
     let me assure you that while I am by no means inclined to be
     self-confident in my own powers, yet I have judgment to see that
     being consciously true to my art I need not fear in the long run
     to receive my due from my profession and from the public as well."

Some critics--by no means all, for he had his meed of praise--have
abused Pettie's work in his lifetime and since; the storied idea always
their stumbling-block. But painters--and I have spoken with many whose
own art is at the opposite pole to Pettie's in aim and method--are
always enthusiastic in their homage to his colour and workmanship. I
venture to think that no painter, however modern, and no critic, however
biassed, could stand in front of that little portrait head in the Tate
Gallery and honestly refrain from admiration and respect. Pettie need
not fear to receive his due.

I have said little of the man himself. By his death in 1893 the world
lost not only a fine painter, but one of the most honest, loyal, and
generous of mankind. When writing Pettie's biography a year or two ago,
I asked a well-known artist, who had been his life-long friend, for any
recollection that would lend "atmosphere" to my memoir. He gave me
several reminiscences, telling tale after tale of Pettie's cheeriness,
loyalty, and unselfishness, and he ended: "Have you ever seen John
Pettie's portrait of himself in the Aberdeen Gallery? It's all pure and
luminous, all rich coral and amber and gold. That's the atmosphere you
must suggest. Pettie was pure and honest through and through. His nature
was all amber and gold."

                                                      MARTIN HARDIE.


  [Illustration: The Vigil]


  [Illustration: The Step]


  [Illustration: A Drum-head Court-Martial]


  [Illustration: Treason]


  [Illustration: Rejected Addresses]


  [Illustration: Ho! Ho! Old Noll!]


  [Illustration: A Sword-and-Dagger Fight]


  [Illustration: Two Strings to her Bow]


  [Illustration: Disbanded]


  [Illustration: Portrait of Sir Charles Wyndham as David Garrick]


  [Illustration: The Clash of Steel]


  [Illustration: A Storm in a Teacup]


  [Illustration: Grandmother's Memories]


  [Illustration: The Chieftain's Candlesticks]






End of Project Gutenberg's John Pettie, R.A., H.R.S.A., by Martin Hardie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN PETTIE, R.A., H.R.S.A. ***

***** This file should be named 37088.txt or 37088.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/0/8/37088/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
