The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dales of Arcady, by Dorothy Una Ratcliffe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Dales of Arcady

Author: Dorothy Una Ratcliffe

Release Date: August 14, 2011 [EBook #37086]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DALES OF ARCADY ***




Produced by Al Haines










THE

DALES OF ARCADY



BY

DOROTHY UNA RATCLIFFE




ERSKINE MACDONALD, LTD.

LONDON, W.C.1




_All Rights Reserved_

_First published November 1918_




DEDICATED TO

THE FIRST YORKSHIREMAN I SET EYES ON

DADDY




  CONTENTS


  Prologue
  Daleshire
  On Otley Chevin
  The Song of Nidderdale
  Song of the Mists
  Wander-Thirst
  The Road
  The Swaling of the Moor
  The Moors in Summer
  My Herbary
  Rushes
  Satan and I
  To the Wind
  Saadi and the Rose
  The Difference
  Song of the Primroses
  Lilies
  The Pear-Tree
  Beggar's Gold
  On Early Rising
  Jewels
  Bargaining
  Song of Good-Bye
  King Yesterday
  Kissing
  Philosophy
  A Thrush's Song
  A February Day
  Laus Deo
  "Past-Ten-O'Clock-Land"
  To Memory
  A War Prayer for a Little Boy
  Star-Scandal
  The First of July
  "The Ideal Man"
  To the Coming Spring
  Question
  The Dales of Arcady
  A War-time Grace
  Queen Mab's Awakening




PROLOGUE

_The youngest Goddess sat in a corner of the Universe and sulked.

For aeons, she had watched the older Goddesses play each in turn with
the Earth-Ball, and every time the Ball passed her way, someone said,

"She is too young, and, if she played with the Ball, might injure it."

Another added,

"Even our honourable Sister E---- created baleful Etna in her ardent
desire to give a beauteous mountain to flowering Sicily, and C----,
when she designed the azure Mediterranean, raised her little finger all
too hurriedly, causing the whirlpool so dreaded by Grecian sailors."

But the youngest Goddess had waited long and was becoming mutinous.

Her great grey eyes, like silent moorland tarns fringed with shadowy
larches, were fixed on the handiwork of the Goddess who at that moment
held the Ball.

She noticed the blue line thoughtfully traced across a vast tract of
land, the line men call the River Amazon, and she watched the Designer
proudly hold the Ball aloft to show her handiwork to her sisters.

"Surely it is the finest river we have yet traced!"

"Nay! let me see it."

"Can it be greater than that which Mortals call the Ganges?"

Then, as the Designer of the Amazon threw the Ball above the head of
the youngest Goddess toward the lap of a weary, responsible-looking
sister, the youngest Goddess leapt above the little silvern stars, and
caught it in her lithe white arms.

A look of consternation went round the Universe.

"She is too young to play!"

But the youngest Goddess claspt the Ball to her breast.

"Let me play, just once," she pleaded.  "I will make no earthquakes, no
volcanoes, no geysers, nothing that could spoil the beauty of the Ball."

Then an old Goddess--so old that she could remember God calling order
out of chaos, hobbled towards her.

"Child! thou hast seized the Ball, and play with it thou wilt, but
disturb not the handiwork of thine elder sisters.  Thou canst pattern
only where they have not worked."

So the youngest Goddess held the Ball up to the glance of God to get a
great light upon it, and by chance found one small space covered with
heather and bilberry, a wild sad waste.

"Here, I may play!  Oh! my sisters, I would make something rarer and
more beautiful of my little wild heath than any of you have dreamed of
for other parts of the Ball."

Lovingly she laid her outstretched hand upon the bosom of the moorland,
and when she lifted it the uplands bore the soft imprint, and a little
river flowed where each finger had rested.

Thus were created

  Airedale,
  Wharfedale,
  Nidderdale,
  Wensleydale, and
  Swaledale.

And because the fingers of the youngest Goddess quivered with pleasure
they are merry little dancing rivers, and even play underground as they
ripple to the Ouse.

In this wise she fulfilled her desire to make something rarer and more
beautiful of her moorland waste than her sisters had ever dreamed of
for any other part of the Ball.

But, being very young, she boasted of her wondrous achievement, and, as
a punishment, the other Goddesses prevented her from ever playing with
the Ball again.

That is the reason there is only one Daleshire._




  DALESHIRE

  To E. A. B.

  When sad home-longings, like little waifs,
    Come to my heart, in a stranger-land,
  No thought of a house sweeps over me,
    No pleasant thorp does my heart demand;
      For the great blue open wold it cries,
      For the road that over the moorland lies.

  For heather lands where the plovers wing,
    Where frail mists gather about the hills
  Like mystic shapes that eerily cling,
    Where the air is hushed for the snipe-loved rills:
      All these my tired heart greets as "Home,"
      When and wherever I'm forced to roam.

  In the dales the pollarded willows flower:
    I hear the wings of a mating thrush;
  The river has gained its spated hour,
    Its mad, magnificent, tumbling rush;
      Ready to break their hearts or sing,
      My own sweet dales are expecting spring.

  No flower-girt cottage means home to me,
    No stately, splendid ancestral pile,
  No cosy house builded pleasantly
    Does my wandering-weary heart beguile,
      But the homesick heart of me longs to hail
      My county of lovering moor and dale!

  BEAMSLEY BEACON.




  ON OTLEY CHEVIN

  Over the rough-hewn limestone wall,
  I watched the serpenting river crawl
  Adown the dale, thro' dimpled fields,
  Daisy-brimmed, where Almscliffe shields
      With rocky crest
  The lambs that play on the old Earth's breast.

  Gently I felt God's hand in mine,
  As the sun came forth with a strength benign:
  "_I have one request to make, dear God:
  That when my body is 'neath the sod,
      My spirit still
  May over this country roam at will._"

  On the wings of the wind I heard Him sigh:
  "Unheedingly many--so many--pass by,
  Tho' the world is full of My fairest thought,
  Of all that My servant Time hath wrought,
      It is so rare
  To hear that My work is surpassing fair."

  "_O!  Grant my prayer, and let me stay
  In this land where Thy little rivers stray,
  For I love them, God, with a love so true,
  Remembering they are a part of You.
      O!  Speak and bless!_"
  And the wind from the uplands echoed "Yes."

  WHARFEDALE.




  THE SONG OF NIDDERDALE

  As I came past the Brimham Rocks
    I heard the thrushes calling,
  And saw the pleasant, winding Nidd
    In peaty ripples falling.
  Its banks were gay with witching flowers,
    And all the folk did hail
  Me back again so cheerily
    To bonnie Nidderdale.

  The blackbirds in the birchen holts
    The live-long day were singing,
  Where countless azure hyacinths
    Their perfumed bells were ringing.
  And Guisecliff stands in loneliness
    Between the moor and vale,
  Protecting with its rocky scaur
    My bonnie Nidderdale.

  And as I passed thro' Pateley Brigg,
    A woman carolled blithely,
  And up and down the cobbled streets
    The bairnies skipped so lithely.
  The sky was blue, and silken clouds,
    Each like an elfin sail,
  Swept o'er the waking larchen woods
    Of bonnie Nidderdale.

  Where grey-stone dykes, and greyer garths
    Look down on Ramsgill village,
  The thieving, gawmless, gay tomtits
    The little gardens pillage.
  Grey Middlesmoor is perched upon
    The fellside azure pale,
  A mist-girt, lonely sentinel
    O'er bonnie Nidderdale.

  Above the dowly intake lands
    The great wide moor is calling,
  Of heathered bens and brackened glens,
    Where peat-born rills are brawling.
  O! land of ever-changing skies,
    Where wild winds storm and wail,
  There is nowhere a land more loved
    Than bonnie Nidderdale.

  NIDDERDALE.




  SONG OF THE MISTS

  When Twilight beckons from the ghyll
  We follow, follow up the hill;
  Garth, holt, and meadow we caress,
  Enwreathing all with loveliness;
  Small, silver, mauve-blue butterflies
  Are born of our brief summer sighs;
  Frail harebells in our arms we bring,
  To curtsey to the reigning ling;
  Bairnies who watch for us to rise
  Steal azure from us for their eyes;
  And poets find their Land of Dreams
  Lost in the moonlight of our streams.

  THE HOLE OF HORCUM, NEAR WHITBY.




  WANDER-THIRST

  There's a drop of Romany blood in me,
    And days there are when it swirls and leaps
  Like a river's race or a surging sea,
    Stirring to life all my calmer deeps.
      Then wandering, wandering must I go
      And the great, wide, open places know.

  For out in the world the woods are awake,
    And I hear the voice of the calling Wind,
  My wonderful wooer, my rough, sweet mate,
    And follow I must!  Perchance I'll find
      His whip that drives the clouds o'er the fells,
      And cracks in the corrie, like short, sharp bells.

  The wild Ever-during is calling for me,
    A missel's song and a curlew's cry,
  Blent with a rivulet's minstrelsy,
    And the crooning voice of the fir-top's sigh.
      'Tis the great god Pan that I seek to find
      Borne on the wings of my lover Wind.

  "O! make me one with the wondrous earth,
    God of the woods and the laughing rills!
  Make me one with the lucent mirth
    Of the Sun as he rides o'er the gorse-loved hills.
      When I am gone and my singing is mute
      Give to my Lover my silent lute."

  ROSEBERRY TOPPING.




  THE ROAD

  Over the moor in the velvet dusk
    Mysteriously it lies.
  White thro' the heath and the swart fir woods
    White 'neath the twilit skies.

  'Tis hid in the folds of the purple hills,
    Seeking a fern-fringed burn:
  But it mounts again, then is lost once more,
    With a tremulous, misting turn.

  Where blue mists gather beneath the moon
    It shows as a silvern stream.
  O Path of Life, you are out of sight,
    And lost in a wistful dream.

  JUGGER HOWE DALE.




  THE SWALING* OF THE MOOR

  Oh!  Moorland in September
  To love and to remember.

  The air is still and sunlit,
    The moor's a russet bed,
  The bracken's turning beryl,
    The whortle leaves are red.

  Here stand five sister pine-trees,
    Gold-nimbussed by the sun;
  And near, a slender rowan,
    Its scarlet reign begun.

  A runnel near is singing
    A song of liquid glee,
  A saucy, joyous blackbird
    Tilts bubbling notes at me.

  Then in a magic circle
    Seven thick white smokes upcurl,
  And forks of flame triumphant
    Like crimson flags unfurl.

  They rise with grace, and slowly--
    Flower incense from the ling,
  Repaying summer splendour
    By an autumn offering.

  Oh!  Moorland in September
  To love and to remember.

  WEST END, BLUBBERHOUSES.

* The annual burning of the heather.




  THE MOORS IN SUMMER

  Up to the moorlands a lingtit has flown--
  (Another meadow has yet to be mown
  Before the sun goes under the hill).
  I will hie me down, for a drink, to the rill:
  A wheatear mimics the whinchat's call,
  And a cuckoo cries from the Woods of Wath
  As a heron soars over the verdant strath,
  And an ousel pipes from the grey stone wall.
          I drink in a dream--
  The water flows from a Fairy Stream.
      For the smell of the ling my heart is a-yearn,
      And the sharp, sweet tang of a moorland burn.

  The lingtit waited anent a gate
  Where foxgloves held their midsummer fete,
  Then on she sped o'er the feathery green
  Of the bracken fronds, flying beneath and between,
  Till she reached a dyke where the bents and moors
  Stretched out to the sky in a rolling sea
  Of wave upon wavelet of purpling glee,
  O'er a land where the wistful lapwing lures.
          I sought to rest
  On the moorland's soft, sweet, heathery breast,
      When out of the bilberries, spick and clean,
      A small man stepped, in a coat of green.

  He bowed to the earth, with an old-world grace,
  Then lifted his eyes to my sun-tanned face:
  "_So you are the Mortal who drank from our rill,
  A cordial welcome to Bilberry Hill!_"
  He peered again, and he watched mine eyes,
  Then turning, he whistled the lapwing's note.
  For a moment the melody seemed to float
  O'er the heather; and then with increased surprise
          I saw a troop
  Of little green men around me group.
      They all bowed low, "I thought you had fled
      The Yorkshire Uplands, green men!" I said.

  They smiled at each other.  Their leader broke
  The hush of the heather, and thus he spoke:
  "_Ling-men! her eyes are the eyes of the fells,
  Grey as the clouds and blue as the bells
  Of the harebell.  See! how they flash and play
  As the rivulet does 'neath the rowan and birk;
  'Tis a glance in which there's loving a-lurk;
  A glance that only is born on the brae.
          Ling-men!  I am sure
  A changeling is she, and belongs to the moor.
      Her way she lost as a weeny bairn.
      Men found her, and town-ways they made her learn.
  Capture her heart so she cannot roam
  Far away from her grouse-loved home,
  Weave from the cottony grasses a chain
  That will pull at her heart with a wild, dear pain;
  Fashion a gyve from the wings of the lark,
  Manacles make from the bumble-bees' croon,
  To keep her a captive from June to June,
  To render her ours in the light, in the dark!_"

          They wove a spell
  Which encircled me round from fell to fell.
      O! it bound my heart for ever and aye,
      To the lands where the Bilberry Ling-men play.

  DALLOWGILL MOOR.




  MY HERBARY

  I know a little garden very old,
    High-walled, with wandering paths of greenest box;
  Beyond the doorway lies the rolling wold,
    The open moorland, and the Brimham Rocks.

  Here find a home all nigh-forgotten herbs;
    The sage and rosemary nod side by side;
  A giant lavender no pruning curbs,
    With us each year the honesties abide.

  Under a hawthorn, ruby-gemmed in May,
    A bank of marjorams lie at their ease;
  Here, lad's-love sigh their fragrant hearts away,
    Whilst rippling lieds of water never cease.

  Beside the cherry-tree the balsams flower,
    The rue and mint bloom out a life-time meek;
  A pleasant place it is at sunrise hour,
    When sportful finches wing in hide-and-seek.

  And where the aged, moss-grown sundial lies,
    The peacock pert unfolds his wheel-rim tail,
  Showing a hundred jewelled Argus eyes:
    With harsh, shrill cry he bids the day "All hail."

  More is he fitted for the fountained sward
    Than for my herbary of butterflies;
  No!  I proclaim the lovelier throstle, Lord,
    The only one my simples recognise.

  PATELEY BRIDGE, NIDDERDALE.




  RUSHES

  Rushes by the river
    Rear their heads of brown;
  In the wind they quiver
    With a warning frown.
  "Do you want them, Fairest?
    At thy feet they lie;
  They were guarding, Rarest,--
    Sentinels!--They die."

  Wild things are not willing
    To be captive ta'en:
  "Cutting's almost killing,"
    Is their sad refrain.
  "Rushes in their beauty
    Greenly-proud should stand:
  Guarding is their duty--
    River from the land."

  DARLEY, NIDDERDALE.




  SATAN* AND I

  To-day there is no one as happy as I,
  Who am free of the hills, of the dales, of the sky,
  As I ride o'er the moors while the lapwings cry.

  I ride thro' the whin, watch the rabbits run,
  Then slowly I turn to bask in the sun--
  Then gallop away o'er the crest, like fun.

  And Satan, you fiend, with your knowing ways
  And tricks, that you dream of for days and days,
  And mem'ries of maddening hours of the chase;

  Do you feel the liberty of the wind,
  That wakes the fern-land with kisses kind,
  And seeks with caresses our lips to find?

  To-day, for us both to be out is joy,
  Tho' I am a girl with the soul of a boy,
  And you are a horse, whom the spurs annoy.

  To just be alive is a blessing rare,
  In a world of beauty, endlessly fair;
  For Satan and I, we have no care.

  ALMSCLIFFE CRAG, WHARFEDALE.

* The name of my horse.




  TO THE WIND

  Strong, powerful Sweetheart-Wind,
    In tireless love-storm surging;
  Great, bold, tempestuous Wind,
    Ever thy passion urging.

  Hold me close in thine arms,
    O! strengthening ecstasy:
  Wild, sweet, capturing arms--
    Love!  I am yearning for thee.

  Eyes, hair, bosom caress,
    My rowan-red lips now kiss;
  Life-giving, wilful caress,
    O! marvellous moorland bliss.

  Great, strong lover o' mine,
    I long for thy grand embrace;
  Fierce, brave lover o' mine,
    I yield to thee my heart's grace.

  GREENHOW HILL.




  SAADI AND THE ROSE

  O summer, with thy magic gift of flowers
    And soft bird voices, musicking the breeze,
    While yet thy roses stir the lazy air
  My soul wings back thro' centuries, as hours.

  It journeys till it 'lights within a court
    Where roses riot o'er veined-marble walls,
    Where peacocks strut along the broad white steps,
  Or over broideries by fair hands wrought.

  Within the palace, divanned, rests a king,
    Who watches listlessly the fountain's jet;
    And at his feet the poet Saadi stands
  And hears intent th' captured bulbuls sing.

  A slave with soul on freedom bent he stands,
    His eyes ablaze with restless ecstasy,
    While all around him breathes magnificence
  Of power imperial over many lands.

  Within his slender hand he holds a rose;
    Raising his head, he murmurs, "_Mighty King!
    Do good unto thy servant while thou canst:
  Thou may'st not always mitigate his woes._

  "_Like to this fleeting glory, carmined deep,
    The season of thy power is transient:
    Do good, whilst yet thou canst--'before thine eyes
  Close in thy last, forgetting, silent sleep._"

  O blood-red rose!  Thy petals bring to me
    The sunlit beauty of the Persian Court,
    The voice of Saadi, pleading with the king
  His freedom granted on thy crimson plea.

  A ROSE-GARDEN IN AIREDALE.




  THE DIFFERENCE

  When the factories all are silenced,
    And night brings her balm of sleep,
  What are your last dear waking thoughts
    Ere you drift into slumber deep?

  Why, Darling Mine! they are all of work,
    As your mind reviews the day:
  Of the men you meet, of progress made,
    Of struggles to make your way.

  But I--when I nestle among the sheets,
    Ere sleep my tired eyes woo,
  Just count and repeat the loving words
    That have fall'n to-day from you!

  AIREDALE.




  SONG OF THE PRIMROSES

  Listen to the infant breeze,
  Clutching at the nippled trees,
    Where our yellow flowers are blowing,
    Where the rivulet is flowing.

  Over all the blue-cupped sky
  Silver brooding clouds swim by;
    See!  The firstling swallow flying,
    Later, owlets will be crying.

  Come and mark the painter sun
  Daub the earth with golden fun;
    Hear the larches' fingers snapping,
    As if goblin hands were clapping.

  Smell the rain-sweet, thymy earth,
  Feel the wonder of rebirth!
    Far away a cuckoo's calling,
    Notes that sound like twin bells falling.

  Then a clearer voice replies
  To his echo ere it dies,
    And the blackbirds' voices mingle
    With th' Eistedfodd in the dingle.

  Gold-green poplars slowly wave
  O'er the Winter's mossy grave;
    Ferns are pointing curly fingers
    Where the dead year's bracken lingers.

  We have seen a hedgehog hide
  Prickle-less to greet his bride;
    Watched the baby otter shiver
    Ere he plunged into the river.

  We are critics of the bees,
  Watch how they despoil and seize
    From each cowslip saffron bounty;
    Uncaught robbers of the county!

  All the keenings of the bat,
  Whimperings of the water-rat;
    All the hopes of sister flowers
    Come to us by gossip showers.

  Tortoise-shelled butterflies,
  On their dew-pearl'd wingful sighs,
    Bear the news of elfin squabbles;
    "Wounded Oberon still hobbles."

  We are darlings of the Spring,
  All her secrets she doth bring,
    Runes of magic she discloses
    To her confidant-Primroses.


  ENVOI

  We shall feel her joy-winged sigh,
  When she hears the Summer's cry:
    We shall droop and die of grieving,
    When our lovely Spring is leaving.

  LITTONDALE.




  LILIES

  When I am old, so very old
    That all my own have passed away,
  And I await Life's evening-gold,
    A little figure, lone and grey;
      I'll keep a garden, green and bright,
      Then I'll forget approaching night.

  A garden dear--with quaint-cut yews--
    Bound by a hedge of bronzing beech,
  And just before them I shall choose
    The great white lilies that beseech,
      With upturned faces, pure and staid,
      Love from the little Mother Maid.

  And close beside the lichened wall,
    Lilies, aflame like scarlet fire,
  Shall watch the little swallows fall
    From out their nestlet in the byre;
      And where the path strays to the stream,
      The golden ones shall dying dream.

  Then where the garden greets the wood,
    A host of lily-bells shall ring
  Their message clear that "all is good
    Where God reigns over everything."
      My garden-beauty, all shall see,
      Is mirrored from Eternity.

  A GARDEN IN AIREDALE.




  THE PEAR-TREE

  A rain of petals the pear-trees give,
  As a pearly toll for the right to live.

  Fragile petals that gently fall,
  Like tears down the face of the old grey wall.

  Around the bole, where the grasses grow,
  Is a circle white as of melting snow.

  An enchanted circle, flower-entwined,
  Where hyacinth fingers the grasses bind.

  The youngling thrushes soon learn how
  To alight and shake the flowers from each bough.

  The swallows tell their babes such tales!
  That the tree is a ship with flower-white sails,

  Anchored to Earth in the harbour of May;
  But one moonless night she will sail away,

  And a prim green tree will take the place
  Of the phantom ship with its sails of lace.

  Then in autumn the Orchardist Time will come,
  And bear the fruit away to his home.

  And later on he will heave a sigh,
  That the little white tree some day must die.

  So I write this verse to the little Pear-tree,
  That both be remembered--it and me.

  COXWOLD.




  BEGGAR'S GOLD

  I

  Around me sounded effort manifold,
    As creaking cranes swung ponderously slow,
  At intervals I heard the hiss of steam,
    The rhythmic beating of an iron's blow:
  I thought,--this energy will sometime be
    Transmuted into that which all men crave,
  The magic metal, Gold, great Titan Gold,
    Whom men make monarch when he should be slave.
  And as I mused, above the jarring clang,
    I heard a faint sweet sound of flutterings,
  A tender movement, musical and low,
    As of a fledgeling trying its young wings.
  A gentle zephyr blew the casement wide,
    A woman glided past the tapestry,
  With russet golden hair, all gowned in gold.
    She looked about her hesitatingly;
  I heard her voice as if thro' beechen boughs,
    Caressive as a moor-born singing burn,
  And thro' it ran the lisping of the pines,
    The lovely lilt of some gold-dying fern.


  II

  (She sang):
    "Ye seek the gold of the city;
      Ye cheat, ye brag, ye lie;
    In quest of its sordid yellow
      Ye hunger until ye die.
    I offer ye gold for the having:
      The mint of October's glow,
    To warm your souls with its wonder,
      Your souls, in their greed-bound snow.
    Gold of the hedges I offer,
      Marvellous gold of the ghyll,
    Rowan-red gold from the forest,
      Take from me, ye who will.
    Gold ye need for your bodies,
      O men of the smoke-chained town.
    But know, that my gold's for the asking,
      Gold for a Beggar's Crown."


  III

    She silently sped
      As a star at morn
    In the saffron track,
      Of the day, dew-born,
    Leaving a longing
      Intensely strong
    To own for myself
    The gold of the song.
    The city I'll leave
    With footstep bold,
    To seek for myself
      The Beggar's Gold.


  IV

  I woke and found a leaf upon the floor,
  And two more golden leaves outside the door.

  AIREDALE.




  ON EARLY RISING

  THE LOVER:

    Why not rise with dawn, my Lady?
      Why miss these sweet hours?
    Come with me: the ghyll is shady,
      Carpeted with flowers;
      Why miss these sweet hours?

    Now thou liest a-bed, my jewel,
      How canst thou still sleep?
    To encase thyself is cruel--
      Beauty thus to keep.
      How canst thou still sleep?

  HIS LADY:

    At this hour, my simple lover,
      I prefer to rest
    Than to watch the tireless plover
      Rise from dewy nest;
      I prefer to rest.

    Beauty such as mine, my lover,
      (This I know is right)
    Even thou wilt soon discover
      Is more meet for night
      (This I know is right).

  THE SONG-MAKER:

    In the daytime chirp the thrushes;
      But the nightingale
    Waits until the moonlit hushes
      To pour forth her tale;
      Wiser nightingale!




  JEWELS

  O!  Gold I lack; I am a man
  Who cannot give as others can;
  No costly gems of value rare
  Are mine to give, my Lady Fair!

  Yet would I give, and of my best,
  So delve the kingdom of mine eyes:
  What say'st thou to a rope of pearls
  Strung from the cirro-clouded skies?

  A sunlit beck, just after rain,
  Should from its ripples lend a chain
  Of sparkling diamonds, very meet
  To grace thy wrist, my Lady Sweet.

  A peaty tarn, lost 'mong the hills,
  Of beryl tint should make a ring;
  The moors should yield a coronet
  Of amethyst, from summer ling.
        *      *      *      *      *
  _Rubies?_  Already thou hast two!
  They are the gems for which I sue.

  RIBBLESDALE.




  BARGAINING

  There are many, many forests lying north, south, east, and west,
    There are many, many rivers moving slowly to the sea,
    But there's a wood of budding beech that claims the heart of me,
  And there's a little singing beck that falls from heathered crest.

  O! I would give the universe to own that singing stream,
    And watch the stars a-hiding from the rosy-fingered morn,
    While cuckoos wake the fellside, and daffodils are born--
  O! any one can have the world, so I may keep my stream--

  Yet would I barter beechen wood and little singing beck
  If I could fold my arms once more around my sweetheart's neck.

  NIDDERDALE.




  SONG OF GOOD-BYE

  The ship is speeding fast from out the bay,
  Instead of thine, I feel a kiss of spray;
  My face is lashed by salt winds from the sea,
  My eyes are wet with parting now from thee.
    O Husband Sweetheart! send to me a thought--
    Some loving word, perchance my lips have taught!

  The evening fades to purple, darkly blue,
  The air is chill, a few white stars creep through
  The steely buckler of the northern sky;
  One lonely sound recurs--a sew-mew's cry.
    O Husband Sweetheart! send thy heart to me
    Across this tireless, surging, tossing sea!

  To-night we're severed, many miles apart:
  I wonder, canst thou rest, my Dearest Heart?
  In Court of Dreams perhaps we'll briefly meet
  And kiss upon the Borderland of Sleep.
    O Husband Sweetheart! say for me a prayer--
    God give you peace, and have you in His care!

  OFF THE YORKSHIRE COAST.




  KING YESTERDAY

  You and King Yesterday both have fled
  To the Land-of-the-beautiful-days-that-are-dead.

  How full of bird music the dewy-fair Morn
  When Yesterday, King of the Past, was born;

  How rosy with roses the passionate noon
  When you and King Yesterday ruled sweet June;

  How royal with splendour the crimsoning west
  As Yesterday bravely grew old with zest;

  And eve was a glamour of emerald light
  When Yesterday greeted the world "Good-night."

  Oh!  You and King Yesterday gently wean
  My thoughts to the Country-it-might-have-been.




  KISSING

  Thou canst not kiss without consent,
  For know, dear Thief, a kiss is lent;
  And if thou takest one to-day,
  With interest must thou repay:
  One now, next week I'll count in fives,--
  Thou'lt owe some scores in Paradise!

  TANFIELD, WENSLEYDALE.




  PHILOSOPHY

  Some tell me "_Life is a weariful thing,
  That Sorrow remains, while joy takes wing._"
  But Sorrow and I already have met:
  His face is wan and his lips are set;
  He cometh and goeth on silent feet,
  Yet between his visits are moments sweet,
  Moments that come like a blackbird's dart,
  When Happiness holds me close to his heart;
  When I sense the rapture of swinging skies
  And know the thrill of the spring's surprise,
  As I lie on the mothering Earth's deep breast
  And clasp my tremulous bosom, lest
  Some unknown loveliness I might miss,
  Or forgetful be of the West Wind's kiss.

  Like the blackbird's notes in the early hours
  Which fall like a peal of silver flowers,
  Joy rings his bells in my waiting ears,
  And Sorrow departs to his silent meres.
  "_And if he returns?_"--my soul will sing
  Remembering Joy who has taken wing!

  RILSTONE FELL.




  A THRUSH'S SONG

  (To My First Love, Daddy)

  A thrush's call
  Has chanced to fall
  Into my heart
  Where dwell apart
  Dear memories
  Of summer skies,
  Of heartsome days,
  Of flower-fair ways,
  Of kisses shy
  With people high.
  What did I ken
  Of lovers then,
  Of lover-laws,
  Of lover-saws?
  The sweet, sweet earth
  Was giving birth
  To lovely things
  With songs and wings;
  And yonder thrush
  On yonder bush
  Brings home to me
  The little years of memory.




  A FEBRUARY DAY

(_There is a country saying that spring has not come until you can set
your foot on seven daisies at once_)

  "_O!  How do you know
    When spring has come?
  Still falls the snow
    And the birds are dumb._"

  The grass will wear
    A greener tone,
  The thrush will dare
    To carol alone.

  The silver rain
    Will warmly fall,
  The woods will gain
    The blackbird's call.

  But the way to tell,
    And the only way,
  Is to find a dell
    Where the breezes play,

  And seek and seek
    Where the daisy-bloom
  Shows white and meek
    Like a baby moon.

  And when your foot treads
    With tender fear
  On seven white heads,--
    Then spring is here.

  COXWOLD.




  LAUS DEO

  (For My Little God-son)

  God Darling!  Listen to my song,
  The one I sing the whole day long,
  Of thanks to Thee for every good,
  Whether at home, in field, or wood.

  I thank Thee for the lovely spring,
  And for Thy little birds that sing;
  I thank Thee for the summer's sun,
  When 'mong the roses I can run.

  I thank Thee for the sickle time,
  When corn is ripe, and apples prime.
  I thank Thee for the deep white snow,
  When I tobogganing can go.

  I thank Thee for the bright sweet day,
  For hours of love and work and play;
  I thank Thee for the deep blue night
  When I and flower-buds fold up tight.

  NIDDERDALE.




  "PAST-TEN-O'CLOCK-LAND"

"_It was Moonlight Land and Past-ten-o'clock Land and we were in it and
of it._"--KENNETH GRAHAM.

  There's a lovely land that is all your own,
    If your years but number ten,
  Where the cherryblossom's ever in flower,
    And found in "Past-ten-o'clock Glen."

  There's a river with musical water-falls,
    You paddle as long as you please,
  And the daisies don't die as you pick them,
    When found on "Past-ten-o'clock Leas."

  And the rivulet leads to a harbour,
    Full of the quaintest of ships,
  One wish will transport you to China,
    Or other "Past-ten-o'clock Trips."

  Away in dim mountains of amber,
    Which drop sheer down to the waves,
  Fierce brigands, be-weaponed and ear-ringed,
    Live in "Past-ten-o'clock Caves."

  O! the folk understand you and love you,
    You never can do any wrong--
  You can shoot the cat with a catapult,
    Or shout the "Past-ten-o'clock Song."

  You can play you are really an otter,
    And get as wet as you like;
  You can lie in wait as a Redskin does,
    In a deep "Past-ten-o'clock Dyke."

  It's a lovely land that is all your own,
    If you're only ten years old,
  But when you are more, you are apt to forget
    "Past-Ten-o'clock-Dreams of Gold!"

  BARDEN FELL, WHARFEDALE.




  TO MEMORY

  Mem'ry, sweet witch! you brought him to my door.
    I heard you knock, and saw your fingers ope
    The rosy gateway of a lingering hope,
  And I beheld his dear face as of yore.
  You held him by the hand I oft caressed,
    And seemed so small a sprite by his tall side,
    As in his leathern coat you tried to hide,
  The same old coat my cheek so often pressed.

  Then searchingly his deep blue eyes found mine,
    As if to plead against forgetfulness,
    With all the old-time loving kindliness:
  And then you led him back without one sign.
    Sweet little Mem'ry, lead him back once more,
    And, knocking, bring him in, and close the door.




  A WAR PRAYER FOR A LITTLE BOY

  Morning

  The day is just beginning,
    But all the long night through,
  The sailor-men were watching
    Out in the dark night blue.
      Dear God! when my turn comes,
      May my watch be as true.

  Evening

  The long, still night is coming,
    But whilst I've been at play,
  The soldier-men were fighting
    Thro' all the live-long day.
      Dear God! when my turn comes,
      Please keep me brave as they.

  ROBIN HOOD'S BAY.




  STAR-SCANDAL

  One summer eve, my own dear love and I
    Sat arm-entwined beneath a rowan-tree.
  A little wind flew past us with a sigh,
    And all the velvet leaves waved merrily.
  Then, as mine eyes escaped his ardent glance,
    I saw a star peep o'er the purple hill
  And climb up to the topmost branch and dance,
    And wink at its reflection in the rill.
  "_Come, kiss me once, O timorous-hearted Love.
    Full many thousand kisses dost thou owe.
  Prithee but one, thy pretty love to prove;
    No one in all the world shall ever know._"
  No one?  That spying star but told a poet,
    And in a song he let the whole world know it.




  THE FIRST OF JULY 1916

For the Mothers, Wives, and Sweethearts of the 15th West Yorks ("Leeds
Pals")

  I

  'Tis passing wonderful that they,
  The little boys of yesterday,
  Should suddenly become such men
  That England rings with praise of them.
  But tho' their names are writ in blood
  --Deepening crimson flood on flood--
  Their impositions writ awry
  And copybooks are hardly dry;
  And Sweetheart Life had scarcely kissed
  The boy to man, when the blue mist
  Of twilight lifted; and the dawn
  Announced that rosy day was born.

  As pink-curled clouds lit up the sky
  A little gentle breeze whisked by
  Caressing all the poppy-heads--
  Rippling fields of budding reds--
  Splashes of yellow sunned the earth
  Where mustard meadows flowered mirth;
  And cornflowers blue ran out to meet
  The blue around God's Mercy-seat.
  O! all the world and all the sky
  Made it a sacrifice to die.


  II

  'Tis passing wonderful that they,
  The little boys of yesterday,
  Who cuddled to dear Mother-hearts
  With darling rosy-fingered arts,
  Did cheer with strong expectancy
  The shattering artillery;
  And smilingly went o'er the top
  Unflinchingly without a stop
  Into the poppied "No Man's Land."
  Wave after wave, band after band,
  Through the terror of bursting shells,
  Through the noise of a thousand hells,
  Through th' unmanning groans of pain,
  Through the blood of the splendid slain
  Lying under a blue-cupped sky,
  As wave after wave swept bravely by.
  From flowers of blue to the Endless Blue
  Hundreds of souls are passing thro',
  And the poppies weep o'er the red-spilled lives:
  O! at home are the mothers, the waiting wives.


  III

  'Tis passing wonderful that they,
  The little boys of yesterday
  Who played with us, who teased us too,
  Should such tremendous actions do.
  No praise, no honour is too high
  For those who gave so cheerfully:
  Gave up the wonder of the spring,
  Gave up the wealth that summers bring,
  Gave up the gold of autumn's store,
  Leaving us richer than before.

  Unflinching bravery of soul!
  Ring out your splendid deathless toll,
  Ring down the years untiringly
  In the hearts of the children-yet-to-be.
  The carillon of your ideals
  You'll hear again in their sweet peals;
  God grant that we may squarely fight
  For all you held to be upright.

  LEEDS, _July 1st, 1917_.




  "THE IDEAL MAN"

  He should be strong--as strong as Thor of old;
    And faults of strength 'twere better he possessed
    Than quavering mind or any lack of zest
  When the time needs a right arm coolly bold.
  Truth should to him be what the unpent song
    Is to the soaring lark; with kindly thought
    For everything that cold Misfortune's sought;
  With earnest faith to fight a cause proved wrong.

  A heart that finds the best in every man;
    Impatient he should be at all delay
    Or if not giv'n at once his own sweet way--
  (But then a fault or two is Nature's plan),
    Yet I would wish his chiefest fault should be
    A wilfulness to see no fault in me!

  SEMER WATER.




  TO THE COMING SPRING

  Hope and Spring!  You are sisters!

  In my woodlands
    The primroses are peeping
  With pale, sweet golden eyes,
    In spite of Winter's weeping.

  In my woodlands
    A thrush has just swung, dipping,
  In search of his spring voice;
    The trees stand dripping, dripping.

  In my woodlands
    Harsh Winter coldly shivers;
  The windflower, white adventurer,
    With hope of springtime quivers.

  Soon my woodlands,
    Bearing bannerets of Spring,
  Will be every moment musical
    With birds that, mating, sing.

  Hope and Spring!  You are sisters!

  Oh, Spring!  Spring!
    Since the Autumn died in glory,
  How I have yearned for your coming
    Thro' the cloistral fog-bound days,
  Your beauty seemed a story
    That would never be told again.
  Spring! of the pearly cloud-skies
    Soft-curled as a baby's hand,
  Turquoise as children's eyes,
    Of rainbow-tinctured days
  And twittering song of the eaves!

  Spring!  You desired vision,
    The wind in your primrose hair,
  Your eyes, too, weepingly ready,
    Your face, an anemone fair;
  Your train, a burgeoning pattern
    Be-sprent with woodland flowers,
  Blackthorn, daffies, bluebells,
    Marking the flight of our hours.

  Spring!  Tho' it still is Winter,
  In your mystic sleep you smile,
  Yet the primroses and the thrush on wing
  Know that even in sleep you sing;
  You wondrous, envassaling, longed-for Maid!
  Oh!  If Death came now I should be afraid:
  I have longed for you so the dark months thro',
  That I must see the pulsing glory of you;
  And your little hand-maidens in their turn--
  For each at their 'pointed times I yearn.

    Virginal snowdrop,
    Firstling of Spring!
    Crocus, herald of purple and gold,
    Wistful windflowers,
    Celandined stars,
    Every one to my heart I fold.

    Snow-soft blackthorn,
    You wild, fair sweet,
    The scent of you brings
    A flutter of wings;
    And, almond blossom,
    You stole at dawn
    The pale dream vest
    Of the infant morn.

  Of a pool of blue I dream--
  Hyacinths, waving in ripples of blue.
  There is nothing so fair the whole world thro'
  As when quivering sun and quivering wind
  Jocundly, joyously, leapingly find
  A young green wood in a lazuli dream.

  O Spring, if I lay on my dying bed
  I should wait to die, till your glory had fled,
  I could not go ere the cuckoo had cried
  His impudent call to the countryside:
  Not till the swallows had loyally come
  To their nesting place, in my liefest home,
  And then I should wait for the blackbird's note
  To leap from his melody-stirring throat.
  Ah!  And to feel the April rain
  Pattering on my face again.
  God grant that I do not die in the Spring,
  When my whole soul rebels to live and sing;
  As we all must die, so let me die
  When the grey November fogs are nigh;
  Not for a longer space of heaven
  Would I forfeit one day, nay, one single hour,
  One sweet bird-cry, or one haunting flower,
  Of my beautiful, longed-for, fleeting Spring.

  Hope and Spring!  You are sisters!

  'Tis Winter still,
    But you stir in sleep
  Tho' the cold gusts blow
    And the bare trees weep.

  But the early primrose
    And flitting thrush
  Have watched you smile
    And have seen you blush.

  And tho' it is long
    Ere yet you rise,
  And the blue of your glance
    Reflect in the skies;

  My heart is awake
    And ready to sing
  The moment you beckon,
    Sweet, glorious Spring!

  Hope and Spring!  You are sisters!

  PATELEY BRIDGE, NIDDERDALE,




  QUESTION

  O Seats of ancient learning, Philosophers and Sages!
  A child has put a question, which I cannot find in pages
  Of any tome in any land: and so the answer's missed.
  "_Where do all the kisses go, after they are kissed?_"




  THE DALES OF ARCADY

  FIRST DAY

    Hearken!  The South Wind's voice.
  My lover returns, and the valleys rejoice.
  The bees fly upward to watch his flight,
  The butterflies quiver with glad delight,
  As he teasingly touches their jewelled wings.
  O! at his bidding the whitethroat swings
  In thrillant blue.  A thrush's call
  Blends with a blackbird's madrigal.

  I steadily gazed at my silent pen,
  Attempting to keep from my straying ken
  An Eden of woods, of bosoming hills,
  Of verdant hedges, of wandering rills.
        How can one work
  When a Lover amid the flowers will lurk?
  He tip-toes in thro' the window-door,
  And whisks my papers on to the floor;
  With flower-steeped hands he caresses my hair,
  And whispers alluringly,

        "_Fair, most Fair,
    Slip your slender hand in mine, my Sweeting,
    Hear! the skylarks cleave the blue with greeting,
    Hear the blackcap on the thorn at even
    Trill truths that echo to the highest heaven,
    Leave your world of carking care, time-haunted,
    For a country ever spring-enchaunted._"

  He leads me on to the dewy grass,
  Where maiden primroses troop and pass;
  With a gleesome kiss in his arms he swings
  Me up 'twixt his eagle-wide rainbow wings:
  Over a willowy coppice he goes
  Flicking the hedges of milk-white sloes,
  Over the blazon of heralding gorse,
  Deftly he steers his ethereal course
  Over anemone hillocks, o'er leas,
  Hyacinth-dimpled, o'er buttercupped leas,
  Over the ings where forget-me-not eyes
  Borrow the blue of azureal skies;
  Over the meadow-flats, higher and higher,
  Sweeping the strings of the cloud-strung lyre.
  The lilt of the planets is in mine ear,
  Crystal dropping on crystal clear:
        "O Wind, my Lover,
  My mortal eyes must you surely cover:
  Such beauty will make me beauty-blind,
  Protect mine eyes, O my Lover Wind."
  Then, as I lost my indrawn breath,
  He swirled me down to the earth beneath,
  Down thro' the depths of a forest of pine,
  On to a carpet of celandine.
  The goldcrests twittered, the squirrels chased,
  While the lofty pines, brown arms enlaced,
  Lisped a dryad-taught melody, sung by the sea.
  Known in the valleys of Arcady.

  For a little space did my Lover sleep,
  While the gold-mailed sun with me did keep
  A radiant watch; but when Eventide
  In saffron-rose wrapped the woodland side,
  He started up, and he kissed my neck,
  Then, bidding me rise at his instant beck,
  We passed where the sovran oak-trees nod,
  Where never a human foot has trod,
  Where birches sway in slenderest grace,
  That never have seen a mortal's face;
  Where rivulets hasten in sweet surprise,
  A wonder beneath my wond'ring eyes;
  A lakelet trembled beneath my glance,
  The lily-white elfins ceased their dance;
  A cherry-tree flung confetti down,
  And framed for my head a loving crown.
        Soft-toned bells
  Called to each other across the fells.
  While music played on a reeded flute
  Stilled the air, and the birds were mute.

  "O leaf-loving Zephyr, whence cometh the mirth
  Of this melody?  Owns my mothering Earth
  A piper who pipes so alluringly
  Of beauty that is, of beauty to be?
  Onward! o'er thousands of blushet-shy daisies,
  To find this piper of beautiful phrases."

  'Mong flocks of goats, and of leaping lambs,
  The piper sat.  Two fierce-horned rams
  Made a fleecy cushion whereon he sat,
  And a sleeping ewe made a creamy mat
  For his hoofed feet.  His music ceased.
  Green were his eyes, and they seemed well pleased
  As they lit on our forms:

          "_O!  Pan, great Pan!
  This mortal thy kingdom of beauty would span,
  And she would learn of the singing seasons'
  Wonderful featness; of all the reasons.
  The hill and the wood and the rippling rill
  The air with different melodies fill;
  Where bonnibel April latest was sent,
  When May filled the world with her wonderment!
  Who teaches the cuckoo his twin-bell call?
  The opening notes of a festival
  To jubilate the reign of the summer
  Beauteous, queenliest, rosy-robed comer.
          O Pan!  I bring
  A mortal whose soul is afire to sing._"

  Pan smiled--a smile like a twisted oak--
  Then beckoned to me, while the forest spoke,
  "Evoe, great Pan," sang the lark on high,
  "Evoe, great Pan," from the uttermost sky;
  I drew near and stood beside his knee:
  He handed his reeded flute to me,
  And kept his eyes, of a forest green,
  On my trembling hands.  O! well, I ween,
  He knew that my amateur hands were weak,
  For the spirit of me was meek, so meek,
  And his green eyes glimmered with rising glee.
  My masterful Lover whispered to me,
  "_Put your lips to the flute with mine,
  Heedless of self-hood, in song be divine._"
  And placing near mine his golden-sweet mouth,
  A rondeau he sang of the forest's youth.

  Pan spoke at last: "Child! wander and learn
  The lilt of the bird and the song of the burn:
  And when thou hast learned from the burn and the bird
  Thou'lt find me again" (the forest heart stirred).
  "Hail! child from the plaintful Kingdom of Man."
  The mountain-tops shouted, "Evoe, great Pan!"
  The rivers sang deeply, "Evoe, great Pan!"
  And whisperingly I, "Evoe, great Pan!"


  SECOND DAY

  The rose-trees show but a tuft of green
  Where a stern, cold pruning-knife has been,
  But they promise a summer of fragrant wealth:
  How the small buds come to the light by stealth
  Like pixies shy; yet a pruning knife
  Leads every browny-bare branch to life.
        Slowly I passed thro' the rustic gate,
  Where wine-red roses will hold June fete;
  The wind stole out from the blossoming row
  Of the cherry-trees, and he whispered low:

  "_Are you content to be bound by a wall,
  E'en tho' it boundeth things beautiful?
  Tho' cherry and apple bloom over it fall,
  Always it is, and it hath been, a wall.
  'Tis true that thro' it there is a wicket,
  But what can it know of the wild grown thicket
  That grows where its pathway may never wander:
  Out of this garden--the blue land yonder?_"

  And a cuckoo called; and the echo ran,
  "Evoe, Evoe, Evoe, great Pan!"

  Then my Lover lifted me up in his arms,
  And swiftly arose.  How the grey-roofed farms
  Receded into the cup-like earth!
  And I chanted a canzone of Springtime and Birth,
  Which called o'er the sea to the firstling swallow,
  Who flew beside us o'er height and hollow,
  Till others came from their home of the Sun,
  And the farm-folk cried, "Dear Summer's begun."
  Hundreds and thousands followed our flight--
  ALL ENGLAND WILL HAVE A SWALLOW TO-NIGHT.

  By the old elm's portal of Arcady
  My Lover alighted and whispered to me,
  "O lily of laughter!  O sister of flowers!
  Wander alone in Arcadian bowers,
  And I will return when the sun goes down,
  And wing you home to your grey, grey town.
  I kiss your little white hands and feet:
  Farewell!"  And he rose, on wings so fleet
  Over the nests in the cradling larch,
  Over the bow of the rainbow's arch.

  Where conifers grow in fine profusion,
  And birches quiver in sweet confusion,
  Where hawthorn waits with a danseuse grace
  To burst on the scene with her milk-white face,
  And pirouette near some stately spruce,
  Scattering around him pearly dews,
  Where rabbits scamper thro' grasses lush,
  And a pheasant's screech breaks the noon-day hush,
  I journeyed on, till the sun began
  His westering course.

          "Evoe, great Pan!
  Never a note of your pipings to-day
  Has guided my steps thro' the sylvan way.
  O! where must I seek in this Paradise?"
  "Evoe, Evoe," a linnet sighs,
  "Seek where the sisterly marshes are,
  Where the marigold twinkles, a golden star,
  Where willow and alder hide the river,
  Where timid reed-warblers tremble and shiver."
  The sky showed pink thro' the branches grey,
  And then I heard, as if far away,
  A tremulous song, a music of fears
  That was strung together by trills of tears,
  A quivering star glowed, curtained by leaves,
  And the hullets called from some distant eaves.

  I found Pan crouched by the river's edge,
  His hoofed feet hid by the rushy sedge,
  And I listened his plaint.

          "O great god Pan,
  You sing with the broken heart of a man!
  Your song is of Syrinx, who, aeons ago,
  Escaped from your loving.  Alas! that you know
  The music of love, and the music of lack,
  And you mourn for the hours that cannot come back,--
  But I would learn of merrier things:
  The melody murmurs of fluttering wings,
  The secrets that fill the nightingaled glades,
  The music that stirs in the leaf-colonnades."

  He piped for a minute, then, turning to me,
  With a wry, queer smile, said: "In Arcady
  No song goes forth to the listening earth
  That comes not thro' travail and tears to birth:
  The river weeps as it leaves the fell,
  And the note cries out as it mourns the bell;
  The bird that praises the young, fair dawn,
  Sings of his loss on the twilit lawn,
  And those that hymn of the coming spring
  Lament for her too, when she taketh wing.
  The song of songs is of Death and of Love--
  I sing of Syrinx, my own ... lost ... love."
  He piped again, and the blue mists frail
  Swayed in the dusk to the tender wail,
  And I dreamed--till I felt on my damp, moist hair,
  My Love's cool hand, and his whisper, "_Fair_,"
  Then I felt his arms, and I knew the skies,
  Whilst over the mountains I saw Dawn arise,
  And another sweet day its course began,
  While the hidden stars sang, "Evoe, great Pan!"
  And the lark in the blue, "Evoe, great Pan!"
  And wistfully I, "Evoe, great Pan!"




  A WAR-TIME GRACE

  Dear God, your rain and shining sun
  Have all their lovely duties done:
  The rain makes grow the golden wheat
  And so provides the bread we eat.

  The cow gives us the milk we drink
  Because she loves your sun, I think.
  Please, grant that other children may
  Have milk and bread enough this day.

  NIDDERDALE.




QUEEN MAB'S AWAKENING

SCENE: _The Meeting of the Waters, in Bolton Woods, Wharfedale_.

QUEEN MAB _lies sleepily in a mossy hollow, guarded by a quivering
frond of last year's bracken.  After a little yawn she discontentedly
gazes at_ THE THRUSH _who is singing continuously, whilst balancing
himself on a twig of the leafless hawthorn above her._

QUEEN MAB (_almost peevishly for a Queen_):

  Thou saucy bird, to wake me from my slumber,
  The spring still tarries, and I would not wake
  To live thro' cloud-spun days, thro' endless nights;
  To watch the weeping rain, until I too
  Would mix my tears with hers.  To see the hills
  Bow their nude forms beneath the lashing hail,
  To hear the strong trees groan.
        I will not wake.

THE THRUSH (_practising trills between each line and minor arpeggios
after each verse_):

  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    Listen my lay!
  A windflower leapt
    In the hedge to-day.
  One of thy dimples
    Lent its mirth
  To lessen the gloom
    Of the snow-tired earth.
  A white-faced flower's
    In the hedge to-day,
  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    Listen my lay!

QUEEN MAB (_impetuously_):

  Please, hush thy noisy song a little while.
  Maybe a windflower shows her shy white face,
  But I have seen anemones in snow,
  Hiding their eyes (false messengers of Spring),
  Justly ashamed of their own perfidy.
  Therefore, sing softly.

QUEEN MAB _curls herself up among her emerald cushions, closes her
azure eyes, and sleeps for several days_.

THE THRUSH (_his voice a degree sweeter and surer_):

  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    Awake!  Awake!
  A primrose blooms
    In the woodland brake.
  From thy sleepy lips
    Has tumbled a smile
  Which lies a-blossoming
    Near the stile.
  A primrose blooms
    In the woodland brake!
  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    Awake!  Awake!

_A blue tit from a neighbourly silver birch softly mimics the trills
after the last line._

QUEEN MAB (_half opening her eyes_):

  O tiresome bird, one primrose does not bring
  The warm sweet days for which I yearning wait.
  Know, I have seen the hillside amber-pied
  With primroses, and yet a fierce gale swept
  Adown the dale.  Primroses are brave,
  But, tho' they blossom, leave me to my dreams.

_Once more she nestles among the jade-green moss and sleeps for a week._

THE THRUSH (_louder and clearer_):

  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    From thy faerie dream
  Has sped a laugh
    Like a sunny gleam
  Which springs to earth
    A daffy-down-dill
  That merrily flouts
    At the purling rill,
  Thy laugh has sped
    O'er the hillside grey:
  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    Listen my lay!

_The cuckoo calls wistfully from down-dale, but_ QUEEN MAB _does not
hear him._

QUEEN MAB (_stretching her small white arms and yawning dreamily_):

  Methinks the air feels warmer, and the sky
  Seems bluer, yet mine eyes are loath to ope.
  I will not wake at once:
          How the birds sing!
  I did not think the world held so much song.
  That note's a blackbird's; that's a finch's call;
  A wren has whispered secrets to his mate;
  Two doves are cooing where green curtains hang,
  Half shyly, lest their love-songs should be heard;
  Yet, 'tis not spring until the cuckoo cries.

_The cuckoo's voice is heard nearer, coming from Bolton Abbey, and a
second voice answers,_

  Cuckoo!  Cuckoo!

From Barden Fell.

THE THRUSH (_his voice jubilantly strong_):

  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    Thy hyacinth eyes
  Have filled the coppice
    With azure sighs.
  My loved little queen
    Of windflower feet,
  Of daffodil-laughter
    So primrose-sweet!
  The rippling wood
    Is a bluey lake.
  Queen Mab!  Queen Mab!
    Awake!  Awake!

QUEEN MAB (_wide awake now, springs from her couch and curtsies to the
World, north, south, east, and west, then raises her arms to the Sun_):

  Gold Sun, I greet thee; do not hide thy face
  Too soon behind the wistful little hills.
  Thou art my lover, faithless, fickle, fair,
  And leav'st me all too soon; my kingdom's naught
  Without thy splendid presence; stay awhile.

  Old World, old wrinkled granddame, thee I greet;
  Thy loving smile renews thy youth once more.
  For months I slept upon thy broad brown breast;
  I thank thee, granddame, for so good a rest.

  Ye birds that whistle, hares that limping run,
  And little soft-eared rabbits, velvet shod,
  Great wayward mortals, with unseeing eyes,
  I greet you one and all, for Spring has come.
  Laugh with the sun, muse with the silver showers;
  Laugh and make merry, Spring is all too fleet,
  And soon will dance away on flower-loved feet.

_Exit_ QUEEN MAB _in search of her court of butterflies.  Above the
bird-music is heard the insistent cry of the cuckoo, till the fells
re-echo with his calling._

BOLTON WOODS, WHARFEDALE.




Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.











End of Project Gutenberg's The Dales of Arcady, by Dorothy Una Ratcliffe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DALES OF ARCADY ***

***** This file should be named 37086.txt or 37086.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/0/8/37086/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
