The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Leak, by Jacques Futrelle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Leak

Author: Jacques Futrelle

Release Date: August 21, 2011 [EBook #37146]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEAK ***




Produced by David Starner, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                            The Leak

                       By Jacques Futrelle


"Really great criminals are never found out, for the simple reason that
the greatest crimes--their crimes--are never discovered," remarked
Professor Augustus S. F. X. Van Dusen positively. "There is genius in
the perpetration of crime, Mr. Grayson, just as there must be in its
detection, unless it is the shallow work of a bungler. In this latter
case there have been instances where even the police have uncovered the
truth. But the expert criminal, the man of genius--the professional, I
may say--regards as perfect only that crime which does not and cannot be
made to appear a crime at all; therefore one that can never under any
circumstances involve him, or anyone else."

The financier, J. Morgan Grayson, regarded this wizened little man of
science--The Thinking Machine--thoughtfully, through the smoke of his
cigar.

"It is a strange psychological fact that the casual criminal glories in
his crime beforehand, and from one to ten minutes afterward," The
Thinking Machine continued. "For instance, the man who kills for revenge
wants the world to know it is his work; but at the end of ten minutes
comes fear, and then paradoxically enough, he will seek to hide his
crime and protect himself. With fear comes panic, with panic
irresponsibility, and then he makes the mistake--hews a pathway which
the trained mind follows from motive to a prison cell."

"These are the men who are found out. But there are men of genius, Mr.
Grayson, professionally engaged in crime. We never hear of them because
they are never caught, and we never even suspect them because they make
no mistake. Imagine the great brains of history turned to crime. Well,
there are today brains as great as any of those of history; there is
murder and theft and robbery under our noses that we never dream of. If
I, for instance, should become an active criminal----" He paused.

Grayson, with a queer expression on his face, puffed steadily at his
cigar.

"I could kill you now, here in this room," The Thinking Machine went on
calmly, "and no one would ever know, never even suspect. Why? Because I
would make no mistake."

It was not a boast as he said it; it was merely a statement of fact.
Grayson appeared to be a little startled. Where there had been only
impatient interest in his manner, there was now fascination.

"How would you kill me, for instance?" he inquired curiously.

"With any one of a dozen poisons, with virulent germs, or even with a
knife or revolver," replied the scientist placidly. "You see, I know how
to use poisons; I know how to inoculate with germs; I know how to
produce a suicidal appearance perfectly with either a revolver or knife.
And I never make mistakes, Mr. Grayson. In the sciences we must be
exact--not approximately so, but absolutely so. We must know. It isn't
like carpentry. A carpenter may make a trivial mistake in a joint, and
it will not weaken his house; but if the scientist makes one mistake,
the whole structure tumbles down. We must know. Knowledge is progress.
We gain knowledge through observation and logic--inevitable logic. And
logic tells us that two and two make four--not sometimes but all the
time."

Grayson flicked the ashes off his cigar thoughtfully, and little
wrinkles appeared about his eyes as he stared into the drawn,
inscrutable face of the scientist. The enormous, straw-yellow head was
cushioned against the chair, the squinting, watery blue eyes turned
upward, and the slender white fingers at rest, tip to tip. The financier
drew a long breath. "I have been informed that you were a remarkable
man," he said at last slowly. "I believe it. Quinton Frazer, the banker
who gave me the letter of introduction to you, told me how you once
solved a remarkable mystery in which----"

"Yes, yes," interrupted the scientist shortly, "the Ralston Bank
burglary--I remember."

"So I came to you to enlist your aid in something which is more
inexplicable than that," Grayson went on hesitatingly. "I know that no
fee I might offer would influence you; yet it is a case which----"

"State it," interrupted The Thinking Machine again.

"It isn't a crime--that is, a crime that can be reached by law," Grayson
hurried on, "but it has cost me millions, and----"

For one instant The Thinking Machine lowered his squint eyes to those of
his visitor, then raised them again. "Millions!" he repeated. "How
many?"

"Six, eight, perhaps ten," was the reply. "Briefly, there is a leak in
my office. My plans become known to others almost by the time I have
perfected them. My plans are large; I have millions at stake; and the
greatest secrecy is absolutely essential. For years I have been able to
preserve this secrecy; but half a dozen times in the last eight weeks my
plans have become known, and I have been caught. Unless you know the
Street, you can't imagine what a tremendous disadvantage it is to have
someone know your next move to the minutest detail and, knowing it,
defeat you at every turn."

"No, I don't know your world of finance, Mr. Grayson," remarked The
Thinking Machine. "Give me an instance."

"Well, take this last case," said the financier earnestly. "Briefly,
without technicalities, I had planned to unload the securities of the
P., Q. & X. Railway, protecting myself through brokers, and force the
outstanding stock down to a price where other brokers, acting for me,
could buy far below the actual value. In this way I intended to get
complete control of the stock. But my plans became known, and when I
began to unload everything was snapped up by the opposition, with the
result that instead of gaining control of the road I lost heavily. This
same thing has happened, with variations, half a dozen times."

"I presume that is strictly honest?" inquired the scientist mildly.

"Honest?" repeated Grayson. "Certainly--of course."

"I shall not pretend to understand all that," said The Thinking Machine
curtly. "It doesn't seem to matter, anyway. You want to know where the
leak is. Is that right?"

"Precisely."

"Well, who is in your confidence?"

"No one, except my stenographer."

"Who is he, please?"

"It's a woman--Miss Evelyn Winthrop. She has been in my employ for six
years in the same capacity--more than five years before this leak
appeared. I trust her absolutely."

"No man knows your business?"

"No," replied the financier grimly. "I learned years ago that no one
could keep my secrets as well as I do--there are too many temptations.
Therefore, I never mention my plans to anyone--never--to anyone!"

"Except your stenographer," corrected the scientist.

"I work for days, weeks, sometimes months, perfecting plans, and it's
all in my head, not on paper--not a scratch of it," explained Grayson.
"When I say that she is in my confidence, I mean that she knows my plans
only half an hour or less before the machinery is put into motion. For
instance, I planned this P., Q. & X. deal. My brokers didn't know of it;
Miss Winthrop never heard of it until twenty minutes before the Stock
Exchange opened for business. Then I dictated to her, as I always do,
some short letters of instructions to my agents. That is all she knew of
it."

"You outlined the plan in those letters?"

"No; they merely told my brokers what to do."

"But a shrewd person, knowing the contents of all those letters, could
have learned what you intended to do?"

"Yes; but no one person knew the contents of all the letters. No one
broker knew what was in the other letters. Miss Winthrop and I were the
only two human beings who knew all that was in them."

The Thinking Machine sat silent for so long that Grayson began to fidget
in his chair. "Who was in the room besides you and Miss Winthrop before
the letters were sent?" he asked at last.

"No one," responded Grayson emphatically. "For an hour before I dictated
those letters, until at least an hour afterward, after my plans had gone
to smash, no one entered that room. Only she and I work there."

"But when she finished the letters, she went out?" insisted The Thinking
Machine.

"No," declared the financier, "she didn't even leave her desk."

"Or perhaps sent something out--carbon copies of the letters?"

"No."

"Or called up a friend on the telephone?" continued The Thinking Machine
quietly.

"Nor that," retorted Grayson.

"Or signaled to someone through the window?"

"No," said the financier again. "She finished the letters, then remained
quietly at her desk, reading a book. She hardly moved for two hours."

The Thinking Machine lowered his eyes and glared straight into those of
the financier. "Someone listened at the window?" he went on after a
moment.

"No. It is sixteen stories up, fronting the street, and there is no fire
escape."

"Or the door?"

"If you knew the arrangement of my offices, you would see how utterly
impossible that would be, because--"

"Nothing is impossible, Mr. Grayson," snapped the scientist abruptly.
"It might be improbable, but not impossible. Don't say that--it annoys
me exceedingly." He was silent for a moment. Grayson stared at him
blankly. "Did either you or she answer a call on the 'phone?"

"No one called; we called no one."

"Any apertures--holes or cracks--in your flooring or walls or ceilings?"
demanded the scientist.

"Private detectives whom I had employed looked for such an opening, and
there was none," replied Grayson.

Again The Thinking Machine was silent for a long time. Grayson lighted a
fresh cigar and settled back in his chair patiently. Faint cobwebby
lines began to appear on the dome-like brow of the scientist, and slowly
the squint eyes were narrowing.

"The letters you wrote were intercepted?" he suggested at last.

"No," exclaimed Grayson flatly. "Those letters were sent direct to the
brokers by a dozen different methods, and every one of them had been
delivered by five minutes of ten o'clock, when 'Change begins business.
The last one left me at ten minutes of ten."

"Dear me! Dear me!" The Thinking Machine rose and paced the length of
the room.

"You don't give me credit for the extraordinary precautions I have
taken, particularly in this last P., Q. & X. deal," Grayson continued.
"I left positively nothing undone to insure absolute secrecy. And Miss
Winthrop, I know, is innocent of any connection with the affair. The
private detectives suspected her at first, as you do, and she was
watched in and out of my office for weeks. When she was not under my
eyes, she was under the eyes of men to whom I had promised an
extravagant sum of money if they found the leak. She didn't know it
then, and doesn't know it now. I am heartily ashamed of it all, because
the investigation proved her absolute loyalty to me. On this last day
she was directly under my eyes for two hours; and she didn't make one
movement that I didn't note, because the thing meant millions to me.
That proved beyond all question that it was no fault of hers. What could
I do?"

The Thinking Machine didn't say. He paused at a window, and for minute
after minute stood motionless there, with eyes narrowed to mere slits.

"I was on the point of discharging Miss Winthrop," the financier went
on, "but her innocence was so thoroughly proved to me by this last
affair that it would have been unjust, and so----"

Suddenly the scientist turned upon his visitor. "Do you talk in your
sleep?" he demanded.

"No," was the prompt reply. "I had thought of that too. It is beyond all
ordinary things, Professor. Yet there is a leak that is costing me
millions."

"It comes down to this, Mr. Grayson," The Thinking Machine informed him
crabbedly. "If only you and Miss Winthrop knew those plans, and no one
else, and they did leak, and were not deduced from other things, then
either you or she permitted them to leak, intentionally or
unintentionally. That is as pure logic as two and two make four; there
is no need to argue it."

"Well, of course, I didn't," said Grayson.

"Then Miss Winthrop did," declared The Thinking Machine finally,
positively; "unless we credit the opposition, as you call it, with
telepathic gifts hitherto unheard of. By the way, you have referred to
the other side only as the opposition. Do the same men, the same clique,
appear against you all the time, or is it only one man?"

"It's a clique," explained the financier, "with millions back of it,
headed by Ralph Matthews, a young man to whom I give credit for being
the prime factor against me." His lips were set sternly.

"Why?" demanded the scientist.

"Because every time he sees me he grins," was the reply. Grayson seemed
suddenly discomfited.

The Thinking Machine went to a desk, addressed an envelope, folded a
sheet of paper, placed it inside, then sealed it. At length he turned
back to his visitor. "Is Miss Winthrop at your office now?"

"Yes."

"Let us go there, then."

A few minutes later the eminent financier ushered the eminent scientist
into his private office on the Street. The only person there was a young
woman--a woman of twenty-six or-seven, perhaps--who turned, saw Grayson,
and resumed reading. The financier motioned to a seat. Instead of
sitting, however, The Thinking Machine went straight to Miss Winthrop
and extended a sealed envelop to her.

"Mr. Ralph Matthews asked me to hand you this," he said.

The young woman glanced up into his face frankly, yet with a certain
timidity, took the envelope, and turned it curiously in her hand.

"Mr. Ralph Matthews," she repeated, as if the name was a strange one. "I
don't think I know him."

The Thinking Machine stood staring at her aggressively, as she opened
the envelope and drew out the sheet of paper. There was no expression
save surprise--bewilderment, rather--to be read on her face.

"Why, it's a blank sheet!" she remarked, puzzled.

The scientist turned suddenly toward Grayson, who had witnessed the
incident with frank astonishment in his eyes. "Your telephone a moment,
please," he requested.

"Certainly; here," replied Grayson.

"This will do," remarked the scientist.

He leaned forward over the desk where Miss Winthrop sat, still gazing at
him in a sort of bewilderment, picked up the receiver, and held it to
his ear. A few moments later he was talking to Hutchinson Hatch,
reporter.

"I merely wanted to ask you to meet me at my apartment in an hour," said
the scientist. "It is very important."

That was all. He hung up the receiver, paused for a moment to admire an
exquisitely wrought silver box--a "vanity" box--on Miss Winthrop's desk,
beside the telephone, then took a seat beside Grayson and began to
discourse almost pleasantly upon the prevailing meteorological
conditions. Grayson merely stared; Miss Winthrop continued her reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Augustus S. F. X. Van Dusen, distinguished scientist, and
Hutchinson Hatch, newspaper reporter, were poking round among the
chimney pots and other obstructions on the roof of a skyscraper. Far
below them the slumber-enshrouded city was spread out like a panorama,
streets dotted brilliantly with lights, and roofs hazily visible through
mists of night. Above, the infinite blackness hung like a veil, with
starpoints breaking through here and there.

"Here are the wires," Hatch said at last, and he stooped.

The Thinking Machine knelt on the roof beside him, and for several
minutes they remained thus in the darkness, with only the glow of a
flashlight to indicate their presence. Finally, The Thinking Machine
rose.

"That's the wire you want, Mr. Hatch," he said. "I'll leave the rest of
it to you."

"Are you sure?" asked the reporter.

"I am always sure," was the tart response.

Hatch opened a small handsatchel and removed several queerly wrought
tools. These he spread on the roof beside him; then, kneeling again,
began his work. For half an hour he labored in the gloom, with only the
flashlight to aid him, and then he rose.

"It's all right," he said.

The Thinking Machine examined the work that had been done, grunted his
satisfaction, and together they went to the skylight, leaving a thin,
insulated wire behind them, stringing along to mark their path. They
passed down through the roof and into the darkness of the hall of the
upper story. Here the light was extinguished. From far below came the
faint echo of a man's footsteps as the watchman passed through the
silent, deserted building.

"Be careful!" warned The Thinking Machine.

They went along the hall to a room in the rear, and still the wire
trailed behind. At the last door they stopped. The Thinking Machine
fumbled with some keys, then opened the way. Here an electric light was
on. The room was bare of furniture, the only sign of recent occupancy
being a telephone instrument on the wall.

Here The Thinking Machine stopped and stared at the spool of wire which
he had permitted to wind off as he walked, and his thin face expressed
doubt.

"It wouldn't be safe," he said at last, "to leave the wire exposed as we
have left it. True, this floor is not occupied; but someone might pass
this way and disturb it. You take the spool, go back to the roof,
winding the wire as you go, then swing the spool down to me over the
side of the building, so that I can bring it in through the window. That
will be best. I will catch it here, and thus there will be nothing to
indicate any connection." Hatch went out quietly and closed the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twice the following day The Thinking Machine spoke to the financier over
the telephone. Grayson was in his private office, Miss Winthrop at her
desk, when the first call came.

"Be careful in answering my questions," warned The Thinking Machine when
Grayson answered. "Do you know how long Miss Winthrop has owned the
little silver box which is now on her desk, near the telephone?"

Grayson glanced round involuntarily to where the girl sat idly turning
over the leaves of her book. "Yes," he answered, "for seven months. I
gave it to her last Christmas."

"Ah!" exclaimed the scientist. "That simplifies matters. Where did you
buy it?"

Grayson mentioned the name of a well-known jeweler.

Considerably later in the day The Thinking Machine called Grayson to the
telephone again.

"What make of typewriter does she use?" came the querulous voice over
the wire.

Grayson named it.

While Grayson sat with deeply perplexed lines in his face, the
diminutive scientist called upon Hutchinson Hatch at his office.

"Do you use a typewriter?" demanded The Thinking Machine.

"Yes."

"What kind?"

"Oh, four or five kinds--we have half a dozen different makes in the
office."

They passed along through the city room, at that moment practically
deserted, until finally the watery blue eyes settled upon a typewriter
with the name emblazoned on the front.

"That's it!" exclaimed The Thinking Machine. "Write something on it," he
directed Hatch.

Hatch drew up a chair and rolled off several lines of the immortal
practice sentence, beginning, "Now is the time for all good men--"

The Thinking Machine sat beside him, squinting across the room in deep
abstraction, and listening intently. His head was turned away from the
reporter, but his ear was within a few inches of the machine. For half a
minute he sat there listening, then shook his head.

"Strike your vowels," he commanded; "first slowly, then rapidly."

Again Hatch obeyed, while the scientist listened. And again he shook his
head. Then in turn every make of machine in the office was tested the
same way. At the end The Thinking Machine rose and went his way. There
was an expression nearly approaching complete bewilderment on his face.

       *       *       *       *       *

For hour after hour that night The Thinking Machine half lay in a huge
chair in his laboratory, with eyes turned uncompromisingly upward, and
an expression of complete concentration on his face. There was no change
either in his position or his gaze as minute succeeded minute; the brow
was deeply wrinkled now, and the thin line of the lips was drawn taut.
The tiny clock in the reception room struck ten, eleven, twelve, and
finally one. At just half-past one The Thinking Machine rose suddenly.

"Positively I am getting stupid!" he grumbled half aloud. "Of course! Of
course! Why couldn't I have thought of that in the first place?..."

So it came about that Grayson did not go to his office on the following
morning at the usual time. Instead, he called again upon The Thinking
Machine in eager, expectant response to a note which had reached him at
his home just before he started to his office.

"Nothing yet," said The Thinking Machine as the financier entered. "But
here is something you must do today. At one o'clock," the scientist went
on, "you must issue orders for a gigantic deal of some sort; and you
must issue them precisely as you have issued them in the past; there
must be no variation. Dictate the letters as you have always done to
Miss Winthrop--_but don't send them_! When they come to you, keep them
until you see me."

"You mean that the deal must be purely imaginative?" inquired the
financier.

"Precisely," was the reply. "But make your instructions circumstantial;
give them enough detail to make them absolutely logical and convincing."

Grayson asked a dozen questions, answers to which were curtly denied,
then went to his office. The Thinking Machine again called Hatch on the
telephone.

"I've got it," he announced briefly. "I want the best telegraph operator
you know. Bring him along and meet me in the room on the top floor where
the telephone is at precisely fifteen minutes before one o'clock
today."

"Telegraph operator?" Hatch repeated.

"That's what I said--telegraph operator!" replied the scientist
irritably. "Goodbye."

Hatch smiled whimsically at the other end as he heard the receiver
banged on the hook--smiled because he knew the eccentric ways of this
singular man, whose mind so accurately illuminated every problem to
which it was directed. Then he went out to the telegraph room and
borrowed the principal operator. They were in the little room on the top
floor at precisely fifteen minutes of one.

The operator glanced about in astonishment. The room was still
unfurnished, save for the telephone box on the wall.

"What do I do?" he asked The Thinking Machine.

"I'll tell you when the time comes," responded the scientist, as he
glanced at his watch.

At three minutes of one o'clock he handed a sheet of blank paper to the
operator, and gave him final instructions.

There was ludicrous mystification on the operator's face; but he obeyed
orders, grinning cheerfully at Hatch as he tilted his cigar up to keep
the smoke out of his eyes. The Thinking Machine stood impatiently
looking on, watch in hand. Hatch didn't know what was happening, but he
was interested.

At last the operator heard something. His face became suddenly alert. He
continued to listen for a moment, and then came a smile of recognition.

       *       *       *       *       *

Less than ten minutes after Miss Winthrop had handed over the
typewritten letters of instruction to Grayson for signature, and while
he still sat turning them over in his hands, the door opened and The
Thinking Machine entered. He tossed a folded sheet of paper on the desk
before Grayson, and went straight to Miss Winthrop.

"So you did know Mr. Ralph Matthews after all?" he inquired.

The girl rose from her desk, and a flash of some subtle emotion passed
over her face. "What do you mean, sir?" she demanded.

"You might as well remove the silver box," The Thinking Machine went on
mercilessly. "There is no further need of the connection."

Miss Winthrop glanced down at the telephone extension on her desk, and
her hand darted toward it. The silver "vanity" box was directly under
the receiver, supporting it, so that all weight was removed from the
hook, and the line was open. She snatched the box and the receiver
dropped back on the hook. The Thinking Machine turned to Grayson.

"It was Miss Winthrop," he said.

"Miss Winthrop!" exclaimed Grayson, "I can't believe it!"

"Read the paper I gave you, Mr. Grayson," directed The Thinking Machine
coldly. "Perhaps that will enlighten her."

The financier opened the sheet, which had remained folded in his hand,
and glanced at what was written there. Slowly he read it aloud:
"PEABODY--Sell ten thousand shares L. & W. at 97. MCCRACKEN Co.--Sell
ten thousand shares L. & W. at 97." He read on down the list,
bewildered. Then gradually, as he realized the import of what he read,
there came a hardening of the lines about his mouth.

"I understand, Miss Winthrop," he said at last. "This is the substance
of the orders I dictated, and in some way you made them known to persons
for whom they were not intended. I don't know how you did it, of course;
but I understand that you did do it, so----" He stepped to the door and
opened it with grave courtesy. "You may go now."

Miss Winthrop made no plea--merely bowed and went out. Grayson stood
staring after her for a moment, then turned to The Thinking Machine and
motioned him to a chair. "What happened?" he asked briskly.

"Miss Winthrop is a tremendously clever woman," replied The Thinking
Machine. "She neglected to tell you, however, that besides being a
stenographer and typist she is also a telegraph operator. She is so
expert in each of her lines that she combined the two, if I may say it
that way. In other words, in writing on the typewriter, she was clever
enough to be able to _give the click of the machine the patterns in the
Morse telegraphic code_--so that another telegraph operator at the other
end of the 'phone could hear her machine and translate the clicks into
words."

Grayson sat staring at him incredulously. "I still don't understand," he
said finally.

The Thinking Machine rose and went to Miss Winthrop's desk. "Here is an
extension telephone with the receiver on the hook. It happens that the
little silver box which you gave Miss Winthrop is just tall enough to
lift this receiver clear of the hook, and the minute the receiver is off
the hook the line is open. When you were at your desk and she was here,
you couldn't see this telephone; therefore it was a simple matter for
her to lift the receiver, and place the silver box underneath, thus
holding the line open permanently. That being true, the sound of the
typewriter--_the striking of the keys_--would go over the open wire to
whoever was listening at the other end. Then, if the striking of the
keys typed out your letters and, by their frequency and pauses,
simultaneously tapped out telegraphic code, an outside operator could
read your letters at the same moment they were being written. That is
all. It required extreme concentration on Miss Winthrop's part to type
accurately in Morse rhythms."

"Oh, I see!" exclaimed Grayson.

"When I knew that the leak in your office was not in the usual way,"
continued The Thinking Machine, "I looked for the unusual. There is
nothing very mysterious about it now--it was merely clever."

"Clever!" repeated Grayson, and his jaws snapped. "It is more than that.
Why, it's criminal! She should be prosecuted."

"I shouldn't advise that, Mr. Grayson," returned the scientist coldly.
"If it is honest--merely business--to juggle stocks as you told me you
did, this is no more dishonest. And besides, remember that Miss Winthrop
is backed by the people who have made millions out of you, and--well, I
wouldn't prosecute. It is betrayal of trust, certainly; but--" He rose
as if that were all, and started toward the door. "I would advise you,
however, to discharge the person who operates your switchboard."

"Was she in the scheme, too?" demanded Grayson. He rushed out of the
private office into the main office. At the door he met a clerk coming
in.

"Where is Miss Mitchell?" demanded the financier hotly.

"I was just coming to tell you that she went out with Miss Winthrop just
now without giving any explanation," replied the clerk.

"Good day, Mr. Grayson," said The Thinking Machine.

The financier nodded his thanks, then stalked back into his room.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the course of time The Thinking Machine received a check for ten
thousand dollars, signed, "J. Morgan Grayson." He glared at it for a
little while, then indorsed it in a crabbed hand, _Pay to the Trustees'
Home for Crippled Children_, and sent Martha, his housekeeper, out to
mail it.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Leak, by Jacques Futrelle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEAK ***

***** This file should be named 37146.txt or 37146.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/1/4/37146/

Produced by David Starner, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
