Project Gutenberg's Games Without Music for Children, by Lois Bates

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Games Without Music for Children

Author: Lois Bates

Release Date: August 23, 2011 [EBook #37165]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAMES WITHOUT MUSIC FOR CHILDREN ***




Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net











GAMES WITHOUT MUSIC

[Illustration]


[Transcriber's Notes: Bold text is show by surrounding =equal signs=.
Italic text by surrounding _underscores_.

On page 77, two facing brackets [] are used to show a drawn square in
the text.]



GAMES WITHOUT MUSIC

FOR CHILDREN

BY

LOIS BATES

  AUTHOR OF 'KINDERGARTEN GUIDE' 'RECITATIONS FOR INFANTS'
  'GUESSING GAMES' 'SALTAIRE ACTION SONGS'
  'SALTAIRE KINDERGARTEN GAMES' ETC.

  LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
  39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
  NEW YORK AND BOMBAY
  1897

  All rights reserved




PREFACE


THE object of these Games is to introduce variety when it is needed in
the ordinary school routine, and to form a means of recreation to the
children when unfavourable weather makes the usual playtime impossible.

Those of the Games referring to special subjects, such as 'Sewing,'
etc., may be used in the lesson time devoted to such subjects, and the
'Guessing Rhymes,' Nos. 51 to 97, may sometimes be given between
lessons. For notes on these, see p. 87.

'Games for the Playground' and a few of those immediately preceding are
old games with new rhymes.

It is hoped that some of the plays (Nos. 12 to 20, _e.g._) will help to
teach the children important truths that are difficult for them to learn
in the abstract, but which represented and practised in childish play
may make an impression on their plastic little minds. Many of the Games
are suitable for home use, and will probably be played there by the
children after being learnt in school.

If the Games help to make school brighter and pleasanter for teacher and
children their object will be gained.

  LOIS BATES.

SALTAIRE.




CONTENTS


  I. GAMES FOR THE SCHOOLROOM

  NO. OF
  GAME                                      PAGE

   1. LAYING THE BREAKFAST-TABLE            1

   2. THE BREAKFAST PARTY                   3

   3. CLEARING THE TABLE                    4

   4. WEIGHING                              6

   5. MEASURING GAME                        8

   6. SHOPPING                             10

   7. TYING A BOW                          12

   8. THIMBLE GAME                         16

   9. SEWING GAME                          17

  10. KNITTING GAME                        19

  11. THE SIGN-POST                        23

  12. ASKING WAY IN STREET                 24

  13. POLITENESS IN STREETS                27

  14. DRESSING CHILDREN                    28

  15. FATHER BRINGING PRESENTS             29

  16. GOING ERRANDS                        32

  17. TAKING FATHER'S TEA                  34

  18. INVITATION TO PLAY                   36

  19. INVITATION TO DRIVE                  38

  20. GETTING READY FOR BED                40

  21. WASHING ONE'S SELF                   42

  22. ASKING FOR DRINK OF WATER            43

  23. THE FOX AND THE TIGER                44

  24. THE COACH GAME                       48

  25. THE STABLE                           50

  26. VISITING GRANDMAMMA                  51

  27. PAYING CALLS                         53

  28. AFTERNOON TEA                        54

  29. SPRING FLOWERS                       56

  30. SUMMER FLOWERS                       57

  31. THE THREE BEARS                      59

  32. IMITATING CRIES OF ANIMALS           62

  33. CHARADES                             63

  34. PASSING THE STICK                    65

  35. FINDING THE THIMBLE                  66

  36. THROWING THE HANDKERCHIEF            68

  37. PICKING UP POTATOES                  69


  II. GAMES FOR THE PLAYGROUND

  38. THROWING THE BALL                    71

  39. LAME LASSIE                          72

  40. POLLY FLINDERS                       73

  41. DROP, DROP, DROP                     74

  42. PUSS IN THE CORNER                   75

  43. WOLF AND SHEEP                       76

  44. DANCING GAME                         77

  45. DUCKING UNDER                        78

  46. WHO'LL GO A-HUNTING?                 79

  47. SHEEP GATHERING                      80

  48. HOPPING GAME                         82

  49. MAKING A CHAIN                       83

  50. MOTHER, MAY WE GO OUT TO PLAY?       84


  III. GUESSING RHYMES

  _MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS_, pp. 88-91

  51. PUDDING

  52. WATCH

  53. BRUSH

  54. ARM-CHAIR

  55. POCKET-HANDKERCHIEF

  56. WINDOW BLIND

  57. BOAT

  58. STEAMER

  59. SAIL BOAT

  60. BELLOWS

  61. PIPE


  _ANIMALS_, pp. 91-93

  62. DOG

  63. STAG

  64. CATERPILLAR

  65. LAMBS

  66. ELEPHANT'S TRUNK

  67. SQUIRREL


  _FLOWERS_, pp. 93, 94

  68. SNOW-DROP

  69. DAISY

  70. WILD HYACINTH

  71. HAREBELL

  72. WILD ROSE

  73. MAY BLOSSOM


  _NATURAL PHENOMENA_, pp. 95-98

  74. SPRING

  75. SUMMER

  76. AUTUMN

  77. WINTER

  78. THE FOUR SEASONS

  79. CLOUDS

  80. HOAR-FROST

  81. DEW

  82. WIND


  _NURSERY RHYMES_, pp. 98-100

  83. LITTLE BOY BLUE

  84. JACK AND JILL

  85. MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY

  86. LITTLE JACK HORNER

  87. LITTLE TOM TUCKER

  88. LITTLE BOPEEP

  89. MOTHER HUBBARD

  90. HUMPTY DUMPTY

  91. LITTLE MISS MUFFET


  _FAIRY TALES_, pp. 100-102

  92. RED RIDING HOOD

  93. WOLF

  94. CINDERELLA

  95. SLEEPING BEAUTY

  96. JACK THE GIANT KILLER

  97. DICK WHITTINGTON




ILLUSTRATIONS


  THE 'HOUSE'      _Frontispiece_

  FIG. 1.--HOW TO TIE A BOW      _page_ 14

    "  2.--THE SIGN-POST      22

    "  3.--FOX'S DEN      46




GAMES WITHOUT MUSIC FOR CHILDREN




I. GAMES FOR THE SCHOOLROOM


1. _LAYING THE BREAKFAST-TABLE_

  1. SPREAD the cloth--this is the way,
     Cups and saucers, where are they?

  2. Put them at one end in rows,
     See, a spoon with each one goes.

  3. One plate for each person bring,
     And a napkin in a ring.

  4. Here's a jug of milk so hot,
     Sugar next, and coffee-pot.

  5. Bread and butter place we here,
     Then we get the chairs, my dear.

  6. Ring the bell, and all sit round,
     Each should in his place be found.

_Directions._--The table may be laid by two children only, or several
may be employed, but different children should take part each time the
game is played, so that all may learn how to carry the cups, &c., and
how to place them.

_Verse 1._ Two little girls step forward and lay the cloth.

_Verse 2._ The cups and saucers are brought on a tray, and placed in
rows at one end of the table.

_Verse 3._ One child brings plates on a tray and places them one by one
round the table, while another follows with serviettes on a small tray,
and places one to the right of each plate.

_Verse 4._ The sugar, milk, &c., are placed in position.

_Verse 5._ One or two plates of bread and butter are put on the table,
and then the chairs are placed ready.

_Verse 6._ The bell is rung, and the children who are to sit at table
take their places.


2. _THE BREAKFAST PARTY_

This game may be played immediately after the one preceding, or it may
be used alone. The children seat themselves at the table, the 'Mother'
sitting at one end and the 'Father' at the other. When all the cups are
filled and passed, the following lines are repeated:

  1. [1]Little hands are folded while the grace is said,
    'Father, God, we thank Thee for our daily bread.'

  2. [2]Let us stir our coffee, softly, gently, so,
     [3]Then the spoon in saucer quietly must go.

  3. When you eat and drink, dears, do not make a noise,
     [4]Pass things to each other, little girls and boys.

        [If there is a piano in school, a little music
           might be played while breakfast is in progress.]

  4. When we finish breakfast, [5]hands in lap lay we,
     Elbows on the table, that should never be!

[1] Fold hands and bow head.

[2] Stir coffee.

[3] Place spoon in saucer.

[4] Pass bread and butter to each other.

[5] Fold hands in lap.

(For Dinner and Tea Table songs, see Appendix I.)


3. _CLEARING THE TABLE_

(For directions as to laying the table, see game No. 1.)

  1. Breakfast over, off we go,
     To remove the cloth, you know.

  2. Put the napkins on the tray,
     And the plates, too, take away.

  3. Cups and saucers next we take,
     Carefully, lest them we break.

  4. Bring the milk and sugar here,
     Soon the table will be clear.

  5. Shake the cloth and fold it straight,
     Then we'll wash each cup and plate.[A]

_Instructions._--_Verse 1._ Children rise from table, and each carries
chair to the place where it should go.

_Verse 2._ A child brings a little tray, and, walking round the table,
takes up all the napkins, putting them on the tray one by one. A second
child follows with another tray, and takes up the plates in the same
manner.

_Verse 3._ Two children remove the cups and saucers, each having a tray.

_Verse 4._ The coffee-pot, milk-jug, and sugar-basin are taken away on a
tray.

_Verse 5._ The cloth should be taken off carefully, so that the crumbs
are not spilt, or if a toy crumb brush and tray can be obtained, the
crumbs may be removed before the cloth is taken up.

[A] For song 'Washing Dishes,' see Appendix I.


4. _WEIGHING_

Scales and weights are required for this game.

Before commencing let the children see the different weights, and hold
them one after the other in their hands.

The following rhymes may assist the scholars to remember the various
weights:

  1. First comes the [1]ounce weight, small and round,
     Sixteen of these do make a [2]pound.

  2. Four ounces [3]quarter-pound will be;
     [4]Half-pound has eight ounces, you see.


The four weights given above will be sufficient at first for little
children, but more may be added as they become familiar with these. When
the scholars have learnt to distinguish the pound, ounce, &c., they may
come out in turn and weigh various objects.

It would be well to explain that solid objects occupy less room than
lighter substances--that a pound of feathers, _e.g._, would take up a
large space, while a pound of lead would go into a very small compass.

[1] Show ounce weight.

[2] Show pound weight.

[3] Show the quarter-pound.

[4] Show half-pound.


GUESSING GAME.--When the object to be weighed has been chosen, a number
of children are allowed to come out and hold it in turn, and say what
they think is its weight. As the object is handed to the first child,
the teacher says:

  Can you tell the weight of this?
  Mind you do not guess amiss.

Each child takes the object in its hand and guesses. The article is then
weighed, and the child who has guessed most nearly its correct weight is
allowed to choose the next object for weighing, and to call out the
children who are to guess. He hands it to the first child, repeating the
words of the rhyme.


5. _MEASURING GAME_

Before playing this game, the children should be well accustomed to the
use of the foot-rule, marked with inches (cost, &c.[1]). Each child
should have a foot-rule and measure its book, pencil, desk, &c.; it
should also be taught to draw lines of different lengths with the rule
on its slate; thus, teacher might say, 'Draw a standing-up (vertical)
line six inches long,' or, 'Draw a lying-down (horizontal) line four
inches long,' and so on. The children will thus get accustomed to
estimating the length and breadth of objects, and will be able to play
the game.

Suppose the slate to be the object chosen, the teacher holds it up so
that all may see it, and then repeats the lines:

  Think it over carefully,
  And tell me what the length may be
                Of this slate.

The children who are ready to answer then put their hands out, and the
one who guesses correctly (or most nearly correctly) has the privilege
of asking the next question, and stands in front of the class in
readiness. Before proceeding, however, the first object should be
measured, so that all may see that the answer was correct.

Perhaps the pencil may be the next object chosen, or a window-pane,
ball-frame, desk, duster, book, &c., and instead of _length_, we may
have _breadth_. The words would then be:

  Think it over carefully,
  And tell me what the _breadth_ may be
              Of this window-pane.

The children should be taught to listen attentively, so that they may
know whether length or breadth is to be guessed; the meaning of the two
terms should, of course, be explained previously.

If circular objects are chosen for measurement, the word 'girth' must be
substituted for 'length.' This form of object should only be used for
the older children, as it is much more difficult. To measure a circular
object, a string should be passed round it, and the string should then
be measured with the foot-rule.

Sometimes the word _height_ may be substituted, as, for instance, in
measuring the height of a plant or a child. The children will enjoy the
latter very much.

  _Twelve_ inches make a foot,
    And _nine_ a quarter-yard,
  The half-yard _eighteen_ inches takes,
    To learn this is not hard.

[1] Appendix II.


6. _SHOPPING_

The shopman should stand behind a table or desk, and have articles made
up in parcels ready for sale. 'The Shop' described in 'Kindergarten
Guide,' p. 230,[1] would do nicely for this game.

The children who go shopping should be dressed in outdoor costume, and
each carry a basket. They should also have money; imitation cardboard
coins (for cost[2]) would do. (Customer walks up to the counter.)

SHOPMAN

Good morning, ma'am, how do you do? And pray what can I get for you?

CUSTOMER

  Good morning, shopman, will you please
  To weigh for me a pound of cheese?
               [The packet is handed to customer.]

CUSTOMER

  Here is a shilling [_handing it_], eightpence take,

SHOPMAN

  And fourpence change [_giving fourpence to customer_] just twelvepence
        make.

The children should also ask for other articles, without using the
rhymes, and they should be encouraged to speak clearly and distinctly,
and to address the shopman civilly. This will be likely to assist them
in going errands for mother.

[1] See Appendix III.

[2] See Appendix IV.


7. _TYING A BOW_

_Instructions._--The children should be sitting at desks or tables, and
each child should have a 3/4 yard length of tape or ribbon, one inch in
width, and a book with stiff cover. The teacher should first show how to
tie the bow by passing her ribbon round the neck or wrist of a child,
and performing the various movements as they are mentioned in the rhymes
and shown in the illustrations. This should be done several times
very slowly, the words being repeated either by teacher only or by all.
When the children begin to tie the ribbon each round its own book, the
teacher should show the various movements as they occur, performing them
simultaneously with the scholars. (The numbers refer to fig. 1, which
shows the various steps in order.)

  [1]Place your ribbon round the book,
    [2]Cross it--left end at the top;
  [3]Now the right end take and pass
    Over, [4]draw it tight, then stop.

  [5]With the right end make a loop.
    [6]Draw the left across it, so;
  [7]Now another loop we make
    With the left, and [8]pull it through.

      'Tying a Knot' (which is more simple than 'Tying a
      Bow') is given in the 'Kindergarten Guide,' p. 105.[A]

[Illustration]

[Transcriber's Note: The numbers in this game's instructions correspond
to the photo listed here.]

[A] Appendix III.


8. _THIMBLE GAME_

Each child should have a thimble, and the teacher should have one also.
A short conversation about the thimble should precede the game--how it
is smooth inside and rough outside. What makes it rough? What are the
little holes for? Which is the rim? &c.

(The teacher, if facing the children, should use the left hand for
right.)

  [1]Pretty little thimble,
    [2]In your cradle go,
  [3]I will rock you gently,
    Gently to and fro.

  Now I [4]toss and [5]catch you,
    [6]Up and down and [7]up;
  [8]Next I hold my thimble
    Like a little cup.

  [9]On the right thumb place it,
    Is that right? [10]oh, no!
  [11]On your longest finger
    [12]Should the thimble go.

[1] Hold thimble up between thumb and forefinger of right hand.

[2] Put thimble in left hand, which should be held palm upward and bent
to form a cradle.

[3] Sway left hand from left to right.

[4, 5, 6, 7] Toss thimble and catch it.

[8] Hold thimble, rim upwards, between thumb and forefinger of left
hand.

[9] Place thimble on right thumb.

[10] Take thimble off.

[11] Hold up middle finger of right hand.

[12] Place thimble on proper finger.


9. _SEWING GAME_

(N.B. In this game, as in No. 8, the teacher, as she faces the scholars,
should use her _left_ hand each time the children use the right.)

If the children have been taught the use of the thimble (Game No. 8),
they should wear it during this game.

TEACHER

  Little children, clean and bright,
  Show your [1]left hand, show your [2]right,
  [3]Left forefinger, that will do,
  [4]Place your sewing round it, so.

  [5]Needle in your right hand hold,
  All should do just what is told;
  When the number _One_ I call,
  [6]Take a stitch, dear children all.

  [7]_Two_, we show the stitch so neat,
  [8]Just to see it is a treat.
  [9]_Three_, we push the needle's eye
  With our thimble carefully.

  [10]_Four_, we draw the needle out,
  Minding well what we're about.
  Thread from needle need not slip,
  If a good look-out we keep.

After practising this game several times, the children will be ready for
the sewing drill given on p. 270, 'Kindergarten Guide.'

[1] Hold left hand up.

[2] Hold right hand up.

[3] Hold up forefinger of left hand vertically.

[4] Hem of pinafore or pocket handkerchief to be placed round left
forefinger.

[5] Hold up right hand with thumb and forefinger in position as if
holding needle.

[6] Pretend to take a stitch.

[7] Hold up sewing with both hands.

[8] Hem in position (see No. 4).

[9] Pretend to push needle (which is supposed to be in the hem) with
thimble.

[10] Pretend to draw needle out.


10. _KNITTING GAME_

Each child should have a pair of knitting-pins ([A]wooden ones are the
best for learning), and the teacher should have a pair also. As the
teacher stands facing the children, her _left_ hand is opposite to their
_right_, and she should, consequently, use her _left_ needle to take the
stitch, &c., otherwise the children will be confused.

TEACHER

  I will teach you how to knit,
    If you listen, dears, to me;
  And I'm sure you will admit
    It is easy as can be.

  Put the pins all ready,[1] so,
    Hold one firmly with each hand;
  Then the knitting drill I give
    You must try to understand.

  [2]Take a stitch at number _One_,
    And when I say, 'Number _Two_,'
  [3]Hold the wool in your right hand,
    And then throw it over, so.

  [4]Now the pin that's underneath
    To the top must come at _Three_,
  [5]Slip the loop at number _Four_
    From the left pin carefully.

When the above game has been repeated several times, the children will
be ready for the Knitting Drill given on p. 274 of 'Kindergarten Guide.'

[A] Appendix V.

[1] Teacher puts her pins in position.

[2] Put end of _right_ pin under end of left.

[3] Pretend to put wool round end of right-hand pin as in actual
knitting.

[4] Bring right-hand pin to the top.

[5] Slide the right pin off the left.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--THE SIGN-POST]


11. _THE SIGN-POST_

[Illustration:

              |   |
              |   |
              |   |
              |   |
              |   |
  ------------+   +------------
                x
  ------------+   +------------
              |   |
              |   |
              |   |
              |   |
              |   |]

_Directions._--The children make roads by standing in lines (see
diagram). Four children should stand at the place marked x (see fig. 2),
one child facing each road, and holding in its two hands a good-sized
strip of cardboard, with the name of a town or village to which the road
is supposed to lead printed thereon. It would be well to use the names
of places in the district with which the children are familiar. Some of
the children must be little travellers, and come walking up the
different roads until they reach the sign-post, then all repeat the
lines:

  The little travellers do not know
  Which way to go, which way to go,
  But here's a sign-post that will tell;
  Ah! now they know the way quite well.

The travellers should be told the names on the sign-post before
starting, and each should choose the place to which he will journey.
After the lines are repeated, each traveller takes the road that leads
to his destination.


12. _ASKING WAY IN STREET_

_Preliminary._--One of her Majesty's inspectors remarked on one occasion
that he could judge of the intelligence and manners of a school by the
way in which its scholars playing in the street would reply if asked a
question as to the whereabouts of any particular place in the locality.

It is doubtless desirable that children should know something of the
streets and roads of the district in which they live, and if they have
clear ideas as to the meaning of 'right' and 'left,' the following game
should help them in describing the position of places.

The streets may be made by the children themselves standing in rows, as
in the preceding game; or if the space available be small, the children
may stand round the room, while the plan of the streets is chalked on
the floor. There should be one central street, with others branching out
of it right and left, and each should be named. It may be possible to
arrange and name the streets of some district with which the children
are familiar. The name of each should be written on a card and placed at
the end of the street. The accompanying diagram will illustrate the
playing of the game. We will suppose that a little girl comes walking up
Victoria Road, and at the point x meets a gentleman (a little boy), who
asks, 'Can you please direct me to Queen Street?' 'Yes,' she replies,
'it is the second turning on the left.' The place of meeting may be
varied, and the children will then see that the terms 'right' and 'left'
are interchangeable, according to the direction in which we are walking.
In the following instance, _e.g._ Queen Street is on the _right_ instead
of left. More difficult questions may be asked as the children get to
understand better, such as, 'Which is the way to Alexandra Road?'
(starting from *). 'Take the second turning to the right, then turn to
left, and it is the first street on the right.'

[Illustration:

   +---------+   +--------------
   |         | V |
   |         | I |
   +---------+ C |
     KING ST.  T +--------------
   +---------+ O  ALEXANDER RD.
   |         | R +--------------
   |         | I |
   +---------+ A |
    QUEEN ST.    |
   +---------+ R |
   |         | O +--------------
   |         | A  JAMES ST.
   |         | D +--------------
   +---------+   |
     JOHN ST.    |
   +---------+   |
   |         |   |
  *+---------+ x +--------------]


13. _POLITENESS IN STREETS_

The streets (p. 26) of Game No. 12 may be utilised for this game. The
children should have on their hats and caps, and walk along the streets.
The game is intended to teach them how to behave when walking; they
should keep to the right, not speak loudly, and the boys should raise
their caps when they meet anyone who acknowledges them.

When the game is fairly started, the two verses which follow may be
repeated by all the children:

  Keep always to the right
    When in the street you walk,
  And please remember this--
    Do not too loudly talk.

  We must not stare at folks,
    Or turn to look behind;
  Be kind, but never rude--
    A good rule you will find.

A little girl who is walking drops her handkerchief; then, after going
a few yards further, stops and says:

  Where is my handkerchief? oh dear!
  I must have dropped it somewhere near.

A boy who has picked it up advances and offers it to the lady, at the
same time raising his cap, and the lady says 'Thank you.' The game may
be continued at the teacher's discretion, and the verses again repeated.


14. _DRESSING CHILDREN_

About a dozen of the older children stand in the centre of the room, and
a number of the little ones come in with coat and hat in hand. The older
children repeat the verse:

  Ready for the babies stand,
  See they come with hat in hand.
  Bigger children always should
  To little ones be kind and good.

The younger children then advance, and the others proceed with the
dressing. First the coat is put on and carefully buttoned, then the hats
or hoods are tied on, and the little child says 'Thank you.'

This game should be played just before the children are dismissed, or
before playtime.

N.B.--How to tie a bow may be learnt from Game No. 7, p. 12.


15. _FATHER BRINGING PRESENTS_

_Object of Game._--Anyone who has observed children cannot fail to have
noticed how very often they have to be _prompted_ to express their
thanks for kindnesses received. It is hoped that this little game may be
of use in impressing the lesson, so often reiterated by parents and
others.

A 'house' is formed by a ring of children (see Frontispiece, and
description of same on p. 31). There should be three children in the
ring to represent 'John,' 'Maud,' and the 'Baby,' also an older girl
for the 'Mother.' The 'Father' is supposed to be away on a journey, and
preparations are being made for his return. The 'Mother' and 'Maud' lay
the table for tea (see Game No. 1, which is similar), and the other two
children may be looking at a picture-book or watching for Father's
return at the door or window. When he arrives, each member of the family
greets him; one takes his hat, another his bag, and a chair is placed
for him at the table. Then the children take their places, and the
Mother pours the tea.

After the meal is finished, the Father opens his portmanteau, and
looking into it, says:

  A ball for baby should be here,
            [Takes out the ball and gives it.]

  BABY
  Oh, thank you, thank you, Father dear.

  FATHER
  A skipping-rope for Maud is this,
                         [Presents it to Maud.]

  MAUD
  I thank you, Father, with a kiss.
                             [Kisses Father.]

  FATHER
  This cricket-ball for John will do.
                          [Hands John the ball.]

  JOHN
  Thank you, Papa, 'tis kind of you.

_Frontispiece._--Twenty or thirty children might very well combine to
make the 'house,' instead of ten as shown here. The two girls who cross
hands form the 'door.' The boy on the left of the door grasps the girdle
of the girl with his right hand, while the boy on the right places his
left hand on the girl's shoulder to make the 'latch.' To open the 'door'
we lift the 'latch,' and then push the girl on the right gently inside
the ring, the girl on the left moving with her.

To _knock_ at the 'door' we rap on the floor.


16. _GOING ERRANDS_

The children join hands and stand round to form a 'house' and 'garden'
(see diagram). A space is left for the gateway of the 'garden.' For
'door' of house see Frontispiece.

[Illustration:

  +----------------------+
  |                      |
  |                      |
  |        House         |
  |                      |
  |                      |
  +--------+----+--------+
  |         _Door_       |
  |                      |
  |        Garden        |
  |                      |
  |                      |
  +--------+    +--------+]

In the 'house' stands one of the bigger girls to represent the 'mother,'
and there should also be a little chair, and a doll's cradle with a doll
in it.

In the 'garden' eight or ten children are engaged in playing a game.
('Drop, Drop, Drop,' No. 41, p. 74, would do nicely.) One of the girls
must represent 'Nellie,' and one of the boys 'Johnnie.' As the game
proceeds, the 'mother' comes to the door and calls:

  'Nellie, Nellie!'
                 [Nellie at once answers:]

  'Yes, mother.'
  [Leaves game immediately and runs to mother.]

  MOTHER
  Baby cries, just soothe her, Nell.
  Rock the cradle; that is well.
      [Nellie sits down and rocks the cradle.]

The game proceeds for a little while, and then the 'mother' calls again:

  'Johnnie!' [_Children say_], 'Mother calls you, see.'
               [Johnnie runs quickly to the 'mother.']

  MOTHER
  Go round to the shop for me.
                         [Gives him money and a basket.]

Johnnie may go outside the room and come back again, or the game
'Shopping' (No. 6, p. 10) may be played, having been previously prepared
in another part of the room, and Johnnie may go to the shop for what his
mother requires. When he has returned, all the children say:

  Little children, always run
    When your mother's voice is heard,
  Leave your play whene'er she calls
    Quickly mind her every word.


17. _TAKING FATHER'S TEA_

A classroom may be used for the 'house' and another for the 'workshop,'
or they may both be made by rings of children (see Frontispiece, and
description of same on p. 31). Between the 'house' and the 'workshop'
there should be a 'street' (see Game No. 12, p. 24). In the workshop
there should be 'joiners' planing, hammering, sawing, &c. (a set of toy
tools might be used for this), and in the 'house' a little girl should
represent the 'mother.'

Two children come walking quickly down the 'street' towards the 'house,'
saying:

  Straight away from school we go,
  To take our father's tea, you know.

They enter the 'house,' and the 'mother' gives a jug to one and a basket
to the other, and says:

  With care the jug of tea you'll hold,
  And make good haste lest it get cold.

Children reply:

  Oh yes, dear mother, all you say
  We'll mind right well--and now, away.

They walk up the 'street' to the 'workshop,' and the 'father'--a joiner
with sleeves rolled up--comes to the door.

  FATHER
  Ah! my children, here you come,

  CHILDREN
  Yes, we've brought your tea from home.

Father takes the jug and basket, saying:

  Thank you, now run home and play;
  I am working late to-day.

Children say 'Good-bye,' and run off.


_INVITATIONS_

_Preliminary._--Children should be taught to express thanks not only for
tangible presents, as in Game No. 15, but also for kindness or favours
received. The two games which follow are intended to teach this.


18. _INVITATION TO PLAY_

A house with garden is needed; to make this the children join hands and
stand as shown in diagram, p. 32. In the 'house' there should be a
'mother,' and in the 'garden' a number of children playing with ball or
skipping-rope. A smaller 'house' is required at some distance from the
first. In this, also, there should be a 'mother'--(Mrs. Day), and a
little girl--(Nell). A classroom may be used for this 'house' if more
convenient.

As the play proceeds the 'mother' comes to the 'door' to watch the
children's game. Presently one of them--a boy--runs up to her and says:

  Mamma, please, may we ask Nell Day
  To come and have a game of play?
            [The other children come and cluster round.]

  MOTHER
  Oh, yes! I will a message send--
  An invitation for your friend.
  Just go and ask if Mrs. Day
  Can spare Nellie to come all day.

  ALL THE CHILDREN
  Thank you, mother.

The boy runs off to Mrs. Day's house and knocks. Mrs. Day answers the
door.

  CHILD
  Please, Mrs. Day, may Nellie come
  To play all day with us at home?

If Mrs. Day says 'Yes,' Nell should reply, 'Thank you, mother,' and Mrs.
Day should also send a message of thanks to the boy's mother. When Nell
is ready, they run off hand in hand.


19. _INVITATION TO DRIVE_

The house and garden described in Game No. 16, p. 32, will do quite well
for this also, but the children are to be at work instead of play. One
child may be fetching water, another minding the baby, and another
watering the garden or going errands. A gentleman (boy) comes to the
garden-gate (a space is left for the gateway), with 'carriage' and
'horses'; the 'carriage' is made in the same way as the 'coach' (Game
No. 24, p. 48), and has two horses instead of four. Gentleman walks
through the 'garden,' knocks at the door, and says:

  Good morning, madam; if I may,
  I'll drive your children out to-day.

  MOTHER

  I thank you, sir [_beckons children to her_]; come children!
        [_children run to her_].

  GENTLEMAN
  Such busy, happy children, they
  Shall drive with me far, far away.

  CHILDREN
  Oh, thank you, sir, 'twill pleasant be
  To ride with you nice things to see.

Children enter carriage, waving hands to 'mother,' and saying:

  Good-bye, dear mother, off we go,
  The horses gallop fast, we know.


20. _GETTING READY FOR BED_

This game may be used for a class of children, or for a few only. In the
former case, the majority of the scholars would, of course, be
lookers-on.

Half a dozen boys and girls should be playing in different parts of the
room; one might be drawing, another building, and a third looking at a
picture-book; or they might all be joining to play a game together. A
big girl or the teacher represents the elder sister, who repeats (or
sings to the tune of 'The Campbells are Coming') the four lines
following:

  Come, children, get ready for bed, bed, bed,
  And sister must wash you, as mother said,
  The hands and the faces will all be clean,
  Such nice, happy children, shall ne'er be seen.

The children instantly put toys and books away in their proper places,
and reply:

  Some folks they do cry, when they're washed, oh dear! dear!
  Pray where do they live? We do not want them here.
  Merry, happy little children, come and get well scrubbed,
  But do not cry when you are washed and rubbed.

The 'sister' pretends to wash all the children; then they say:

  Some folks they do cry when they're told, 'Time for bed,'
  Some folks pout and say, 'Oh! let me play instead.'
  Merry, happy little children, laughing go away,
  Good-night, good-night, we'll play another day.

The children go out of the room kissing hands to those who are left, or
to the elder 'sister.'


21. _WASHING ONE'S SELF_

The teacher may repeat the lines, accompanying them with the actions,
which the children imitate, or the children may learn and repeat the
words themselves.

  [1]Wash your hands, dear children all,
    [2]Palms we rub and [3]backs as well,
  [4]Round the wrist we leave no mark,
       Else a sad tale that would tell;
  [5]Rub the knuckles, [6]brush nails, too,
     Clean, bright[7] hands nice work can do.

  Now 'tis time to [8]wash your face,
    [9]Soap your hands, and [10]rub away,
  [11]Gently round the ears we go,
    [12]Don't forget your eyes, I say;
  [13]Nose, and [14]mouth, and [15]forehead high,
  [16]All to make quite clean we try.

_Actions._--

[1] Pretend to wash hands.

[2] Rub palms together.

[3] Rub back of left hand with palm of right.

[4] Wash left wrist, then right.

[5] Rub knuckles of both hands.

[6] Brush nails of left hand with right fist.

[7] Show hands.

[8] Touch face with both hands.

[9] Pretend to rub soap on hands.

[10] Rub hands together.

[11] Wash the ears.

[12] Wash eyes.

[13] Rub the nose.

[14] Wash round mouth.

[15] Rub forehead.

[16] Rub all the face.


22. _ASKING FOR DRINK OF WATER_

_Preliminary._--This little game may be used to teach children to be
courteous to strangers, and it should also teach them how to carry
liquid without spilling.

_Directions._--The school or classroom should be the 'house,' and a boy
(representing the man who asks for water) should go outside. One child
is required to answer the door, and another may carry the glass of
water, or the same child may do both.

The 'man' comes and knocks at the door, which is opened by a little
girl; he then says:

  A drink of water, please, I pray,
  You'll give me, madam, this hot day.

A child walks across the room with the glass of water, which should be
carried on a plate or small tray, without spilling, and hands it to the
man, who takes it, saying, 'Thank you.' When he has finished drinking,
he returns the glass, and the child says 'Good-day,' and closes the
door.


23. _THE FOX AND THE TIGER_

_Directions._--The 'tiger' (a boy) hides in a 'forest,' which the
children make by standing at irregular intervals and representing trees.
Each child should name the tree it chooses, the following rhyme gives
the names of a few common trees:

  Beech and chestnut, birch and oak
    Are the names of English trees,
  Elm and willow, poplar, ash,
    Soon you will remember these.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--FOX'S DEN]

The children should see leaves from each tree, and country children
should be shown the trees themselves with the leaves growing on them.
The 'den' of the 'fox' is at the edge of the 'forest,' and is made by
ten children standing as shown in fig. 3. The four children who form the
entrance join hands as shown, and the other six meet hands in centre. A
better way of making the den would be for each child to hold a branch of
a tree, then the _branches_ would meet instead of the hands. The
children who stand for 'trees' in the 'forest' wave branches, if the
latter are obtainable; if not, the arms are waved for branches. One of
the bigger girls should be the 'fox,' and two or three of the smallest
children should be cubs, and go into the den with the fox. Then the fox
comes walking out of the den, and says:

  I go to find a duck
    For dinner this fine day,
  And you, my pretty cubs,
    Will stay at home and play.

While she is absent, the tiger comes softly into the den and takes one
of the cubs (leading the child away by the hand). Presently the fox
returns, goes into the den, misses the cub, and chases the tiger.


24. _THE COACH GAME_

[Illustration:

  x      x      x      x
  13     14     15     16

  x                    x
  11                   12

  x                    x
  9                    10

  x      x      x      x
  5      6      7      8

  x      x      x      x
  1      2      3      4]

The 'coach' is formed by children standing in position as shown on
diagram. All the children face the same way. 1, 2, 3, 4 are 'horses' and
join hands behind, as in 'Bell-horses'; 5, 6, 7, 8 join hands to make
the front part of the 'coach'; '5' holds the coat of 'horse' No. 1 with
right hand, while '8' holds coat of '4' with left; 9, 10, 11, 12 each
hold the dress of the child standing in front; 13, 14, 15, 16 join
hands; '13' catches hold of No. 11 with right hand, and '16' holds the
dress of No. 12 with left. When the 'coach' is ready, the 'driver' (a
boy) repeats the lines:

  Here is my coach, who'll come and ride?
  The door, you see, is open wide.

Four 'passengers' advance, and the 'driver' makes way for them to enter
the 'coach' between '10' and '12,' saying:

  Jump in quick! quick! not long we stay,
  Then ready! steady! right away!

The 'door' is closed by '12' again grasping the dress of '10,' and the
'coach' moves off. The 'horses' should not go very quickly, else the
'coach' will probably lose its shape. The 'passengers' walk along with
the 'coach' until their destination is reached, when the 'driver' opens
the door and allows them to alight.

The above game may be played in conjunction with Nos. 25, 26 and 27.


25. _THE STABLE_

This game may be played immediately after 'The Coach,' or it may be
played alone.

_Directions._--The 'stable' is formed by a number of children who stand
in rows (see diagram) and join hands.

[Illustration:

  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x
  x     x     x     x     x
  x     x     x     x     x
  x                       x]

The 'hostler' (a boy) should stand near the 'stable.' When the 'coach'
(Game No. 24, p. 48) drives up, he goes to the driver and asks:

HOSTLER

  Shall I take your horses for a rest and feed?
  They are tired, I think, sir, and a drink they need.

DRIVER

  Yes, good hostler, take and give them nice fresh corn,
  With a pail of water; they have worked since morn.

The 'hostler' leads one horse into each stall, and pretends to give them
hay or corn. Then he carries water to them in a pail (a toy pail, price
1_d._, would do), and each drinks. After this he rubs them down, using a
brush or his hand.


26. _VISITING GRANDMAMMA_

_Directions._--Four little girls are selected to visit grandmamma, and
to carry messages and presents to her. Grandma's 'house' is made by a
ring of children (see Frontispiece, and description of same on p. 31),
and the girl who is to be 'Grandma' sits in the ring knitting. An
old-fashioned kerchief and cap help to make the 'grandma' more real, and
a pair of spectacles adds further to the effect. If the 'coach' game be
used in conjunction with this, the little girls may be the 'passengers'
and go in the 'coach' to grandma's house. The 'door' (see description of
Frontispiece on p. 31) should be opened by a little maid, then the four
children enter and repeat the lines:

  CHILDREN ALTOGETHER
  Good morning, grandma, we have come
  With messages from all at home.

  FIRST CHILD
  Mamma sends love, and I'm to say
  She hopes you are quite well to-day.
               [Grandma replies suitably.]

  SECOND CHILD
  These flowers, dear grandma, are for you,
                   [Gives her flowers.]
  In my small garden bed they grew.

  GRANDMA
  Thank you, my dear.

  THIRD CHILD [_handing a basket_]
  And here are cakes that Nellie made
  To send to grandmamma, she said.

  FOURTH CHILD [_giving basket to grandma_]
  Ripe fruit I bring for grandmamma,
  These pears and plums are from papa.

When 'grandma' has thanked each of the children, they take leave of her
and return home.

The Guessing Rhyme, No. 92, might be given after playing the above game.


27. _PAYING CALLS_

_Directions._--A ring of children form the 'house' (see Frontispiece,
and description of same on p. 31) or a classroom may be used for it. A
few chairs and a table should be placed in the 'house,' and there should
be a 'mother' and 'children.' A 'lady' (represented by a little girl)
comes and knocks at the 'door,' and the 'mother' opens it.

  VISITOR
  How do you do, dear Mrs. Brown?
  I've called upon you going to town.

  MOTHER
  I'm quite well, thank you, Mrs. May,
  And glad to see you this fine day.

The visitor then walks in and speaks to the children one by one; they
should answer without hesitation. Children are generally very shy and
awkward when addressed by strangers, but they should be encouraged to
reply with confidence and ease. Perhaps these little games may help to
give them confidence.

The game 'Paying Calls' might appropriately be followed by 'Afternoon
Tea'; both these are played with great glee by the little girls.


28. _AFTERNOON TEA_

The tea-tray is brought in by one of the children and placed on a table
near the 'mother,' who pours out the tea. One of the children carries a
cup to the visitor, and hands it to her, asking:--

  Will you take a cup of tea?

  VISITOR
  Yes, refreshing it will be.
         [Takes the cup and says 'Thank you.']

A plate or d'oyley may be placed in the lap of the visitor for the bread
or biscuit, which the child hands, saying:--

  Bread and butter, biscuits, cake.

  VISITOR
  Please a biscuit I will take.

The 'mother' may serve the children with tea, or there may be other
visitors calling, then the time of the children will be occupied in
attending to them.

When Mrs. May has finished, the child says:--

  Shall I take your cup away,
  And your plate, too, Mrs. May?
                      [Takes them away.]

By-and-by the visitor takes leave of the 'mother' and children, bidding
each 'Good-day,' and the 'door' is opened for her by one of the
children.


29. _SPRING FLOWERS_

All the children join to form a large ring, and one of the taller girls
stands in the centre to represent 'Spring.' The twelve flowers mentioned
in the verses should be represented by twelve children standing at
intervals in the ring. Before commencing the game, the child who
represents 'Spring' might appropriately repeat the lines of Guessing
Rhyme No. 74, p. 95.

The 'Flowers' step forward from the larger ring as the name of each is
mentioned in the verses, and form a smaller circle round 'Spring.' The
children should join hands to close up the gap which is left by each
'Flower' as it steps forward to join the small circle.

  A Daffodil am I,
    And I a Daisy small;
  A Bluebell I come here,
    I'm Buttercup so tall.

  The Cowslip should come next,
    And then the Violet sweet,
  The Snowdrop fair and white,
    The Crocus trim and neat.

  The starry Celandine,
    Anemone, so fair,
  The yellow Primrose, sweet,
    Lily, with fragrance rare.

The 'Flowers' then join hands and repeat the verse following:--

  Whene'er Spring shows her face
    The flowers all come again,
  We cluster round the 'Spring,'
                        [All the Flowers bow.]
    We follow in her train.
                        [Flowers turn to right.]

'Spring' marches round inside the larger ring, and the 'Flowers' follow
in order.


30. _SUMMER FLOWERS_

This game is played like the game of 'Spring Flowers' (see instructions
on p. 56).

The girl chosen to represent 'Summer' may repeat the verse given in
Guessing Rhyme No. 75, p. 95, and then the 'Flowers' step forward as
their names are mentioned in the rhymes which follow.

  First comes the Pink Wild Rose,
               [Rose steps forward.]
    The White rose, too, is here
  Next Honeysuckle sweet,
    And Foxglove standing near.

  The scented Mignonette,
    Dog-daisy gold and white,
  The pretty Cornflower blue,
    And Marigold so bright.

  A Campion white grows here,
    And next a Campion pink,
  Here's Clover from the field,
    Harebell comes next, I think.

The 'Flowers' then join hands and repeat the following rhyme:--

  A ring we make round Summer sweet,
  Oh Summer, Summer, thee we greet:
                             [All bow.]
  For bright and happy is our play
  All through the livelong Summer day.

The 'Flowers' then dance round 'Summer.'


31. _THE THREE BEARS_

This game may be played either in the home, schoolroom or classroom. The
words should be learnt previously as a recitation.

_Materials required._--Three mugs or basins of various sizes, with a
spoon in each; three stools or chairs of various sizes, and three beds.
The latter may be made by laying shawls or coats on the forms or floor.
The 'beds' should vary in size, the first being the largest, the next
smaller, the third smaller still.

Three boys or girls should be chosen to represent the Three Bears, and
these also should vary in size. The 'Bears' go outside the room.

The child who represents the little girl should know the rhymes well.
When all is ready she comes in and, standing near the open door, says:--

  What a funny house I see!
    Surely I may step inside,
  All is quiet as can be,
    And the door is open wide.
            [Walks slowly towards the mugs.]

  Pots of food are near the fire.
    I must taste them, one [tastes the first], two [tastes the second],
          three [tastes the third];
  Oh, how good, I'll eat it all,
    For my breakfast it shall be.
            [Puts the mug down and turns to stools.]

  Three stools! first [sits on first] and next [sits on it] too high,
    Tiny one is just for me.
                          [Sits on third.]
  Oh, 'tis broken [tumbles off], off I go,
    What else is there yet to see?
                          [Walks towards beds.]

  Beds, a large one [lies down], that is hard, [Rises.]
    This one [pointing to middle bed] is too long, I fear,
  Oh, how soft [lies down in little bed], I'll take a rest,
    In the little bed just here.
                         [Pretends to sleep.]

The three bears come tramping in. The big one takes up his mug and says,
'Who has been at my porridge?' The second bear says the same; and then
the little bear takes up his mug and says, 'Who has been at my porridge
and eaten it all up?'

They proceed in the same way with the stools, the little bear finishing
with 'Who has been sitting on my stool, and broken it?'

Then they go to the beds in order, asking one after the other, 'Who has
been at my bed?' until it comes to the little bear's turn, when he says,
'Who has been at my bed? and here she is still!'

The little girl now opens her eyes, and, seeing the bears, jumps up
quickly and runs off.


32. _IMITATING CRIES OF ANIMALS_

(A simple game for the very smallest children.)

One child comes out to stand in front of the class and says:--

  Listen to the cry I make,
  Then, if you the trouble take,
      You may guess my name.

He then imitates the cry of some animal, the 'bark' of a dog, the 'mew'
of a cat, or the 'crowing' of the cock, and the children who wish to
answer hold out the hand. The child who is allowed to give the name of
the animal represented by the cry comes out (if the answer is correct)
and makes the cry of another animal, first repeating the lines as
before. The following are some of the cries that the children may be
able to imitate, 'cluck, cluck' (hen), 'quacking' (duck), 'hissing'
(goose), 'neighing' (horse), 'braying' (donkey), 'grunting' (pig),
'chirping' (bird) or talking like the parrot.


33. _CHARADES_

_Preliminary._--Everyone knows how fond children are of representing
ideas by action. It is for this reason that charades are recommended
here. It will, of course, be necessary for the teacher to assist and
suggest, but the children soon acquire confidence, and their acting,
being perfectly natural, is often remarkably good.

A very simple little charade is given as an example.

The children who are to take part go out of the room for a few minutes
with the teacher. We will suppose the word chosen is

TEA-CAKE

ACT I.--The teacher is to be the 'mother' and the rest are children. The
'mother' enters and sits down; presently the children come trooping in
from school and gather round her. She asks what they have been doing at
school, each one tells her something about its work or play, and then
one child asks, 'May we have tea, mother, please?' 'Yes,' says the
mother, 'go and take off your hats and we will get it ready.' (End of
Act I.)

ACT II.--The tea-table is prepared (see Game No. 1, which is similar)
and the children sit down to tea. (The 'guessing' children should be
told to listen carefully to what is said during tea.) One child asks for
the _cake_ to be passed, another for bread and butter, and so on. (End
of Act II.)

ACT III.--In the last act the whole word is to be given. The children
pretend to have a baker's shop (see 'Shopping Game,' No. 6), one child
keeps the shop, and the rest come to buy. One asks for a loaf, another
for rolls, a third buys a _tea-cake_, and so on.

Bricks and tablets may be used for the loaves and cakes, or they may be
made in the clay-modelling lesson and kept for this game.

_Finding the word._--The children who have been listening are now asked
to guess, and may be encouraged by remarks, such as, 'Think of the first
act, and what the children said to their mother.'

'Remember the tea-table and what was said there.'

Some of the words thus obtained may be written on the blackboard, words
for each act being put in separate columns.

'Now what did the baker sell?' In this way the answer is soon obtained.

It is well worth while to help the children to learn how to play
charades, because it makes such a pleasant home-play for them in wintry
and wet weather.


34. _PASSING THE STICK_

The children sit round the room, or stand in a semi-circle. The teacher
should start the game, standing at the left extremity of the
semi-circle, with the stick in her right hand, and repeat the lines:--

  On the floor you see I [1]tap my [1]stick, [1]stick, [1]stick,
  Then I [2]pass it to my [3]neighbour quick, quick, quick,
  If you know it, then please do the trick, trick, trick.

The children who do not know the game will probably _omit_ to pass the
stick into the left hand; as each one tries to do the trick, the teacher
says 'right' or 'wrong' as the case may be, and those who are wrong are
told to notice particularly how the teacher does it.

[1] Tap floor.

[2] Pass stick from right hand to left.

[3] Give it to neighbour.


35. _FINDING THE THIMBLE_

This is a favourite game and can be played with very little noise. At
home, _all_ the children would go out of the room except the one who
remains behind to hide the thimble, but when played in the school or
classroom, it will be sufficient if six children are sent out.

The thimble is to be placed where it can be seen, the children are then
called in, and the one who has hid it says:--

  Try to find the thimble out,
  Use your eyes and look about,
  Look before and look behind,
  And when you the thimble find,
                  Just sit down.

As soon as any child sees the thimble, he takes a seat and remains quite
still until all the seekers have seen it, and each in turn has sat down.
Then the child who _first_ saw the thimble takes it from its
hiding-place, and has the privilege of remaining behind to hide it next
time. Different children should go out each time, so that all may have a
turn.


36. _THROWING THE HANDKERCHIEF_

The children stand in a ring, or sit round the room, one child standing
in the middle. The handkerchief is thrown from one to another, and the
one who is 'out' tries to find a child with the handkerchief in its
hand. As soon as he can do this, the child who was caught with the
handkerchief has to stand in the centre, and the other one sits down, or
stands in the ring, as the case may be.

As the game begins, the children say:--

    The handkerchief is thrown,
    Find quickly where 'tis gone:
  From you to me, from me to you,
  To keep it long will never do.


37. _PICKING UP POTATOES_

Take twelve potatoes and place them in two rows of six each, thus:--

[Illustration:

  * * * * * *
  * * * * * *]

Two medium-sized spoons are required with which to take up the potatoes,
and a basket is placed two or three yards away to receive them.

Two children are chosen to pick up the potatoes, one standing at the end
of each row. The rest of the children may be grouped on the gallery, or
may stand round in a ring.

The following verse is repeated either by teacher alone, or by all the
children, as the spoon is handed to each child.

  Take this spoon, and with it see
  That you lift so carefully
  These potatoes. One! two! three!

The last three words are said slowly, and the game is to begin
immediately 'three' is said. The child who gets his row of potatoes
_first_ picked up and deposited in the basket wins the game. The
potatoes are not to be touched, except by the spoon, and they are to be
carried one by one in the spoon to the basket.




II. GAMES FOR THE PLAYGROUND


38. _THROWING THE BALL_

One child holds the ball in her hand and stands at a little distance
from the wall against which it is to be thrown. The other children are
gathered near in a group or semi-circle. When all are ready, the
children say:--

  Throw the ball against the wall,
  Then we'll listen for your call.

The child who is holding the ball replies:--

'One, two, three, Pollie Burton' (supposing that to be the name of the
child called), and throws the ball, all the children running off except
the one whose name was mentioned. If the latter is successful in
catching the ball, it is returned to the girl who had it first and the
game is repeated, another name being substituted. If the ball is not
caught, the child who was called picks it up and runs after the other
children until she manages to hit some one with it. The child who is hit
picks up the ball and all return to the starting place. The lines are
again repeated and the game proceeds as before.


39. _LAME LASSIE_

At the commencement of the game the children stand in a large ring, and
the girl who is to be 'Lame lassie' stands in the centre. The children
then say:--

  Now Lame lassie give us chase,
  Get one quick to fill your place.

They all run off, and 'Lame lassie' follows until she manages to touch
some other child. Wherever the latter is touched, she must place her
hand on that particular spot and run after the others until she is
successful in reaching some one else. Sometimes a child will be holding
its shoulder or elbow, or it may have to hold up one leg and hop on the
other. This is a game which causes much fun and merriment.


40. _POLLY FLINDERS_

The children form a ring, joining hands, and one child sits in the
middle. Those who form the ring walk round singing to the tune of 'The
Keel Bow.'

    Here's Polly Flinders,
    She sits on the cinders,
  Waits for a fairy to come and bring her news.
    Stand upon your feet, dear,
    Take a look around here,
  Kiss the one you love best, the one you like to choose.

At the word 'stand' the child in the centre rises to her feet, and when
the rhyme is ended she chooses a child to take her place in the centre
and returns to the ring. All the children stand still while the choice
is being made.


41. _DROP, DROP, DROP_

The children stand eighteen inches apart in a ring, _not_ joining hands.

One child walks round the ring, holding a handkerchief in her hand, and
repeating the words:--

  One, two, three,
  Come follow me,
  Drop, drop, drop,
  Where shall I stop?

At the word 'stop,' she drops the handkerchief near one of the children,
and runs; the child picks it up and follows her as she threads her way
in and out of the ring, until she is caught. Then the 'chaser' goes
round the ring with the handkerchief, repeating the rhyme, and the child
who was caught stands in the other one's place.


42. _PUSS IN THE CORNER_

This game may be played by four children, each standing at a corner,
with one in the centre for 'pussy,' or it maybe played by a ring of
children.

The child who is 'pussy' stands in the centre of the ring, and the
others say:--

  Pussy cat, pussy cat looking so spry,
  Might very soon catch us, if she would but try.

Two children then beckon to each other and exchange places. (If a ring
is formed, the two children should come from opposite sides of it.) As
they are crossing, 'pussy' tries to catch one of them; if she succeeds,
the child who is caught stands in the centre, and the old 'pussy' takes
her place in the ring or corner.


43. _WOLF AND SHEEP_

One child is the 'wolf' and stands on one side of the playground, while
the rest of the children are 'sheep,' and stand in a row on the opposite
side.

  _Wolf_: Where's your shepherd, pretty sheep?
  _Sheep_: In his cottage, fast asleep.
  _Wolf_: I will catch you as you run,
  _Sheep_: If we let you, there's the fun!

The 'wolf' and 'sheep' then change sides, and in crossing the 'wolf'
touches as many of the 'sheep' as she can; these all go to her side and
help to catch more 'sheep' next time. The game proceeds until all the
'sheep' are caught except one, and that one is 'wolf' next time.


44. _DANCING GAME_

The children stand in two rows facing each other, thus:--

[Illustration:

                               g
                        <--------
  c                             e a
  x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
   O                            []
  x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x
  d                             f b
                        <--------
                               h]

The following is sung to the tune of 'Pop Goes the Weasel.'

  Have you seen my monkey, Jack?
    Gay old Jack, so funny!
  He can climb, or nuts can crack,
    Or take your money.

As the children begin to sing, '=a=' and '=b=' join hands and dance down
to '=o=,' then change hands and dance back again to []; then '=a=' goes
behind '=e=' as shown by line '=g=,' and stands at '=c=,' while '=b='
goes behind '=f=,' following the line '=h=' and stands at '=d='; '=e='
and '=f=' proceed in the same way, and each couple follows in turn.


45. _DUCKING UNDER_

The children stand in rows facing each other, each child holding the
handkerchief of its opposite partner, and so helping to make a long
tunnel. As they stand thus the verse is repeated:--

  Ducking under is the game,
    Are you ready, children, all?
  Hold your handkerchiefs quite fast,
    Then run under when I call,
                    One, two, three.

[Illustration:

  a  x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x  c
  b  x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x  d]

At 'three,' '=a=' and '=b=' run under, and stand at '=c=' and '=d='
respectively, extending handkerchiefs as quickly as possible, so that
the next couple may be able to pass under. The couple who stood next
'=a=' and '=b=' at the beginning follow, then the next couple, and so
on until the 'tunnel' has moved round the playground.


46. _WHO'LL GO A-HUNTING_

[Illustration:

      __a__
     /  X  \
    /   |   \
   /    |    \
  /     |     \
  \c    |    d/
   \    |    /
    \   |   /
     \->X<-/
        b]

The children stand behind each other in couples at one end of the
playground, ready to dance off when the song begins. They start from
point '=b=,' and each holds his partner's hand until the other end of
the playground is reached, point '=a=,' then the hands are dropped; one
goes to the left (following direction of arrow '=c='), the other to the
right (arrow '=d='), and they meet again at the starting point '=b=,'
where they join hands and repeat the movement.

The following is sung to the tune of 'Weel may the Keel Row.'

  Who'll go a-hunting, a-hunting, a-hunting,
  Oh! who'll go a-hunting this merry, merry day?
  We'll catch the sly old fox--O,
  Safe in a box--O,
  Then who'll go a-hunting this merry, merry day?


47. _SHEEP GATHERING_

Two rows of children are formed facing each other, with a long chalk
line between. The children join hands.

[The first row advances to the chalk line, singing:--

KEY F.

  | d:--:d | d:--:m | s:--:m | d:--:d |
  | Here we  come to| ask of   you  a |

  | r:--:r   |  r:--:d  | t_{1}:--:l_{1}|s_{1}:--:|

               [First line recedes as second advances.

               [Second line advances singing:--

  | d:--:d   |  d:--:m    |  s:--:m  |  d:--:d   |
  |Pray which  good sheep | would you  like? the |

  | r:--:r | s_{1}:l_{1}:t_{1} | d:   ||
  |name you  please     must   | say. ||

[Second line retires, and first again advances singing:--

  Mary Burton [or any other name] is the name,
     so send her right away, away,

[Second line advances as first retires and sings:--

  Johnny Smith [or any other name] will come to
    fetch her, then begins the play.

The two children named then come out, and joining hands with the line
between them, try to pull each other over the line. If the child from
first line succeeds, then both children join that line, or _vice versa_,
and the game begins again.


48. _HOPPING GAME_

Squares are chalked on the ground, thus:--

[Illustration:

  +----+----+
  |  5 |  6 |
  +----+----+
  |  4 |  7 |
  +----+----+
  |  3 |  8 |
  +----+----+
  |  2 |  9 |
  +----+----+
  |  1 | 10 |
  +----+----+
      X]

and a stone or pebble is put at the place marked =x=.

The object of the game is to pass the pebble into each square with one
foot only, following the numbers in order. The child who is to begin
the game stands near the pebble, while the children say:--

  Here is a game for you, hippity, hop,
  Into the next place you make the stone pop.

The child then sends the stone into No. 1 square (hopping on one foot),
from that into Nos. 2, 3, 4 and so on. If the stone be sent outside the
square into which it should go, the player is out, and another begins.
The child who first gets the pebble into No. 10 square, having passed it
into each of the others successively, keeping on one foot all the time,
wins the game.


49. _MAKING A CHAIN_

The game is started by one child who catches another and says:--

  I have caught you, come away,
  Let us make a chain to-day.

The two then join hands and catch another, repeating the same words;
then the three start off and catch another, and so on until all are
caught.

The last child caught starts the game again, or the completed 'chain'
may form a ring and play one of the ring games, Nos. 40, 41, 42.


50. _MOTHER, MAY WE GO OUT TO PLAY?_

One corner of the playground may be the 'house' in which the 'mother'
sits. If the game is played by the children elsewhere, they will
probably mark out the shape of the 'house' on the ground with stones or
pebbles, a practice of which they are very fond. The children come to
the 'house' where the 'mother' sits, and standing in front of her,
ask:--

  _Children_:   Mother, may we go out and play?
    _Mother_: Yes, good children, that you may.

The children then run away, and after a little while return to the
mother; she asks:--

    _Mother:_ Where have you been?
  _Children:_   Away up the hill.
    _Mother:_ What have you seen?
  _Children:_   A house by a mill.
    _Mother:_ Who was there in it?
  _Children:_   A little, old man.
    _Mother:_ What said he to you?
  _Children:_   Catch me if you can.

The children then run off, and the 'mother' chases until she has caught
one or more; these are kept prisoners in the 'house,' and the game
proceeds until all are caught except one, and she is the 'mother' when
the game begins again.




III. GUESSING RHYMES


_Notes._--The Guessing Rhymes are intended to be read by the teacher to
the children, who then try to find out the word. The verse should be
repeated slowly two or three times before the children are asked to
guess. At first only the familiar and well-known objects should be
given, and even then it will sometimes be necessary to assist the
imagination of the children by a question or two. Before reading the
rhyme, the teacher should say whether it is a flower, object or animal,
&c., that is to be guessed.

The rhymes about animals, flowers, and natural phenomena will not be
difficult to the children if these subjects have been included in their
object lessons, or have formed the subject of 'morning talks' (see p.
14, 'Kindergarten Guide').

The Nursery Rhymes will have been learnt by the children when they were
in the Babies' class, and the rest of the rhymes belong to fairy tales
that are commonly told to all children.


_MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS_

  51. I'm tied up in a basin
        And boiled well in a pan,
      And then turned out and eaten,
        So guess me if you can.
                         PUDDING.

  52. Two hands I have, my face is round,
      In father's pocket I am found,
      My hands do move, I make a noise,
      Now guess me quickly, girls and boys.
                              WATCH.

  53. Are there cobwebs, is there dust,
        Are there crumbs upon the floor?
      Then you surely bring me out
        From behind the pantry door,
      And on sweeping days I'm seen,
      Making all things nice and clean.
                               BRUSH.

  54. Sometimes I'm made of willows,
        But oftener of wood,
      Four legs they always give me,
        Or else I am no good;
      A back I should have also,
        And two strong arms as well,
      Now if you think it over,
        My name you soon should tell.
                            ARM-CHAIR.

  55. You have me in your pocket,
        I'm square and white, 'tis true,
      And many things I'm used for
        By children, such as you.
                            POCKET-HANDKERCHIEF.

  56. I may be white, I may be brown,
      You draw me up or pull me down,
      At night I'm mostly down, you know,
      But in the morning up I go.
                          WINDOW BLIND.


  57. I glide along or fast or slow,
      And only on the water go;
      I'm long and narrow, and you see
      My pointed end [bow] that first should be;
      The broad end always goes behind [stern],
      And both have names as you will find.
                                        BOAT.

  58. By steam alone I move and go,
      Men have an engine down below;
      Long journeys oftentimes I make,
      When o'er the sea my way I take.
                               STEAMER.

  59. I skim so lightly o'er the sea,
      With wings outspread like bird so free,
      What are my wings? [sails] and do you see
      How o'er the waves they carry me?
                              SAIL BOAT.

  60. The fire burns very slowly,
        You come to look for me,
      I blow it till it blazes,
        All bright and cheerfully;
      I'm partly made of leather,
        The rest is iron and wood,
      I always have a round hole,
        Or else I am no good.--BELLOWS.

  61. I'm made of wood, or made of clay,
      And used at any time of day;
      When father comes from work at night,
      Perhaps he takes me, strikes a light,
      And puffs--ah, then what do you smell?
      Now surely you my name can tell.
                                  PIPE.


_ANIMALS_

  62. I watch your house all night,
        When you're asleep, my dear,
      If any thief should come,
        My voice you soon would hear.
                                DOG.

  63. A gentle, timid creature, I
      Shall soon run off if you come nigh;
      My horns, like branches of a tree,
      Above my head you always see.
                                  STAG.

  64. A little, creeping thing I saw,
        Upon a plant it stayed all day,
      And very many legs it had,
        And how it ate the leaves away!
                           CATERPILLAR.

  65. They are frisking in the field,
        By the side of mother dear,
      Playful, happy creatures, they
        Never think of danger near,
      And their coats so soft and light
      Keep them warm by day and night.
                                LAMBS.


  66. I take my trunk with me, wherever I go,
      'Tis not made of tin or of wood, oh, dear no,
      I use it to lift to my mouth things I eat,
      Just give me a biscuit, that would be a treat!
                        ELEPHANT'S TRUNK.

  67. My coat is made of soft, warm fur,
        My tail is thick and round,
      My eyes are very sharp and bright,
        Among the trees I'm found;
      I like to crack the nuts, you see,
      And jump about from tree to tree.
                                SQUIRREL.


_FLOWERS_

  68. Before the winter changed to spring,
      I saw a graceful, white, wee thing;
      Its pretty bell was hanging down,
      As if it thought, 'Too soon I've grown,'
      Although more snow we yet may see,
      We give glad welcome, flower, to thee.
                              SNOW-DROP.

  69. A yellow eye and frill of white,
      Which closes up when comes the night,
      Sometimes my frill is edged with pink,
      Now, surely of my name you'll think.
                                 DAISY.

  70. I come in the spring, and my bells are all blue,
      A pretty blue carpet I'm spreading for you.
                            WILD HYACINTH.
            (Commonly called 'Bluebell.')

  71. Another blue flower, that in summer we see,
      Has bells that are larger, in which dips the bee,
      And if you should give these blue bells a slight shake,
      A pretty, soft tinkle for you they would make.
                                  HAREBELL.

  72. Five petals I have which are white, as I think,
      Unless I should blush, then they turn rosy pink,
      I smell, oh, so sweetly, now guess me quick, quick!
      And mind, when you pluck me, the thorns do not prick.
                                WILD ROSE.

  73. All the hedge is snowy white,
      Covered with my blossoms bright,
      Sweetly I do smell, they say,
      And I come in month of May.
                          MAY BLOSSOM.


_NATURAL PHENOMENA_

  74. All the trees have buds of green,
      Pretty, yellow flowers are seen,
      Lambs are frisking, happy, free,
      Pray what season can this be?
                                  SPRING.

  75. Sunny days so bright and long,
      Sweet, new hay, and mower's song,
      Honeysuckle, roses sweet,
      Holidays, that are a treat.
                                  SUMMER.

  76. The reapers' scythes are heard among the yellow corn,
      There's harvest moon at night, and frosty air at morn,
      The hunter sounds his horn, ripe nuts and fruits are here,
      The leaves go whirling by, and colder days draw near.
                                  AUTUMN.

  77. Now we have the North wind bold,
      Bringing frost and snow and cold,
      Sliding, skating, oh what fun,
      When this season is begun!
                                  WINTER.

  78. Four sisters come past, one by one, every year,
      The _first_, in a dress of green buds will appear,
      The _second_ brings roses and flowers, oh, so sweet,
      The _third_ scatters gold and brown leaves at our feet,
      The _fourth_ often wears a white robe--now please tell
      The names of these sisters, you know them quite well.
                                            THE FOUR SEASONS.

  79. We are sometimes dark and heavy,
        Then you think there will be rain,
      We are sometimes light and fleecy,
        And the blue sky shows again,
      If you would see us, look above,
      Across the sky we always move.
                                CLOUDS.

  80. On a frosty morning, you may sometimes see
      All the fields and houses white as white can be,
      If the sun arise, the whiteness soon will go,
      Pray what can its name be? for it is not snow.
                              HOAR-FROST.

  81. In the early morning
        Drops are shining clear,
      On the leaves and grasses,
        In the flower-cups here;
      Through the night 'tis falling,
        But by noon of day,
      Sunshine warm and pleasant
      Sends it quite away.
                                  DEW.

  82. You want me very much when you go to fly your kite,
      I send it soaring upwards, to such a great, great height,
      Sometimes I lift your hat off, and you to catch it fly,
      You wonder where I come from, so now to guess me try.
                                            WIND.


_NURSERY RHYMES_

  83. A little boy once had a horn,
      I think he lived among the corn,
      And wore a pretty dress of blue,
      I've nearly told his name to you.
                          LITTLE BOY BLUE.

  84. A boy and girl walked up a hill,
        But tumble, tumble, down they came,
      And where's the water? where the pail?
        Of each poor child you know the name.
                          JACK AND JILL.

  85. Somebody has a garden,
        We ask her how it grows,
      Such funny things she says are there,
        A-growing all in rows.
          MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY.

  86. Who sat down in a corner,
        One Christmas, long ago,
      And thought himself a good, good boy,
        While eating pie, you know?
                      LITTLE JACK HORNER.

  87. 'Twas something about a supper,
        And something about a knife,
      And something about a boy that cried,
        And something about a wife.
                      LITTLE TOM TUCKER.

  88. 'Where is your flock, my little maid?'
      'They're lost, all lost, kind sir,' she said,
      'I slept and dreamed, but found not one,
      Ah! here they are with tails all gone!'
                          LITTLE BOPEEP.

  89. She had a dog, and he could smoke,
        And dance, and laugh or cry,
      This woman and her dog you know,
        To find her name please try.
                      MOTHER HUBBARD.

  90. He tumbled from a wall so high,
      And if to pick him up they try,
      They find it is in vain, in vain,
      He cannot be picked up again.
                          HUMPTY DUMPTY.

  91. She sat upon a little stool,
        To eat her food one day,
      A spider came and frightened her,
        And quick she ran away.
                  LITTLE MISS MUFFET.


_FAIRY TALES_

  92. Who was it went her Grandmamma to see,
      In cloak and hood as pretty as could be?
                      RED RIDING HOOD.

  93. And pray whom did she meet, that said 'Good-Day,
      I'll race you, little maiden, all the way?'
                                  WOLF.

      And when, at last, she reached her Grandma's house,
      Who lay there in the bed, still as a mouse?
                                  WOLF.

  94. She sat by the fire, and she looked oh, so sad,
      Until a kind fairy made everything glad,
      Away drove the maiden in carriage so bright,
      With slippers that sparkled like jewels that night.
                              CINDERELLA.

      What time did the fairy tell someone to come
      To her carriage, and quick, oh, so quickly drive home?
                              12 O'CLOCK.

      And what did she lose? [Her slipper.] I think you know well,
      And what was the end of it all, can you tell?

  95. They say she slept a hundred years,
        Her hair down to her feet had grown,
      And then the brave prince woke her up,
        And claimed the maiden for his own.
                      SLEEPING BEAUTY.

  96. He climbed a stalk so wondrous high,
      It seemed almost to reach the sky,
      And then he slew, so we are told,
      A giant who was bad and bold.
                  JACK THE GIANT KILLER.

  97. Who was it had a pussy cat,
        And sent it o'er the sea,
      And then became Lord Mayor, they say,
        And rich as rich could be?
              DICK WHITTINGTON.




_Works by the same Author_

  1. 'The Dinner Table Song'} by Lois Bates,
     'The Tea Table Song'   } 1_s._ 4_d._ each
     Song, 'Washing Dishes' }(E. J. Arnold.)

  2. Foot-Rules, 9_d._ per dozen.

  3. 'Kindergarten Guide,' by Lois Bates, 6_s._ (Messrs. Longmans.)

  4. Cardboard Coins. Box of 220, 1_s._ 8_d._

  5. Wooden Knitting-pins. 10_d._ per dozen pairs.


  _Spottiswoode & Co. Printers, New-street Square, London._

       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 12, "Hubbare" changed to "Hubbard" (89. Mother Hubbard)






End of Project Gutenberg's Games Without Music for Children, by Lois Bates

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAMES WITHOUT MUSIC FOR CHILDREN ***

***** This file should be named 37165.txt or 37165.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/1/6/37165/

Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
