The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Outspan, by Percy Fitzpatrick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Outspan
       Tales of South Africa

Author: Percy Fitzpatrick

Release Date: August 29, 2011 [EBook #37260]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OUTSPAN ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Outspan
Tales of South Africa
By Sir Percy Fitzpatrick
Published by William Heinemann, London.
This edition dated 1897.

The Outspan, by Sir Percy Fitzpatrick.

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
THE OUTSPAN, BY SIR PERCY FITZPATRICK.

CHAPTER ONE.

  "_There is no art in the Telling that can equal the consummate art of
  the Happening_!"

It was a remark dropped by a forgotten someone in a prospector's hut one
night, years and years ago, when we had exhausted snakes and hunting,
lucky strikes and escapes, and had got away into coincidences.  One of
the party had been telling us an experience of his.  He was introduced
on the day he arrived to a man well known on the fields.  It seemed
quite impossible that they could have met before, for they compared
dates and places for ten years back, and yet both were puzzled by the
hazy suggestion of having seen the other before, and, in our friend's
case, of something more definite.  His remark to the other was:

"I can't help feeling that I saw you once in a devil of a fright
somewhere--or dreamt it, I suppose!"

But this first feeling faded quickly away, and was utterly forgotten by
both.  Later on they shared a hut near Rimer's Creek, and afterwards,
when houses came into vogue, they lived for several years together,
while the first impression was lying buried, but not dead.

One day, in the process of swapping yarns, the other man was telling of
the "narrowest escape he ever had"--and all due to such a simple little
mistake.  A ticket-collector took the tickets at the wrong end of a
footbridge.  Instead of collecting them as the passengers from the train
_went on to_ the bridge, he took them as they were _going off_.  The
result was that the crowd of excursionists was too great for the little
bridge, and it slipped between the abutments, carrying some two hundred
people into the river below, the narrator being one of them.  It was
then that the dormant idea stirred and awoke--jumped into life--and our
friend put up his hands as he had done fifteen years before, when the
little bridge in Bath dropped, and gasped out:

"My God! you were the other chap that hung on to the broken rail!
_That's_ where we met!"

That was what prompted the forgotten one to say after we had lapsed into
silence:

"There's no art in the Telling that can equal the consummate art of the
Happening!"

And I only recall the remark because it must be my apology for telling
plain truth just as it happened.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When a man has spent some years of his life--the years of young manhood
they generally are--in the veld, in the waggon, or tent, or Bush, it is
an almost invariable rule that something which you can't define
germinates in him and never entirely dies until he does.  When this
thing--this instinct, feeling, craving, call it what you will--awakens,
as it periodically does, it becomes a madness, and they call it
trek-fever, and then, as an old friend used to say, "You must trek or
burst!"  There are many stories based on trek-fever, but this is not one
of them; and if you were to ask those who know them, or, better still,
get hold of any of the old hands, hard-headed, commonplace, unromantic
specimens though they might be, who have lived in the veld--if you gave
them time to let it slip out unawares--you would find that every man
jack of them would have something to say about the camp-fire.  I do
believe that the fascination within the fascination is the camp-fire in
veld life, with its pleasant yarn-swapping, and its long, pregnant,
thoughtful silences, no less enjoyable.  The least loquacious individual
in the world will be tempted to unfold a tale within the circle of a
camp-fire's light.

Everything is so quietly, unobtrusively sociable, and subjects are not
too numerous in the veld, so that when a man has something _apropos_ or
interesting to tell, he commands an appreciative audience.  Nobody
bores, and nobody interrupts.  Perhaps it is the half-lazy preference
for playing the listener which everyone feels that is the best security
against bores and interruptions.

The charm of the life is indescribable, and none who have tasted it ever
weary of it, ever forget it, or cease to feel the longing to return when
once they have quitted it.

It was in '91, the year after the pioneers cut their way through the
Bush, with Selous to guide them, and occupied Mashonaland.  We followed
their trail and lived again their anxious nights and days, when they, a
small handful in a dense Bush, at the mercy of the Matabele thousands,
did not know at what hour they would be pounced on and massacred.

We crossed the Lundi, and somewhere beyond where one of their worst
nights was passed we outspanned in peace and security, and gossiped over
the ruins of ancient temples and the graves of modern pioneers.  There
were half a dozen of us, and we lay round the fire in lazy silence, too
content to speak, simply _living_ and drinking in the indescribable
glories of an ideal African night.

It was someone knocking his pipe out and asking for the tobacco that
broke the long silence, and the old Barbertonian, who had had to move to
release the tobacco, looked round with the air of wanting someone to
talk to.  As no one gave any sign, he asked presently:

"Are you chaps asleep?"

"No!" came in clear, wakeful voices, with various degrees of promptness.

"I was just thinking," he said, refilling his pipe slowly, "that this
sort of thing--a night like this, you know, and all that--although it
seems perfection to us, isn't really so perfect after all.  It all
depends on the point of view, you know.  A night like this must be a
perfect curse to a lion or a tiger, you know."

"Your sympathies are too wide, old man," said the surveyor.  "Chuck me a
light, and console yourself that your predatory friends do well enough
when others are miserable.  Take a more human view."

"If you want an outlet for your native sympathy, you might heave me out
a cushion," suggested another.  "I've made a pillow of a bucket, and got
a dent in my head.  The thick cushion, old boy, and I'm with you so far
as to say that the lions have a jolly hard time of it with so much fine
weather."

The Barbertonian lighted up his pipe and threw the cushion at the last
speaker.

"H'm!" he grunted between puffs.  "I was really thinking of it from
quite a human standpoint--the view of that poor devil who got lost here
two months ago.  Now, _he_ couldn't have thought much of nights like
these.  Do you think he mused on their beauty!"

"Oh, I heard something of him," said one.  "Lost for forty days in the
wilderness, wasn't he?  I remember.  The coincidence struck me as
peculiar."

"Yes, it was odd in a way.  He was just `forty days and forty nights.'
He went out with a rifle and five cartridges to kick up a duiker along
the river bank here, and somehow or other got astray towards sundown,
and lost his head completely.  Five cartridges, seven matches, no grub,
no coat, no compass, and no savvey!  That's a fair start for a forty
days' picnic, isn't it?" he resumed.  "Well, he fired off all his
cartridges by dark, trying to signal to his camp, and then threw away
his rifle.  Fact!  He broke the heads off two matches--he was shaking so
from fright--before he realised that there were only seven altogether.
But as he had nothing to cook, it didn't really make much difference
whether he had matches or not."

"What, in winter time, and with lions about?"

"_Yah_!  Well, you get used to that.  It was a bit frosty, and sometimes
wet, and at first the lions worried him a lot and treed him several
nights; but he says that that was nothing, while the sense of being
lost--dead, yet alive--remained.  What's that?  Live?  Oh, he doesn't
know himself how he lived, but we could pretty well tell by his
condition when we found him.  We were out shooting about five miles
down-stream, and on one of the sandy spits of the river we saw fresh
footprints.  Nigger, we thought, as it was barefoot.  We wondered,
because there were no kraals near here, and we had seen no cattle spoor
or footpaths.  I was on top of the bank every minute expecting a duiker
or Bush buck to make a break out, and--I tell you--I don't know when I
got such a start--such a _turn_, I should say--as when I caught sight of
a white face looking at me out of an ant-bear hole.  Great Caesar! there
was something so infernally uncanny, wild, and hunted in the look that I
instinctively got the gun round to cover him if he came at me.  When the
others came up, he crawled out, stark naked, sunburnt, scratched,
shock-headed--still staring with that strange hunted look--came up to us
and--laughed!  We led him back to our camp.  He could tell nothing,
could hardly understand any of our questions.  He was quite dazed.  His
hands were cut and disfigured, the nails were worn off with burrowing
for roots.  We went to his den.  It was a big ant-bear hole under an old
tree and among rocks--a well-chosen spot.  He had burrowed it out a bit,
I think, and in a sort of pigeon-hole or socket in the side of it there
were a few nuts, and round about there were the remains of nuts and
chewed roots, stones of fruit, and such things.  I never could
understand how it was that, being mad as he certainly was then, he had
still the sense--well, really it was an instinct more than any
knowledge--to get roots and wild-fruits to keep body and soul together!"

"A suggestive subject, truly," said a man who had more millions to his
credit than you would expect of a traveller in Mashonaland.  "A man
starving within rifle-shot of his friends and supplies.  Helpless in
spite of the resources that civilisation gives him, and saved from
absolute death by a blessed instinct that we didn't know was ours since
the days of the anthropomorphic ape!  H'm!  You're right, Barberton!  He
couldn't have thought much of the beauties of the night, and, if he
thought at all, he must have placed a grim and literal interpretation on
the _Descent_ of Man when he was grubbing for roots with bleeding,
nail-stripped fingers or climbing for nuts without a tail to steady
him!"

Among us there was a retired naval man, a clean-featured, bronzed,
shrewd-looking fellow, who was a determined listener during these
camp-fire chats; in fact, he seldom made a remark at all.  He sat
cross-legged, with one eye closed--a telescope habit, I suppose--
watching Barberton for quite a spell, and at last said, very slowly, and
seemingly speaking under compulsion:

"Well, you never know how they take these shocks.  We picked a man up
once whose two companions had lain dead beside him for days and days.
Before he became delirious, the last thing he remembers was getting some
carbolic acid from a small medicine-chest.  His mates had been dead two
days then, and he had not the strength to heave them overboard.  I
believe he wanted to drink the carbolic.  Any way, he spilt it, and went
off his head with the smell of carbolic around him.  He recovered while
with us--we were on a weary deep-sea-sounding cruise--but twice during
the voyage he had short but violent returns of the delirium and the
other conditions that he was suffering under when we found him.  By the
merest accident our doctor discovered that it was the smell of carbolic
that sent him off.  Once--years after this--he nearly died of it.  He
had had fever, and they kept disinfecting his room; but, luckily for
him, he became dangerous and violent, and they had to remove him to
another place.  He was all right in a few days."

"Do you believe that a man could live out a reasonably long lifetime in
the way that `forty days' chap lived?  I suppose he _could_, eh!  Shoo!
Fancy forgetting the civilised uses of tongue and limbs and brain!  It
seems awful, doesn't it? and yet men have been known to deliberately
choose a life of savagery and barbarism--men whose lines had been cast
in easy places, too!"

"That's all very well," said Barberton.  "Now you are speaking of
fellows settling down among savages and in the wilds voluntarily, and
with certain provisions made for emergencies, etc, not of men _lost_."

"Even so, a man must deteriorate most horribly under such
circumstances."

"Well," said Barberton contemplatively, "I don't know so much about
that.  It all depends upon the man.  Mind you, I do think that the end
is always fiasco--tragedy, trouble, ruin, call it what you like.  We
can't throw back to barbarism at will.  For good or ill we have taken
civilisation, and the man who quits it pays heavy toll on the road he
travels, and, likely enough, fetches up where he never expected to."

The man who wrote for the papers smiled.

"I know," he said with kindling eye--"I know.  It was just such a case
you told us of at Churchill's Camp the other night.  A man of the best
calibre and training goes wild and marries two--mark you, _two_!--Kaffir
women, and becomes a Swazie chief, and then the drama of the--"

"Drama be damned!" growled Barberton.  "It was one case out of twenty of
the same sort."

Barberton was nervously apprehensive of ridicule, and hated to be traded
and walked out for effects.

"I was up on the Transvaal-Swazie border in '86," said the millionaire.
"I remember you told me something of them then.  It was a warm corner,
Swazieland, then--about the warmest in South Africa, I should think.
Eh?"

"You're right.  It was.  But," said Barberton, turning to the
correspondent, "you were talking of men going _amok_ through playing
white nigger.  Well, I can tell you this, that two of my best friends
have done that same trick, and I'd stake my head that better men or more
thorough gentlemen never trod in shoe-leather, for all their Kaffir
ways."

"Do you mean to say," asked the millionaire, "that you have known men
settle down among natives, living among them as one of themselves, and
still retain the manners, customs, instincts, habits of mind and body,
even to the ambitions, of a white man?"

"No--well, I can't quite say that.  Their ambitions, as far as you could
gauge them, were a Kaffir's; that is, they aspired to own cattle, and to
hunt successfully, but--And yet I don't know that it is right to say
_that_ even, because in almost every case these men get the `hanker' for
white life again sooner or later.  The Kaffir ambition may be a
temporary one, or it may be that the return to white ways is the passing
mania.  Who knows, any way?  From my own experience of them, I can say
that the return to their own colour almost invariably means their doom
and ruin.  I don't know why, but I've noticed it, and it seems like--
like a sort of judgment, if you believe in those things."

"And you know," he said, after taking a few pulls at the pipe again,
"there's a sense of justice in that, too.  Civilisation, scorned and
flouted, being the instrument of its own revenge!  If one could vest the
abstract with personal feelings, what an ample revenge would be hers at
the sight of the renegade--sick-hearted, weary, and shamefaced--coming
back to the ways of his youth and race, and succumbing to some one part
of that which he had despised and rejected _in toto_!"

Barberton generally became philosophic and reminiscent on these fine
nights.  Someone would make a remark of pretty general application, and
he would sit up and wag his old head a few times in silence; then, from
force of habit, examine his pipe and knock it out on the heel of his
boot, and then out would lounge some reminiscence in illustration of his
philosophy.

It was generally introduced by a long-drawn, thoughtful, "We-ll, you
know, I've always thought there was something curious about these
things."  He would have another squint down the empty bowl of the pipe
and ask for the tobacco.  There would be a couple of grunts, and then,
as he lighted up, he would say, between puffs, "I remember, in '78, up
at Pilgrim's," or, "There was a fellow up Barberton way in '86."

This night he sat in tailor fashion, with an elbow socketed in each
knee-bend, and his hands clasped over the bowl of his pipe.

"One of the rummiest meetings I ever had," said he, smiling thoughtfully
at the recollection, "was in the Swazie country in '85.  Did I ever tell
you about Mahaash and the Silver Spur!"

He gave a gurgling sort of chuckle, and puffed contentedly at the
big-bowled briar.

"There were two of us riding through the Swazie country, and making for
the landing-place on the Maputa side.  We had had a row with the
Portuguese about some cattle that the niggers stole from us.  A couple
of the niggers got shot, of course, during the discussion, and we had to
quit for a while and take a rest on the Lebombo.  But that's nix!  When
we got to the Komati, we were told that there was a white man on the
Lebombo whose Kaffir name was Sebougwaan.  That's the name the niggers
give to a man who wears an eyeglass or spectacles.  We were jogging
along doing our thirty miles a day, living on old mealies roasted on a
bit of tin, and an occasional fowl--Swazie fowl, two to the meal--helped
down by bowls of amazi--thick milk, you know.  We used to sleep out in
the Bush every night, with a blanket apiece and saddles for pillows, and
the horses picketed at our heads.  Man, it was grand on nights like
this!  We were always tired and often hungry; but to lie there in the
peace and stillness of the Bush, to look up at the stars like diamond
dust against the sky, and not care a damn for anything in God's world,
why--why--I call that living!  All those months we had no knowledge of
the outer world.  As far as we were concerned, there might as well have
been none.  We had one book, `The Ingoldsby Legends.'  If anyone could
have seen me reading Ingoldsby by the light of the fire, and have heard
every now and then the bursts of laughter over `The Jackdaw of Rheims'
or `The Witches' Frolic,' and others, his face would have been a study,
I expect.

"However, I was telling you about Mahaash.  Mahaash was a big induna,
and had about five to seven thousand fighting men.  He used to konza to
Umbandine, but paid merely nominal tribute, and was jolly independent.
He was the cleverest-looking nigger I have ever seen.  Small, thin, and
ascetic-looking, with wonderfully delicate hands, clear features, and
lustrous black eyes.  Really, he gave one the idea that he saw through
everything, or next to it, and though he said very little, he looked one
of the very determined quiet ones.  We had to pass his place to get to
Sebougwaan's, and, of course, had to stay the day and pay our respects.
His kraal was on top of the highest plateau, near the Mananga Bluff.  It
lay on the edge of a forest, and the road--an aggregation of cattle
tracks--was very steep and very stony.  You can imagine we were not
overflush just then, and what puzzled us was what to give the chief as a
present when he would accord us an interview.  Rifles and ammunition we
daren't part with, and we were mortally afraid they were just the things
he would want to annex.  Finally, it occurred to us to present him with
one of my chum's silver spurs.  Heron didn't favour this much.  He said
it would likely cause trouble; but I put that down to his disinclination
to spoil his pair of swagger spurs.  Only the day before our arrival the
chief had purchased a horse; he had sent to Lydenburg for it, and it was
the first they had ever seen in that part of the country--which seems
odd when you think that the chief's own name, Mahaash, means `the
Horse.'  However, to proceed.  We got word next day that the chief would
see us, and after the usual hour's wait we had our indaba, and presented
the silver spur.  I must say he viewed it very suspiciously--very!--and
when we showed him how to put it on, he gave a slow, cynical smile, and
made some remark in an undertone to one of his councillors.  I began to
agree with Heron about the unwisdom of giving a present so little
understood, and would gladly have changed it, but that Mahaash--who was
of a practical turn of mind--sent a man for our horses, and bade us ride
with the `biting iron' on.  We gave an exhibition of its uses which
pleased him, and we, too, felt quite satisfied--for a moment!  But
things didn't look quite so well when he announced that he was going to
ride his horse, and he desired Heron to strap the spur on to his bare
foot.  It was no use hesitating--we had to trust to luck and the chances
that a skinny moke such as his was would take no notice of a spur;
besides which Heron, with good presence of mind, jammed the rowels on a
stone and turned most of the points.  It was no good, however.  The
chief had never been astride a horse before; he was hoisted up by a
couple of stalwart warriors.  Once on, he laid hold of the mane with
both hands, and gripped his heels firmly under the horse's belly.  I saw
the brute's ears go flat on his neck.  The two supporters stepped back.
Mahaash swayed to one side, and, I suppose, gave a convulsive grip with
the armoured heel.  There was a squeal and scuffle, and a black streak
shooting through the air with a red blanket floating behind it.  The
chief bounced once on the stony incline, shot on for another ten feet,
and fetched up with his head against a rock.  I can tell you that for
two minutes it was just hell let loose.  We dropped our rifles--we
always carried them--and ran to the chief I believe if we had kept them
they'd have stuck us, for there were scores of black devils round each
of us, flashing assegais in our faces, and yelling: `Bolalile Inkos!
Umtagati! umtagati!'--`They have killed the chief!  Witchcraft!
witchcraft!'  But in another minute we saw Mahaash standing propped up
by several kehles, and holding one hand to his head.  He steadied
himself for a moment, gave us one steady, inscrutable look, and walked
into his private enclosure.

"For four days we remained there--prisoners in fact, though not in name.
Nothing was said about leaving, but our guns and horses were gone, and
we were given a hut to ourselves in the centre of the kraal.  We didn't
know whether Mahaash was dead, dying, or quite unhurt.  We didn't know
whether we were to be despatched or set free, or to be kept for ever.
On the morning of the fifth day we found our horses tied to the cattle
kraal in front of our hut, and a grey-headed induna brought word to us
that Sebougwaan, for whom we were looking, lived not far from there
along the plateau.  We took the hint, and saddled up.  As we were
starting an _umfaan_ brought a kid, killed and cleaned, and handed it to
me--a gift from the chief; and the old induna stepped up to Heron with a
queer look in his wrinkled, cunning old phiz, and said:

"`The chief says, "Hamba gahle",' (`Pleasant journey'), `and sends _you_
this.'

"It was the silver spur."

Barberton had another squint at his pipe, and chuckled at the
recollection of the old nigger's grim pleasantry.

"But I was telling you about that white man on the Bomba," he resumed.
"Well, we weren't long in making tracks out of Mahaash's kraal, and as
we dodged along through the forest, following a footpath which just
permitted a man on foot to pass, we realised how poor a chance we'd have
had had we tried to escape.  Every hundred yards or so we had to
dismount to get under overhanging boughs or trunks of fallen trees or
networks of monkey-ropes.  The horses had got so used to roughing it
that they went like cats, and in several places they had to duck under
the heavy timber that hung, portcullis fashion, across the dark little
pathway.  This was the only way out at the back of Mahaash's.  In front
of him, of course, were the precipitous sides of the Lebombo Range.

"We went on for hours through this sort of thing, hardly seeing sunlight
through the dense foliage; and when we got out at last into a green
grassy flat, the bright light and open country fairly dazzled us.  Here
we met a few women and boys, who, in reply to our stock question, gave
the same old reply that we had heard for days: `Sebougwaan?  Oh, further
on ahead!'

"We just swore together and like one man, for we really had reckoned to
get to this flying Dutchman this time without further disappointments.
We looked around for a place to off-saddle, and made for a koppie
surrounded by trees.

"Heron was ahead.  As we reached the trees, he pulled up, and with a
growing grin called to me, `I say, just look here!  Here's a rum start!'

"It was clearly our friend Sebougwaan.  He was standing with arms
akimbo, and feet well set apart, surveying critically the framework of a
house he was putting up.

"He had a towel round his loins, and an eye glass screwed tightly into
the near eye.  Nothing else.

"We viewed him _en profile_ for quite awhile, until he turned sharply
our way and saw us.  It was one of the pleasantest faces in the world
that smiled on us then.  Sebougwaan walked briskly towards us, saying:

"`Welcome, gentlemen, welcome.  It's not often I see a white face here.
And, by-the-by, you'll excuse my attire, won't you?  The custom of the
country, you know, and "In Rome--" Well, well.  You'll off-saddle, of
course, and have a snack.  Here, Komola!  Bovaan!  Hi, you boys!  Where
the devil are they?  Here, take these horses and feed them.  And now
just "walk into my parlour."  Nothing ominous in the quotation, I assure
you.'

"He bustled us around in the jolliest manner possible, and kept up a
running fire of questions, answers, comments, and explanations, while he
busied himself with our comfort.

"It was a round wattle-and-daub hut that he showed us into, but not the
ordinary sort.  This one was as bright and clean as a new pin.  Bits of
calico and muslin and gay-coloured kapelaan made curtains, blinds, and
table-covers.  The tables were of the gin-case pattern, legs planted in
the ground; the chairs ordinary Bush stools; but what struck me as so
extraordinary was the sight of all the English periodicals and
illustrated papers laid out in perfect order and neatness on the table,
as one sees them arranged in a reading-room before the first frequenters
have disturbed them.  There was also a little hanging shelf on which
were five books.  I couldn't help smiling at them--the Bible, a
Shakespeare, the Navy List, a dictionary, and Ruff's Guide.

"They say that you may tell a man by his friends, and most of all by his
books; but I couldn't make much out of this lot, with one exception.  I
looked at the chap's easy bearing, the pleasant, hearty manner and
torpedo beard, and concluded that the Navy List, at any rate, was a bit
of evidence.  However, he kept things going so pleasantly and gaily that
one had no time in which to observe much.

"Lots of little things occurred which were striking and amusing in a
way, because of the peculiar surroundings and conditions of the man's
life rather than because of the incidents themselves.  For instance,
when we owned up that we had had no breakfast, we found ourselves within
a few minutes enjoying poached eggs on toast, and I felt myself grinning
all over when the Swazie boy waited in passable style with a napkin
thrown carelessly over one shoulder.  Surely a man must be a bit
eccentric to live such a life as this in such a place and alone, and yet
take the trouble to school a nigger to wait on him in conventional
style.

"I thought of the peculiar littleness of teaching a nigger boy that
waiter's trick, and concluded that our friend, whatever his occupation
might be, was not a trader from necessity.  After breakfast he produced
some excellent cigarettes--another fact in the nature of a paradox.

"We were making for the landing-place on the Tembe River, and had
intended moving along again that day; but our host was pressing, and we
by no means anxious to turn our backs on so pleasant a camp, so we
stayed overnight, and became good friends right away.

"I was quite right.  He had been in the navy many years, and had given
it up to play at exploring.  He said he had settled down here because
there was absolute peace and a blissful immunity from the ordinary
worldly worries.  Once a week a native runner brought him his mail
letters and papers, and, in fact, as he said, he was as near to the
world as he chose to be, or as far from it.

"He had a curious gold charm attached to a watch-chain, which I saw
dangling from a projecting wattle-end in the dining-hut.  I was looking
at this, and puzzled over it; it seemed so unlike anything I had ever
seen.  He saw me, and, after putting us to many a futile guess, told us
laughingly that he had found it in one of the villages they had sacked
on the West Coast.  I don't know what sort of part he took in these
nasty little wars, but I'll bet it was no mean one.  We listened that
night for hours to his easy, bright, entertaining chat, and although he
hardly ever mentioned himself or his own doings, one couldn't but see
that he had been well in the thick of things, and dearly loved to be
where danger was.  Now and then he let slip a reference to hardships,
escapes, and dangers, but only when such reference was necessary to
explain something he was telling us of.  What interested us most was his
description of General Gordon--`Chinese Gordon'--with whom he appeared
to have been in close contact for a good while.  The little details he
gave us made up an extraordinarily vivid picture of the soldier-saint,
the man who could lead a storming-party, a forlorn hope, with a Bible in
one hand and a cane in the other; the man who, in the infiniteness of
his love and tenderness, and in the awful immutability of his decision
and justice, realised qualities in a degree which we only associate with
the Deity.  I felt I could see this man helping, feeding with his own
short rations, nursing, and praying with, the lowliest of his men, the
incarnation of mercy.  But I also saw him facing the semi-mutinous
regiment of barbarians, and, with the awful passionless decision of fate
itself, singling out the leaders here and there--in all a dozen men--
whom he shot dead before their comrades, and turning again as calm and
unmoved as ever to repeat his order, which this time was obeyed!  I
pictured this man, with the splendid practical genius to reconquer and
reorganise China, treasuring a cutting which he had taken from what he
verily believed to be the identical living tree from which Eve had
plucked the forbidden fruit.  Surely, one of the enigmas of history!"

"Do you mean to say that's a fact?" asked the millionaire, as old
Barberton paused.

"As far as I know, it certainly is.  Our friend told it as a fact, and
not in ridicule, either, for he had the deepest reverence and regard for
Gordon.  He assured us, moreover, that Gordon was once most deeply
mortified and offended by a colleague of his treating the matter as a
joke and laughing at it.  Gordon never forgot that laugh, and was always
constrained and reserved in the man's presence afterwards.

"I wish I could remember a hundredth part of our host's anecdotes of
well-known people, descriptions of places and of peoples, accounts of
travels and adventures.  He seemed to know everyone and all places.  It
was three in the morning before we thought of turning in.  After
breakfast we saddled up and bade adieu, but our friend walked along part
of the way with us to put us on the right path.  He was carrying a bunch
of white Bush flowers--a curious fancy, I thought, for a man clothed in
a towel and an eyeglass.  I remarked on the beauty of the mountain
flowers, and he held up the bunch.

"`Yes,' he said, `they are lovely, aren't they?  Poor old Tarry!  He was
my man--the only other white man that ever lived here.  He was with me
for many years, and died here two summers back--fever contracted on the
Tembe.  Poor old fellow!  I fixed him up on the bluff yonder.  He used
to gather these flowers and sit there every day of his life looking out
towards Delagoa, wondering if we would ever quit this place and get a
sight of old Ireland again.  I take him a bunch once in a while.  Come
up and see where a good friend lies.'

"We left the horses and climbed up the rough path, and looked at the
unpretentious stone enclosure and the soft slate slab with a rough-cut
inscription:

  "Paddy Tarry's Rest!
  _Are ye ready_?
  _Ay, ay, sir_!"

"Our friend leaned over the low stone wall and replaced the faded wreath
by the fresh one.

"We left him standing there on the ridge, clear-cut above the outline of
the mountain, and took our way down the rough cattle-path that wound
down to the still rougher, wilder kloof through which our route lay.  I
remember so well the way he was standing, one foot on a projecting rock,
arms folded, until we were rounding the turn that took us out of sight.
Then he waved adieu."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"We had unpleasant times on that trip to the Tembe.  We met all the
murderous ruffians in that Alsatia, and they were all at loggerheads,
thieving and shooting with both hands.  However, we got out all right
after months and months of roaming about, owing to the trouble about
those Kaffirs, and I think we had both forgotten all about Sebougwaan by
the time we fetched up in Lydenburg again.  There was always something
happening in that infernal outlaw corner of Swazieland to keep the time
from dragging!

"My chum went off to his farm; but I had no home, and took the road
again with waggons, and loaded for Barberton at slashing fine rates.  I
got there just as the Sheba boom was well on.  Companies were being
floated daily, shares were booming, money flowing freely.  All were
merry in the sunshine of to-day.  No one took heed of to-morrow.
Speculators were making money in heaps; brokers raking in thousands.

"You know how it is in a place like that.  After you have been there for
a few hours, or a day or two, you begin to notice that one name is
always cropping up oftener than any other; one man seems the most
popular, important, and indispensable.  Well, it was the same here.
There was always this one name in everything--market, mines, sport,
entertainment--any blessed department.  You can just imagine--at least,
you can't imagine--my surprise when I found that my naked white Kaffir
sailor-friend, Sebougwaan, was the man of the hour.  I couldn't believe
it at first, and then a while later it seemed to be the most natural
thing in the world; for, if I ever met a man who looked the living
embodiment of mental, moral, and physical strength, of good humour,
grace, and frankness--a born king among men--it was this chap.

"I met him next day, and he seemed more full of life and personal
magnetism than ever.  After that I didn't see him for three or four
days; you know how time spins away in a wild booming market.  Then
somebody said he was ill--down with dysentery and fever at the Phoenix.
I went off at once to see him.  I couldn't believe my eyes.  He was
emaciated, haggard, with black-ringed eyes sunk into his head, and so
weak that he couldn't raise his arm when it slipped from the bed.  He
spoke to me in whispers and gasps, only a word or two, and then lay back
on the pillows with a terrible look of suffering in his eyes, or
occasionally dropping the lids with peculiar suddenness; and when he did
this the room seemed empty from loss of this horrible expression of
pain.

"I stood at the foot of his bed, and didn't know what to do or say, and
didn't know how to get out of a room where I was so useless.  This sort
of thing may only have lasted a few minutes, or perhaps half an hour--I
don't know; but after one long spell he opened his eyes suddenly and
looked long and steadily into mine, sat bolt upright, apparently without
effort, lifted his glance till I felt he was looking over my head at
something on the wall behind me, and then raised both arms, outstretched
as though to receive something, and, groaning out, `Oh, my God! my poor
wife!' dropped back dead."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There were five intent faces upturned at Barberton as he stopped.  The
rosy glow of the fire lighted them up, and the man nearest me--the
millionaire--whispered to himself, "Good God! how awful!"

"Well, who was he?  Did you--" began the man who wrote for the papers.

Barberton looked steadily at him, and with measured deliberation said:

"We never knew another word about him.  From that day to this nothing
has ever been heard to throw the least light on him or what he said."

Far away in the stillness of the African night we heard the impatient
half-grunt, half-groan of the lion.  Near by there was a cricket
chirping; and presently a couple of the logs settled down with a small
crunch, and a fresh tongue of flame leaped up.  Barberton pumped a straw
up and down the stem of the faithful briar, and remarked sententiously:

"Yah, it's a rum old world, this of ours!  I've seen civilisation take
its revenge that way quite a lot of times--just like a woman!"

No one else said a word.  Now and then a snore came from under the
waggon where the drivers were sleeping.

The dog beside me gave some abortive whimpers, and his feet twitched
convulsively--no doubt he was hunting in dreamland.  I felt depressed by
Barberton's yarn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

But round the camp-fire long silences do not generally follow a yarn,
however often they precede one.  One reminiscence suggests another, and
it takes very, very little to tempt another man to recall something
which "that just reminds him of."  It was the surveyor who rose to it
this time; I could see the spirit move him.  He sat up, stroked his
clean-shaven face, closed the telescope eye, and looked at Barberton.

"Do you know," he began thoughtfully, "you talk of chaps going away
because of something happening--some quarrel or mistake or offence or
something.  That is all a sort of clap-trap romance, I know--the mystery
trick, and so forth; but I confess it always interests me, although I
know it's all rot, because of a thing which happened within my own
knowledge--an affair of a shipmate of mine, one of the best fellows that
ever stepped the earth, in spite of the fact that he was a regular
Admirable Crichton.

"He was an ideal sort of chap, until you got to know him really well,
and found out that he was cursed with one perfectly miserable trait.  He
never--absolutely _never_--forgave an injury, affront, or cause of
quarrel.  He was not huffy or bad-tempered--a sunnier nature never was
created; a more patient, even-tempered chap never lived--but it was
really appalling with what immutable obstinacy he refused to forgive.
In the instances that came under my own notice, where he had quarrelled
with former friends--not through his own fault, I must say--nothing in
this world, or any other, for that matter, could influence him to shake
hands or renew acquaintance.  His generosity and unselfishness were
literally boundless, his courage and fidelity superb; but anyone who had
seen evidence of his fault must have felt sorrow and regret for the
blemished nature, and must have been awestruck and frightened by his
relentlessness.  Death all round him, the sight of it in friends, the
prospect of it for himself, never shook his cursed obstinacy; as we
knew, after one piece of business.  He got the V.C. for a remarkable--in
fact, mad--act of courage in rescuing a brother officer.  The man he
carried out, fought for, fought over, and nearly died for, was a man to
whom he had not spoken for some years.  God knows what the difference
was about.  This was their first meeting since quitting the same ship,
and when he carried his former friend out and laid him safely in the
surgeon's corner of the square, the half-dead man caught his sleeve, and
called out, `God bless you, old boy!'  All _he_ did was to loosen the
other's grip gently, and, without a word or look at him, walk back into
the fight.  It seems incredible--it did to us; but he wouldn't know him
again.  He had literally wiped him out of his life!

"This trait was his curse.  He was well off and well connected, and he
married one of the most charming women I have ever met.  For years none
of us knew he was married.  His wife was, I am convinced, as good as
gold; but she was young, attractive, accomplished, and, in fact, a born
conqueror.  Perhaps she was foolish to show all the happiness she felt
in being liked and admired.  You know the long absences of a sailor.
Well, perhaps she would have been wiser had she cut society altogether;
but she was a true, good woman, for all that, and she worshipped him
like a god!  None of us ever knew what happened; but he left wife and
child, settled on them all he had in the world, handed over his estates
and almost all his income, and his right to legacies to come, went out
into the world, and simply erased them from his mind and life.

"That was a good many years ago--ten, I should think; and--I hate to
think it--but I wish I was as sure of to-morrow as I am sure that he
never recognised their existence again."

The surveyor shuddered at the thought.

"He was a man who could do anything that other men could do.  He was
best at everything.  He was loved by his mates, worshipped by his men,
and liked and admired by everyone who met him--until this trait was
revealed.  Others must have felt as I did.  When I discovered _that_ in
him, I don't know whether I was more frightened or grieved.  I don't
know that I didn't stick to him more than ever--perhaps from pity, and
the sense that he was his own enemy and needed help.  I have never heard
of or from him since he left the service, and yet I believe I was his
most intimate friend.  Oliver Raymond Rivers was his name.  Musical
name, isn't it?"

Barberton dropped his pipe.

"Good God!  Sebougwaan!"

CHAPTER TWO.

SOLTKE.

AN INCIDENT OF THE DELAGOA ROAD.

We were transport-riders trekking with loads from Delagoa Bay to
Lydenburg, trekking slowly through the hot, bushy, low veld, doing our
fifteen to twenty miles a day.  The roads were good and the rates were
high, and we were happy.

Towards sundown two of us strolled on ahead, taking the guns in hopes of
picking up a guinea-fowl, or a stembuck, or some other small game,
leaving the waggons to follow as soon as the cattle were inspanned.  We
shot nothing; in fact, we saw nothing to shoot.  It was swelteringly
hot, as it always is there until the red sun goes down and all things
get a chance to cool.  It was also very dusty--two or three inches of
powdery dust under our feet, which whipped up in little swirls at the
least breath of air.  I was keeping an eye on the scrub on my side for
the chance of a bush pheasant, and not taking much notice of the road,
when my companion pulled up with a half-suppressed exclamation, and
stood staring hard at something on ahead.

"Dern my skin!" said he slowly and softly, as I came up to him.  He was
a slow-spoken Yankee.  "Say, look there!  Don't it beat hell?"

In the direction indicated, partly hidden by the scant foliage of a
thorn-tree, a man was sitting on a yellow portmanteau reading a book.
The sight was unusual, and it brought the unemotional Yankee to a
standstill and set us both smiling.  The man was dressed in a sort of
clerk's everyday get-up, even to the bowler hat, and as he sat there he
held overhead an old black silk umbrella to protect him from such of the
sun's rays as penetrated the thorn-bush.  He must have become conscious
of the presence of life by the subtle instinct which we all know and
can't explain, for almost immediately he raised his glance and looked us
straight in the eyes.  He rose and came towards us, laying aside the
umbrella, but keeping his place in the book.

The scene was too ludicrous not to provoke a smile, and the young
fellow--he could not have been above twenty-three--mistaking its import,
raised his hat politely and wished us "good-afternoon."

He spoke English, but with a strong German accent, and his dress, his
open manner, his ready smiles, and, above all, his politeness,
proclaimed him very much a stranger to those parts.  Key murmured a line
from a compatriot: "Green peas has come to market, and vegetables is
riz."

"You have come mit der waggons?  You make der transport?  Not?" he asked
us, following up the usual formula.

We told him it was so, and that we were for the fields, and reckoned to
reach Matalha by sun-up.  He too, he said, was going to the gold-fields,
and would be a prospector; he was just waiting for his "boy," who had
gone back for something he had forgotten at the last place.  He was
going to walk to Moodie's, he said.  He "_did_ make mit one transporter
a contract to come by waggons; but it was a woman mit two childs what
was leave behind, and dere was no more waggons, so he will walk.  It was
good to walk to make him strong for de prospect.  Oh yes!"

We were used to meeting all sorts on the road, and they were pretty well
all inclined to talk; but this one was so full it just bubbled out of
him, and in his broken English he got off question on question, between
times imparting scraps of information about himself and his hopes.  He
was clearly in earnest about his future, and he was so utterly
unpractical, so hopelessly astray in his view of everything, that one
could not but feel kindly towards him.  We chatted with him until our
waggons came up, when he again politely raised his hat as he said
good-bye to us, and offered many thanks for the information about the
road.  As we moved on with the waggons, he turned to look down the road
by which we had come, and said, apparently as an afterthought:

"You haf seen my `boy' perhaps?  Not?  No!  Soh!  Good-bye--yes,
good-bye!"

It does not take long for daylight to glide through dusk into darkness
in the bush veld in South Africa, and even these few minutes spent in
conversation had seen the light begin to fade from the sky as the sun
disappeared.  The road was good and clear of rocks and stumps, so we
hopped onto the most comfortable waggon, and talked while the oxen
plodded slowly along.

We had quite a large party that trip, for, besides Gowan and myself, who
owned the waggons, we had three traders from Swazie country--old friends
of ours who had come down to Delagoa to buy goods.  We had all arranged
to stand in together in a big venture of running loads through
Swazieland to the gold-fields later on in the season; in fact, the trip
we were then making was more or less a trial one to see how the land
lay, and how much we could venture in the big coup.

Gowan, the other transport-rider, and I always travelled together.  We
were not partners exactly, but in a country like that it was good to
have a friend, and we understood each other.  There were no two ways
about him; he was a white man through and through.  The two Mackays were
brothers; they had left Scotland some years before to join a farming
scheme "suitable for gentlemen's sons with a little capital," as the
circular and advertisements said.  They had given it best, however, and
gone trading long before I met them.  The other member of our party was
the one with whom I had been walking.  He was an American, and had been
everything and everywhere, most lately a trader in Swazie country.  We
generally called him the Judge.

As the waggons rumbled along Key was giving a more or less accurate
account of our conversation with the stranger.

It was very amusing, even more amusing than the original, for I am bound
to say that with him a story did not suffer in the telling.  It was only
Gowan who didn't seem to see anything to laugh at in the affair.  He sat
there dangling his legs over the buck-rails, chewing a long grass stalk,
and humming all out of tune.  He had a habit of doing that, growling
with it.  Presently, as conversation flagged, the tune got worse and his
growling took the shape of a reference to "giving a poor devil a lift."

I frankly confessed that I simply had not thought of it, and that was
all.  As, however, Gowan continued growling about "beastly shame" and
"poor devil of a greenhorn," etc, Key answered dryly.

"Waal, I _did_ think of it; but, first place, they ain't my waggons--"

Gowan grunted out, "Dam rot!"

"And second place," continued Key placidly, "considerin' the kind o'
cargo you've got aboard, and where it's going to, I didn't reckon you
_wanted_ any passengers!"

"I don't want passengers," said Gowan gloomily; "but any damned fool
knows that that fellow'll never see food or blankets or `boy' again on
the face of God's earth.  Kaffir carriers don't forget things at
outspans.  No, not any that I've seen, and I've seen a good few."

Old Gowan took up the grass stem again, and chewed and tugged at it, and
made occasional kicks at passing bushes, by way of showing a general and
emphatic disapproval.  No one said anything; it was Gowan's way to growl
at everything, and nobody ever took much notice.  He was the most
good-natured, kindly old growler that ever lived.  He growled as some
sturdy old dogs do when you pat them--they like it.

In this particular case, of course, he had reason.  It is not that we
were inhospitable or unfeeling, but years of roughing it had, I suppose,
dulled our impressions of the first night alone in the veld, and we had
not seen it as Gowan did.  Life of the sort we led, no doubt, develops
the sterling good qualities of one's nature, but quick sympathy and its
kindred delicate traits are rather growths of refinement and quiet, and
it betrayed no real want of feeling that we had not taken Gowan's view.

There could be no doubt, of course, that the Kaffir boy had bolted with
the blankets and food, for we had noticed that the young German had
nothing left when we saw him but that yellow portmanteau, and our
knowledge of the Delagoa Bay "boy" forbade acceptance of the theory that
he had gone empty-handed.

We rumbled heavily along for a bit, and after a while Gowan resumed, in
a tone of deeper grumbling and more surly dissatisfaction than before:

"Like as not the silly young fool 'll lose himself looking for water,
and die in the Bush, like that one Joe Roberts brought up last season.
Why, I remember when--"

"Grave o' the Prophet!" exclaimed Robbie, starting up in mock alarm;
"he's going to tell us that dismal yarn about the parson chap who hunted
beetles, and was found after a week's search with two of his most
valuable specimens feeding on his eyes.  Skip, sonnie, skip! and fetch
up your German friend 'fore the old man gets under way."

Key dropped off the buck-rails, as the drivers shouted their "Aanhouws"
to the cattle to give them a breather, kicked his legs loose a bit,
dusted down his trousers quietly, and, smiling good-humouredly at Gowan,
"guessed it was better business to hump that gripsack a mile or two than
listen to old Yokeskey's prayers."  That was his irreverent way of
alluding to Gowan's calling of transport-rider--a yokeskey being part of
the trek gear.  Key and I set out together at a brisk pace, well knowing
how poor was our chance of catching up to the waggons again before the
midnight outspan.

Key, who was always tickled by Gowan's growling tones, remarked after we
had walked for some minutes:

"Sling hell like a nigger parson, you know, can the old 'un, but soft
and harmless as a woman."

After half an hour's brisk walking, we caught the unsteady flicker of a
fire through the straggling thorns, and we found our friend sitting
tailorwise before it, making vigorous but futile attempts to wisp aside
the smoke that would go his way.  His look of mild curiosity at the
sound of our voices wakened up into welcome when he recognised us, and
he at once became interested in the reason of our return.

"You haf lose something--not?  I, too, will look for you," he said,
jumping up eagerly; but we reassured him on that point, and inquired in
turn whether his "boy" had returned, and cross-questioned him as to the
when and wherefore of his leaving.

The Kaffir-bearer, he said, had left him that morning during the
after-breakfast trek.

"Ten hours gone, by Jimmie!" muttered the Judge.

"And you have waited here since then?"  I asked.

"Oh yes, yes!  I read to learn de English.  It is--"

"Had any scoff?"

"Please?"

"Had any grub--anything to eat or drink?" explained Key, illustrating
his meaning by graphic touches on mouth and belt.

"No, no; I am not hunger.  Also it is good that I eat not.  It make me
use for the prospect."

Key smiled gently, and said, with a quaint judicial air:

"Waal, I don't know as that's quite necessary; but ef you kin stick it
out till that nigger o' yours comes back, I guess you'll do for most any
camp you'll strike in this country.  Say!  Has he got the blankets?
Yes!  And the grub?  So!  An'--er--mebbe you didn't give him money as
well?"

"I haf give him one pound to pay the passport, which he forgot.  He say
policeman will take him if he shows not the ticket.  But he will come
bring to me the change.  He is ein goot boy, and he speaken English feul
goot; but perhaps something can happen, and that policeman haf take him,
I think."

Even in a new-comer such credulity was a revelation.  I could not help
smiling, but the Judge's clear-cut, impassive features never changed;
only, at the mention of the "boy's" lingual accomplishments, he winked
solemnly at me.

The Judge brought matters to a practical issue by telling our friend
that he "had much better wait at our waggons for the good boy that
speaks English so well."

"It ain't," said Key, "es if he couldn't find you.  A Kaffir kin find
you most anywhere if he wants to--'specially them English-speakin'
ones," he added, with a twinkle in his eyes.

Key did not wait for any reply, but turned the "yaller gripsack" over
and looked at the name, "Adolf Soltke," painted in big white letters.

"Your name?" he asked in chaff, rather than that he doubted it.

"My name, yea Soltke--Adolf Soltke--coom from Germany, but in der
colonie I was leetle times."

"Took you for Amurrikan," said the Judge, without a vestige of a smile.

I looked hastily at Soltke, feeling that his broken, halting English
should have protected him from such outrageous fooling, but my
solicitude was misplaced.  Soltke calmly, but firmly, disclaimed all
knowledge of America, and repeated that he was a German.

Key shouldered the portmanteau with the curt suggestion, "Waal, let's
git!" and as our friend--except by his protestations of gratitude and
wild endeavours to carry the whole of the kit himself--offered no
hindrance to the proposed scheme, we marched along briskly to overtake
the waggons.

A bullock-waggon is a slow one to travel with, but a bad one to catch,
as anyone knows who has tried it; and it was close on midnight when,
tired and dusty, we came suddenly on the waggons outspanned in a small
opening in the Bush.

The silence was absolutely ghostly, except when now and then a bullock
would give a big long sigh, or a sappy stick in the fire would crack and
hiss.

Gowan was sitting over the fire on a three-legged rough-wood stool, head
in hands and elbows on knees, with the odd jets of flame lighting up his
solemn old face and shaggy brown beard.  The others had turned in.  He
stood up slowly as we came up and extended a hand to Soltke, saying
baldly:

"How are ye?"

Our friend took the inquiry in a literal sense, and was engaged in
answering it, when Gowan cut in with a remark that it was "time to be in
bed," and, accepting his own hint, he hooked his finger in the "reimpje"
of his camp-stool and strolled off to where his blankets were already
spread under one of the waggons.

As he turned, he pointed with his foot to the fire, growling out that
there was a billy of tea and some stew warmed up "for him" (looking back
at Soltke), and adding, "Bread's in the grub-box.  'Night!" he turned
in.

It was just like him to remember these things, for in our routine there
was as a rule no eating during the night outspan.  It was breakfast
after the morning trek, and supper before the evening one.  Gowan had
also thrown out a couple of blankets, and between us we made up pretty
well for the lost bedding; so Soltke was installed as one of the party.
It says something for him that, in spite of our eight-mile walk and that
yellow portmanteau, the verdict under our waggons that night was: "Seems
a decent sort, after all, and it _would_ ha' been a bit rough to leave
him to shift for himself."

Soltke's stupendous greenness should have disarmed chaff; and, indeed,
at first we all felt that fooling him was like misleading a child: there
was no fun to be got out of it.  He believed anything that was told him.
He accepted literally those palpable exaggerations which are not
expected or wanted to be believed.  He took for gospel the account of
the Munchausen of the Bush veld who told how his team of donkeys had
been disturbed by a lion during the early morning trek, and how, to his
infinite surprise and alarm, he found that the savage brute had actually
eaten his way into one donkey's place, and when day broke was found
still pulling in the team, to the great dismay of the other members.  He
was anxious to make a personal experiment of the efficacy of dew taken
off a bullock's horn, which we had recommended as an infallible snake
charm.  At considerable risk he had secured the dew, and the scene of
Soltke's struggling with the bewildered bullock at early dawn one
morning was one to be remembered.  However, he pledged himself not to
carry the experiment further without the assistance of one of us, and a
day or two later we removed immediate risk by losing his phial of dew.
I am convinced that he would have tried the experiment on any snake he
might have met, and with absolute confidence as to the result.

His mind was such as one would expect in a child who had known neither
mental nor physical fear.  He seemed absolutely void, not only of
personal knowledge of evil, but even of that cognisance of its existence
which shows itself in a disposition to seek corroborative evidence, to
consult probabilities, and to inquire into motives.  I am convinced that
Soltke never questioned a motive in his life, nor ever hesitated to
accept as a fact anything told in apparent seriousness.  Irony and
sarcasm were to him as to a child or a savage.  He was intensely
literal, single-minded and direct, and perfectly fearless in thought,
word or act.  Such a disposition in a child would have been charming.
In a well-set-up, active young man of three-and-twenty or so it was
embarrassing.  Donald Mackay, who was of a choleric disposition,
complained a day or two after Soltke joined us that "he was blanked if
he could blank well stand it.  Why, that morning, when he was about to
give one o' the boys a lambastin', the kiddie turns white as a girl wi'
the first swear and a sight of the sjambok, an' Aa tell ye, mon, Aa was
nigh to bustin' wi' a' the drawing-room blether Aa was gettin' off."  It
was quite true.  Soltke was not shocked nor affecting to be shocked at
the vigorous language he heard; he was simply unlearned in it, and
shrank as a girl might from the outburst of violence.

Gradually the feeling of strangeness wore off, and the restraint which
the new presence had imposed was no longer felt except on odd occasions.
On our side, we chaffed and shook him up, partly on the impulse of the
time, and partly with good-natured intent to make him better fitted to
take care of himself among the crowd with whom he would mix later on.
On his side, he had never felt restraint, and of course rapidly became
familiar with us and our ways, and seemed thoroughly to enjoy the chaff
and his initiation into the system of good-humoured imposture.  With all
his greenness, he was no fool; in fact, he was in odd, unexpected ways
remarkably shrewd and quick, as he often showed in conversation.  He
was, moreover, a poor subject for practical jokes, and several of the
stock kind recoiled on the perpetrators, because, as I have said, he did
not know what fear was.

When a notorious practical joker named Evans, with whom we travelled in
company for a couple of days, "put up" the lion scare on Soltke, it
didn't come off.  He asked our young friend to dine at his waggons on
the other side of a dry donga, and, after telling the most thrilling
lion yarns all the evening, left Soltke to walk back alone, while he
slipped off to waylay him at the darkest and deepest part of the donga.
There was the rustle of bushes and sudden roar which had so often played
havoc before; but Soltke only stepped back, and lugged out in unfamiliar
fashion a long revolver which no one knew he carried.  Ignoring the fact
that a lion could have half eaten him in the time expended, Soltke
calmly cocked the weapon, and, to the terror of his late host, poured
all six barrels into the bush from which the noise had come.  He then
retreated quietly out of the donga to where we, hearing the shots and
Evans's shouts of terror, had run down to see what was up.  Soltke was
excited, but quiet, and the noise of the reports had evidently prevented
him from detecting the man's voice.  He said:

"It was something what make `Har-r-r-!' by me, and I shoot; but I haf no
more cartridge."

We did not see Evans again for some months.  The story of Soltke's lion
made the road too hot for him that winter.

When we told Soltke the real facts, his face was a study.  For some days
he was very quiet and thoughtful; he was completely puzzled, and for the
life of him could not imagine the motive that had actuated Evans; nor
could he, on the other hand, realise the possibility of anyone acting
differently from the way in which he had done.

Before this there had been some horseplay when we were crossing the
Komatie River.  The stream was running strong, and was then from four to
five feet deep at the drift; and, although it was known to be full of
crocodiles, there was little or no danger at the regular crossing.
However, Key had primed Soltke with some gorgeous stories of hairbreadth
escapes, intending to play a trick on him in the river.

"It is quite a common thing for men to be carried off here," said the
Judge; "but white men are very seldom killed--not more than four or five
a year--because of the boots."

"Boots!" exclaimed Soltke inquisitively.

"Yes," said Key, in half-absent tones.  "Ef you kick properly, no croc'
can stand it."

Soltke complained excitedly, and as though he had suffered gross
injustice, that no one had told him this interesting phase of life on
the road; but Key snubbed him, telling him that men didn't speak much of
such matters, as it gave the impression of bragging.

Soltke, who was above all things desirous of conforming with the
etiquette of the road, asked no more questions; but Key, later on in the
day, affecting to relent a little, got Soltke to sit straddle-legs on
the pole of one of the waggons, and there, under his directions,
practise kicking crocodiles.

The crossing was too difficult for one span of oxen, so we
double-spanned, and put all hands on with whips and sjamboks along the
thirty oxen, to whack and shout until we got through.

Key placed himself behind Soltke and, just when the excitement was
greatest, with his long whip-stick and lash he made a loop, in which he
managed to enclose Soltke's legs.  One jerk took him clean off his feet,
and down-stream he went, floundering and kicking for dear life, for he
believed a crocodile had him.  His kicking when he was head downwards
and his legs were free of the water was remarkable.  There were roars of
laughter from everyone, as Key had passed the word along; but presently
there was a lull, and the niggers stopped laughing and felt the joke
fall flat, when Soltke, utterly unconscious of the real cause of his
upset, waded deliberately back as soon as he recovered his feet, and,
pale but undaunted, took his place, sjambok in hand, the same as before.

Among transport-riders the condition of the Berg--as the spurs of the
long Drakensberg range of mountains are called colloquially--is always a
fruitful topic of conversation.  The Berg at Spitz Kop is worse than at
any other point, I believe, and Soltke exhibited a growing interest in
this much-discussed feature of the road.  His enthusiastic nature led
him here into all sorts of speculations about it, which were highly
amusing to us; and the Judge egged poor Soltke on and crammed him so
that he undertook in our interest to devise some method for ascending
this awful Berg whereby the then terrible risks to life and property
would be minimised, if not entirely removed.  The position, as Key
explained it, was this: There was a long, steep hill to be surmounted,
the grade of which varied between 30 degrees and vertical, but the
crowning difficulty lay in the "shoot."  Here it was an open question
whether the hill did not actually overhang; so steep was it, in fact,
that it was not an uncommon occurrence for the front oxen to slip as
they gained the summit, and fall back into the waggon, possibly killing
both leader and driver, and doing infinite damage to the loads.  Soltke
faced this problem brimful of confidence in the subject and himself.
After hours of keen discussion and diligent experiments, Soltke produced
his plan.  It was a system of endless rope on guides and pulleys, so
arranged that by a top anchorage on the summit of this hill both oxen
and driver would be secure.  Soltke was triumphant, but Key extricated
himself temporarily by pointing out that, as we had not enough rope to
try the scheme, we would have to take the old roundabout road and leave
the "shoot" for the next trip.

The joking with Soltke; as I have said, at times degenerated into common
horseplay, and this led to the only unpleasantness we had.  The younger
Mackay--Robbie--was a quiet, humorous, and most gentle-natured fellow,
an immense favourite with everybody.

One night we were all standing round the fire, when something occurred
which nobody ever seemed able to explain.  Soltke had mislaid his pipe,
and, thinking he had seen Robbie take it, asked him for it back.  Robbie
denied all knowledge, and Soltke, deeming it but another practical joke,
said, "I saw you taking it, you--" using a term which he, poor chap, had
picked up without knowing the meaning, a term which among white men
never passes unnoticed.  Robbie's Scotch blood was aflame, and before
one of us could stir, before he himself could think of the allowances to
be made, before the word was well said, a heavy right-hander across the
mouth dropped Soltke back against the waggon.  Blank amazement and
something like consternation marked every face, but none was so utterly
taken aback as poor Soltke, who would have suffered anything rather than
inflict pain upon a fellow-being.  He only said, "Robbie, what haf I
say?  I do not understand," and, looking white and miserable, walked
quietly off to his blankets and turned in.  To us it was as though a
girl, a child, had been struck, and no one felt this more than Robbie
himself, as soon as he saw that the insult was not intentional.  The
look on Soltke's face was that of a stricken woman, a look of dull,
unmerited pain.  He was not cowed--just dazed and hurt, but
inexpressibly hurt.  You will see men blink and shuffle under that look
in a woman's face.  You will see a master quail before it in a servant.
You will see White go down before it in Black; for it is God's own
weapon in the hands of helpless right.  As long as I live I shall
remember that look.  I felt as though _I_ had done it!

We trekked as usual next morning at about three o'clock, and it must
have been some time in the dark hours of the early trek that Bobbie
spoke to Soltke.  Whatever it was he said, it relieved the awkwardness,
and restored Soltke to something of his old self; but he was never quite
the same again, and for some days we did not get over the look in his
eyes and the feeling of guiltiness it left in us.

Robbie did not speak of that early morning scene, but later in the day
remarked incontinently:

"By God! he is white, is Soltke--white all through."

Soltke kept a diary, and kept it with the most marvellous fidelity and
unflagging industry, and he also learned to shoot, and shot cockyolly
birds occasionally, and was pleased to know their sporting and
scientific names.  There is a sort of bastard cockatoo in those parts
which is commonly known as the "Go way" bird, on account of its cry,
which closely resembles these words, and of a habit it is supposed to
have of warning game of the approach of man.  In Soltke's diary there
should be an elaborate essay on the ancestry and personal habits of this
bird, and the wonderful traditions of its family.  He took these things
down faithfully and laboriously from the Judge's own lips.  The Judge
had a copious mythology.  Poor Soltke tried to stuff some of his
dicky-birds, labelling them with such names as Key could always supply
at a moment's notice.  The result was unpleasant, as Soltke took to
bestowing these ill-preserved relics in the side-pockets of the tents,
in the waggon-boxes, and in a dozen other unlikely spots.  It was only
now and then that we could actually find them; but there was a constant
suggestion of their proximity, nevertheless.

We took to calling Soltke the Professor, as it was a title which, we
told him, seemed better to suggest an all-round efficiency than any
other we could think of, and therefore suited him more than such purely
departmental distinctions as Leather-stocking, the Engineer, or the
Ornithologist.

I had forgotten to say that there was one thing on which we did not
chaff poor Soltke.  He played the zither.  I do not know if he played it
well or not, for he was the only one whom I have heard play that
instrument.  To us, lying round a bright thornwood fire, in which the
big logs burnt into solid glowing coals--to us, who lay back smoking or
gazing up into the infinite depths of silent, cloudless sky, watching
millions and millions of stars twinkling busily and noiselessly down at
us, the music was a kind of dream.

As Soltke sat in the glow of the fire, and the unsteady flicker of
shooting and dying flames threw lights and shadows on his face, it
sometimes looked as though he was not quite what we took him for.  His
was a bright, intelligent face, lit up by quick, eager blue eyes; in
fact, though it was a thing that we took no stock in, Soltke was really
a very good-looking boy, and one naturally thought of him as some
"mother's hope and pride;" and the look of worry and grief that I
sometimes fancied I saw was put down to home-sickness brought out by
music.  However good or bad his music was, he seemed to feel it, and
we--well, we never talked much after he began to play; and when he
stopped, we generally knocked our pipes out with a sort of half-sigh,
and turned in for the night.  It used to make me think of home as I
remembered it when I was still externally respectable--before I took to
flannel shirts and moleskins, and ways that were not home ways; and I
expect the others felt that too.

We had passed the Crocodile River and the belt of `Tsetse Fly' country.
We had passed Josikulus, where Hart was murdered by the niggers, and we
told Soltke the story of the dead man's sentry-go.  We passed Ship
Mountain, and pointed out the bush that hid the haunted cave, and told
him the weird tradition of the old witch-doctor imprisoned by the rock
slide, handling still as a skeleton the implements of magic he used in
life.

All these things were noted in Soltke's voluminous diary; and a curious
medley it must have contained, with the embroidered facings of Key and
the solid square facts of Gowan intermingled with the author's own
original remarks and reflections.  Soltke, to do him justice, was
clearly a person of some purpose.  He had placed before himself an
ideal, and he never lost sight of it.  He was eternally qualifying for
that pursuit which he called "de prospect."  He would eat from choice
the charred and blackened crust of an overbaked loaf or a steak that had
slipped the gridiron and got well sanded; he also seemed to prefer the
dregs of the coffee billy, which he swallowed black and unsweetened; he
scorned to use a fork; and he always slept on the lumpiest ground; and
all this was to fit him for the hardships and emergencies he promised
himself as a full-blown prospector.  His eagerness for knowledge of the
flora and fauna was equally remarkable: he had compiled a sort of
dictionary of plants and animals, describing their virtues, medicinal or
culinary, and I am sure that towards the end of our trip Soltke would
have set out into the Bush with a light heart, armed only with his book,
and fortified by a confidence which was absolutely phenomenal.

Looking back on it all, it seems a mean shame ever to have played on his
credulity; and, indeed, most of us were, even at this time, keenly alive
to this; but there were times when his eager questioning and intense
earnestness about commonplace trifles made temptation irresistible, and
seemed even to inspire one with ridiculous notions suited to Soltke's
undiscriminating appetite.

It was on a Sunday morning that we came in sight of Pretorius Kop--a
solitary sugar-loaf hill--and we lay by as usual during the hours of
daylight.  We knew it was Sunday, because Soltke had said so, and
because we saw him in the early morning kneeling in the shadow of a big
tree a few yards from the waggons, Prayer-book in hand, absorbedly
following the prayers of the Mass.  He was a Roman Catholic, and was as
uncompromisingly particular in observing the smallest detail of his
Church's ritual and teaching as he was by nature tolerant of the
shortcomings of others.  In the course of the morning's short excursion
Soltke had come across one of those crawling creatures known to children
as "thousand-legs," the common, harmless millipede.  It was the first he
had ever seen, and words failed him in his quest for information.  Key
was the first he met on his return, and the Judge told him solemnly that
the insect in question was "that well-known and most ferocious of
reptiles, the viper."  During breakfast Soltke absorbed whole volumes of
information about this "wiper"--its habits and uses, and as soon as the
meal was over he betook himself to the side-pocket of the tent waggon,
where the beloved diary was kept, and commenced to write up the new
discovery.  We were all spread about enjoying the morning smoke, or
taking it easy in other ways.  We had forgotten Soltke, but presently
his face popped out, wearing a most worried, earnest, and intense
expression.

"Joodge!" he called, "Joodge, how vos dot wiper shpell?"

Key dictated calmly:

"W-h-y-p-e-r, whyper," and Soltke with infinite pains put it down.  But
we heard him a moment later from his place in the tent of the waggon
murmuring:

"Lieber Himmel! dot vos un oogly name."  He kept his diary in English,
and many a perspiring hour did he spend in his struggles with our
language; but he never quailed once, never even slackened, for he said
it was "goot to make him friends mit der English, and he can talk him
when he shall coom on der prospect."

Soltke could hardly have taken down the name of this new wonder, when
the sight of a blue jay flying past--one marvellous blaze of gorgeous
colour as its shiny feathers caught the sunlight--sent him into a
perfect paroxysm of excitement.  He had seen the honeysuckers, and knew
them in the diary as "birds of Paradise;" he knew the ordinary or
cockyolly bird as the small "pheasant of Capricorn"; he had shot
dicky-birds by the dozen and stuffed them, and their noxious odours
seemed to add zest to his ornithological pursuits; but he had never
seen, never dreamed of, anything like this.  For one spellbound moment
Soltke watched the bird sail by, and then gasped out:

"Gott in Himmel! what woss dat?  Christnacht, be shtill, und I shot
him."

Diary, pen, ink and blotter were thrust aside, and Soltke scrambled for
the gun.  We turned our backs on him to watch the bird.  Soltke jumped
from the waggon.  The report of the two barrels was so loud and close
that it made us duck; but the blue jay sat unmoved.

There was a curious silence that made several of us look round together.
The gun had fallen, and Soltke was standing above it, rigid and ghastly
white, with one hand gripping a burnt and blood-spattered tear in his
right leg.  As we sprang to him open-armed he seemed just to sway gently
towards us with closed eyes and a soft murmur of words in his own
tongue.  It sounded like a prayer.

I think he fainted then; but we were never sure, as he was always so
still with it all that one couldn't tell at times whether he was dead or
alive.  The medicines we had, and the remedies we knew, did not run to
gunshot wounds and broken legs, but we made shift to fix him up somehow
with a rough ligament.

It was here that Key came in.  Quiet and self-possessed, firm and kind,
he cut away the burnt, torn clothing.  He washed out the ragged,
blackened wound; he tried the leg, and told us it was fractured--
shattered--and would have to come off.  And Soltke lay there, under the
big tree, on a blanket spread on a heap of grass, as white as alabaster
and as still, while we watched silently beside him, fanning him with
small green boughs, and keeping off the flies.

Donald Mackay had started off at once for a doctor; but we knew that,
with the best luck in finding him, and riding day and night, it must be
over two days before we could get him down there.  Bobbie went with his
brother to the nearest waggons a few miles on ahead, where Donald raised
a horse and went on alone on his long ride for help.  Robbie came back
with a few things that we hoped would help a little, and then we settled
down to watch in silence the awful race between ebbing life and coming
help.

Through the hot, long, quiet day we watched and tended him, and so on
into the cool of the evening.  We could do nothing, really; but it
seemed to please him and us to whisk away the flies, and say a word of
cheer to him, or now and then to shift the cotton sheet that covered
him.  When the stars came out, and the soft cool feel of night grew up
around, and the ruddy flicker of the fire worked its magic on the
encampment, changing and beautifying everything with sudden lights and
weird shadows; when the cattle were tied up to the yokes, and one by one
lay down to sleep with great restful, deep-drawn sighs; when there were
no sounds but the steady chewing of the cud and the occasional distant
howl of a hyena or the sharp, unreal laugh of the jackal--then did we
really seem to settle down to the business of waiting.

Now and then, perhaps three or four times in the night, Soltke asked for
water; once or twice towards morning he sighed a suppressed tired sigh;
but not a word of complaint, not a sign of impatience, not one evidence
of the torture he was enduring, escaped him.  When morning came, cool
and fragrant, and the blue smoke of the camp-fire curled up straight and
clean into the pure air, he was as quiet and uncomplaining still, though
not for one second had his eyes closed nor the deadly numbing pain
ceased its ache.

Soltke seemed to me to look younger than ever, though terribly white and
fagged.  His eyes looked blue and brave and trustful--childishly
trustful--as ever, and he alone, of all the party, did not keep looking
towards the west for the return of Donald Mackay and his charge.

All that day we watched and waited, and on through another slow and
silent night; but we could see then that Soltke could not last out much
longer without a doctor's help, and that his chance was becoming a poor
one.

It must have been about three in the morning when, lying flat on my
back, looking up into the wonderful maze of stars that spatters our
southern sky, I heard or felt the tiniest tap, tap, tap under my head.
I shot up with the cry of, "There's Donald at last!"

We were all up and listening, but could hear nothing when standing, of
course.  However, there was no mistake, and after five minutes we could
hear on the cool, clear, still air the footfall of a horse--_one_ horse,
as we all remarked with an awful heart-sinking.

Two of us--Key and I--went on to meet the horseman, and in a few minutes
came upon Donald leading a horse, upon which, by the aid of a propping
arm, was balanced a man whom we all knew--only too well.

In a breath Donald told us that he had sent on from the first camp for
the district surgeon, but, chancing on Doc Monroe, had packed him on the
horse and come back with him as a makeshift.  Munroe was a quack chemist
of morose and brutal character, and a drunkard with it.  His moral
status might be gauged by the fact that no patient among those who knew
him personally or by repute ever approached him professionally except
upon the contract system--so much the job, payment on delivery, cured.
He had a certain repute for ability.  God knows how it was earned, for
he had killed more men than any other agency in the country; but I
believe that his brutal and sardonic indifference to public opinion, his
fiendish hints that there was no accident about the deaths of _his_
patients, and that "those who want Doc Munroe can pay for him, by God!"
inspired a weird dread which, irrationally, perhaps, yet not
unnaturally, begot a sort of blind awed belief in the man's ability.

Men hardly stricken have been known to sit on the bar-step and wait
while Doc, having drunk himself drunk, would drink himself sober, and
then, with implicit faith, swallow down mixtures to which the bloodshot
eyes and the trembling hands of the Doc added the interest of a blind
gamble.

By the uncertain light of the stars I had not recognised him, until Key,
who was a few paces in front, said softly:

"It's Doc Munroe--dead drunk!"  Donald was utterly worn out, and wild
with despair.  Doc had been drunk when he found him, but (as Donald
said) he was always that, and he had hoped that a forty-mile ride would
sober him.  However, it seems that twice on the road he had got liquor,
and the second time, when Donald had caught him and taken it away, he
had sat down by the roadside stolid and immovable until the liquor was
returned to him.

There were reasons why we bottled up our rage and treated the Doc with a
show of civility, and even conciliatory respect.  We knew, firstly, that
he had his instruments, and that only he could use them; and, secondly,
that, however drunk he might be, he never lost his senses until delirium
set in; and, moreover, that he was intensely suspicious of offence when
in this state, and if once huffed, was indifferent to prayers and
threats alike.  The look on Gowan's face was positively murderous when
he saw in what manner our waiting was rewarded.  I am sure he would
readily have killed Munroe at that moment.

Poor Soltke showed his first signs of anxiety then, and we had to make
what excuses we could--the want of light, first of all, and then the
long ride--to account for the doctor's not seeing him now that he had
come.  But the hours went by, the last chance was ebbing away, and we
could do nothing--absolutely nothing--with the man.

We tried him with everything.  We gave him black coffee--he wouldn't
touch it; we tried soup--he kicked it over; food, sleep, a bath--
everything was rejected with a sullen and stolid shake of the head, and
the one word "W'isky."  That we would _not_ give.  For four mortal hours
the man lay sullenly by the waggon on a pile of blankets, and only the
one word passed his lips.  We dared not give him more--it would have
destroyed our only chance; and without liquor he would not budge.

Day was well advanced when Munroe stood up quietly, and walked over to
where Gowan stood beside his waggon.  I suspected that the Doc had
noticed Gowan's look when he came into camp with us, and now it was
clear that he had.

"You think I'm drunk," said Munroe, with a malignant sneer.  "I saw you
look at me when I got off that damned horse!  You think I'm drunk, do
you?"

Gowan looked him steadily in the eyes, but made no answer, and Doc
resumed:

"Are you going to give me that whisky?"

Again no answer; but I walked nearer, as I could see Gowan's hands close
and go back, and his chest came up with hard breathing.

"Are--you--going--to--give--me--that--whisky?" asked Munroe again,
slowly and deliberately.

"No!" roared Gowan, with a tiger-like spring at the other man; "I'll see
you in hell first!"

I caught Gowan's uplifted arm, but Munroe never flinched, and, pulling
himself together with something of a shake, he said in a perfectly
sober, even tone and with diabolical malevolence:

"Then I'll see your friend dead and rotten before I stir a hand to help
him;" and with that he marched back to the blankets and lay down again.

An hour passed, and he never stirred a finger--never even blinked his
staring eyes.  Then the Mackays, Key, and I held a council, and decided
to give him the liquor as a last--a truly forlorn--hope.  It was left to
me to see him, and I went over bottle and glass in hand.

He wouldn't touch it.

I argued, begged, and prayed; but it had no effect whatever.  He just
lay there, resting on one arm, with the cruel, shallow glitter in his
eyes that one sees in those of wild beasts.  I returned to the others,
and we had another talk, and then I offered him money--a price: all that
we could give!  That fetched him.  He sat up, and looked at me for about
a minute, and then said, shaking with hate:

"Your liquor I won't touch.  Your money won't buy me.  As soon as it's
cool enough to move, I go back; and if you've ever heard of Doc Munroe,
you'll take that for a last answer."

That was a facer, and when I went back and told the others, opinions
were divided as to what to do.  Gowan and Key were for the rifle cure.
If he wouldn't operate, shoot him!

But we urged another--a last--delay, say till noon; and they gave way,
but warned us it would be useless.

The heat that day was awful.  No breeze, no relief--only dead,
oppressive heat, reflected to and fro the steel-blue sky and the
hard-baked earth.

The fires were out--we had cooked nothing that day--and the camp looked
dead and deserted.  One or more of us would always be with Soltke; the
others would be lying in the shadow of a tree or under a waggon.  We had
some faint hope that the district surgeon would turn up, but not before
the morrow, and, knowing Soltke's condition, that seemed useless, so
that our only real chance was with Munroe.

As we lay there, dismally and hopelessly waiting, we were suddenly
startled by a most peculiar and unnatural bark.  The two dogs also
jumped up and ran out on to the road.  We could see nothing except that
Munroe had gone.  The noise was repeated, and the dogs growled, and
every hair stood up on their backs.

"Great God! look there!" came from Donald.

Following his glance, we saw, low down amongst the thick buffalo grass,
the wild, haggard face of Doc Munroe.  His shock red hair half covered
his eyes, which glittered and glared like a lioness's.  As we stood he
barked again, and made a jump out to the margin of the grass.  He was
mad--stark, staring mad--with delirium tremens!  In one of his hands,
half hidden by the grass, we could see a Bushman's friend, and the
bright blade seemed to catch an ugly gleam from the man's eyes and
reflect it malevolently back on us.

Munroe was a big man, and, although ruined in health by years of hard
drinking, would have been a very ugly customer while the mad fit lasted;
so we just stood our ground, ready to take him any way he wanted to
come.  After a minute or two he seemed to feel the effect of four pairs
of eyes looking steadily at him, and the wild beast died out, and his
body, which had been as rigid as a "standing" pointer's, became visibly
limp and nerveless.  He got up heavily, with a silly, hysterical laugh,
and stood meekly before us, looking as foolish and harmless as a human
being might.  He sidled over towards Donald Mackay, keeping as far as
possible from Gowan, whom he clearly distrusted, and looking furtively
about, as though others besides us might hear him, he said, with a
sickly smile and in a thin, uncertain voice:

"I was playin', Donald, old man, only playin'.  You know me--old Doc
Munroe.  _You_ weren't frightened, Donald, eh?  He! he!  I _like_ to
bark, ye know.  I _like_ it, and who'll stop me if I like it, eh?  You
could see I was playin', old partner.  _You_ knew it, didn't you?"

The man was wretchedly weak and shaky, and as he continued to look about
anxiously, he wiped the heavy drops of cold perspiration off his
colourless face with the dirty strip of kapalaan which did service for a
pocket-handkerchief.  He sidled up closer and closer to Donald, and
watched with growing intentness and terror the place from which he had
just emerged.  Mackay quietly imprisoned the knife-hand, but Munroe
never noticed that, and only clung closer to him, and began to mutter
and cry out again, quivering with excitement and terror, which grew on
him, until he shrieked to Donald to save him, and to "knife him over
there"--pointing to the tree beneath which he had hidden.  Key took the
proffered knife, and, walking quietly towards the tree, began to hack it
in an unenthusiastic manner; and the relief that this seemed to give
Munroe would have been ludicrous but for the desperate hopelessness it
brought for poor Soltke.

It was no longer possible to keep up our well-intended fiction about the
doctor requiring rest, for Munroe's maniac laughter and shrieks of
terror became so frequent and awful that they must have startled one
half a mile away.  He became so violent that we were obliged to take him
down to the spruit, and to tie him down there in the shadow of a high
bank, with one of the niggers to look after him, and an occasional visit
from one of us to see if all was well.

Soltke bore the news as he had borne all that went before, with silent,
martyr-like patience.  He seemed to have guessed it: not a muscle moved,
not a feature changed.  He listened to it as calmly as he listened to
our expressed hope that the district surgeon would turn up by sundown,
and with as little personal concern.

Towards evening he spoke a good deal to us all, but in a way that made
our hearts sink.  He spoke of his home and his past life--for the first
time--and of something that was troubling him greatly.  He also admitted
that his leg was feeling very hot, and that he felt twinges of pain
shooting up into the groin and body.

At sundown he asked for his Prayer-Book, and later on, when we had left
him alone for a while, and sat in silent, helpless despair by the
neglected fire, he asked for Robbie.  At last, at about ten o'clock that
night, we heard the welcome sound of a horse's trotting, and to our
unspeakable delight the cheery little doctor turned up.  Poor old Soltke
did brighten up then, and the smile which had never failed him
throughout the days of suffering seemed to me more easy and hopeful.  In
less than an hour the shattered leg was off.  In spite of the bad light
and the rude appliances all went well, and with infinite relief we saw
Soltke doze off under the merciful influence of the morphia which the
doctor had brought.  We felt that we had rounded the turn, and could
afford to sleep easy.  The little doctor, who had ridden seventy miles
since sun-up, rolled into his blankets near where Soltke slept, and was
in the land of dreams long before we, who were restless from very relief
and joy, could settle down to close our eyes.

I seemed to have dozed for but a few minutes, when in my dreams, as it
seemed to me, I heard in the faintest but clearest whisper the doctor
saying: "Mortification, you know!  I couldn't see it by candle-light, or
we might have spared him the operation."

He was just dead.  He sighed himself out, as the doctor said, like a
tired child to sleep.  We buried him close to the road under a big
thorn-tree, which we stripped of its bark for a couple of feet to serve
for a headstone for his grave.  It was the tree where we had seen him on
his knees at prayer.  And as it neared sundown, we called for the oxen,
and inspanned for the evening trek.

The doctor had gone.  He had to get back those seventy miles to see
another patient, whose life perhaps depended upon the grit of his
gallant little horse.

During the night Munroe had managed to get loose, and with a madman's
cunning had got away with his horse and disappeared, which was perhaps a
good thing for him.

The boys had packed everything on the waggons, and were lashing the
bedding in the tent waggon so as to be out of the way of the dust and
the thorns, when one of them picked up and handed out to us the open
book and writing materials, just as Soltke had left them three days
before, when he had jumped out to shoot the blue jay.

The diary lay open at the last-written page, and we read:

"The most verushius of reptile is the Whuy-per--"

Robbie closed the book gently and put it away.  It didn't seem the least
bit funny then.

At midnight, when the long night trek was over, and we were rolled in
our blankets near the camp-fire, Robbie's heart was full, and he spoke--
slowly and in half-broken tones:

"Ye mind the time he sent for me?  Ye do?  Yes; well, it was to ask my
forgiveness for what he said the day I struck him.  Ay, he did that!"

Robbie looked slowly round the circle through dimmed glasses, and then
went on hesitatingly:

"And he said, too, that we had all been too good to him, and that he had
played it low on us; and that he--he hoped the good God would pardon him
the greatest crime of all.  And he said that I must give his Prayer-Book
and his zither," (Robbie continued in a lower and reverent tone) "to--to
his child--his little boy."

"_Soltke's child_?" came from all together.

Robbie nodded, and there was a space of time when everyone shifted a
little and felt chilled; but it was Gowan who put our common thought
into words.

"Where is his wife?" he asked slowly.  "Dead!" said Robbie.  "I--I
didn't know he was married."  Robbie's look was a prayer for mercy, as
he answered: "He wasn't!"

CHAPTER THREE.

INDUNA NAIRN.

ONE.

"Moodie's" was concession ground, and belonged to a company; but as
"findings is keepings" is the first law of the prospector, there were
quite a number of people, otherwise honest and well-principled, who
thought that it would be the right thing to rush it and peg it, and
parcel it out among themselves upon such terms and conditions as a
committee of their own number might decide.

So of course they rushed it!

They were good men and true, and they were strong in their righteous
indignation, but in nothing else; and when it came to trying conclusions
with a Government, they, being penniless, short-rationed, and few in
numbers, went under, and were carried off under arrest to Pretoria, the
committee designate going in bulk, with their proposers and seconders
thrown in.

It was then that the real inwardness of an embarrassing position was
revealed.  The case of "The State _versus_ H. Bankerpitt and Twenty-nine
Others" could not come on for many weeks, and the Government, being
mistrusted by the Pretoria tradesmen, who would no longer accept
"good-fors" of even a few shillings value, attempted to masquerade stern
necessity as simple grace, and offered to release the prisoners on bail.

The offer was rejected with derision.

Next day Government went one better and offered to release them on
parole without bail.  But even this did not tempt them, and eventually a
delegate was deputed to interview the prisoners so as to ascertain their
wishes.  The unanimous reply was:

"You brought us here.  You can keep us here.  We are quite contented."

It was then realised that the matter was serious, and a meeting of the
Executive Council was called and the gravity of the situation explained
by the President of the State.  The result of the deliberations was the
presentation by the Government of an ultimatum, which was in effect,
"Choose between a compromise and a freeze-out."

They accepted the compromise.

It was that the Government should find them in lodging and they should
find their board.

It was not a very grand compromise, but it was better than a freeze-out,
and during the ensuing months in which "The State _versus_ H. Bankerpitt
and Twenty-nine Others" sustained many adjournments and much publicity
in the Pretoria press, only once was the _modus vivendi_ thus
established in any way threatened.

The younger members of the party had begun to keep irregular hours.  One
or two remonstrances failing to effect an improvement, the worthy gaoler
resolved upon the extremest measure.  He posted the following notice on
the door:

"Anyone failing to return by nine p.m. will be locked out."

There was no further trouble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some months had passed since the trial.  The State had vindicated its
authority; the inherent right of man was thrown out of court; and "H.
Bankerpitt and Twenty-nine Others" had paid the penalty for their
mistaken zeal.  The man in the street had ceased to prophesy that the
case would lead to war with the suzerain power, the weekly newspaper
resumed its normal appearance, and the "constant reader" was no longer
haunted by a headline more constant than himself.

"Moodie's" was controlled by its rightful owners, but its name was as
wormwood in the prospector's mouth, and the quondam Promised Land became
a spot accursed and despised.

Across the valley of the Kaap, over the rock-crested mountains of
Maconchwa, out into the shattered hills and ranges of Swazieland, and
over the hot bush-hidden flats the prospectors took their ways to find
something somewhere which would be their own.

They went singly and in pairs, and they "humped swag and tucker" when
they had no donkeys to pack.  It was a rule with few exceptions that
they only went in parties and without swag when there was a rush on.

This was one of the exceptions.

Seven men in irregular Indian file, and at irregular distances apart,
were toiling up the green slopes of the Maconchwa.

They were following a path, and one after another would stop and turn
panting to pay tribute to the steepness of the hill and the beauty of
the view below.

Far below them, and farther still ahead, the smooth-worn path meandered
over the hill's face like a red-brown thread woven in the green.  The
sun was fiercely strong, but the breath of the mountain was cool, and
they drank it in gratefully at each rest.

They were all marked with the "out-of-luck" brand.  It was stamped on
their faces.  They were all tired, and most of them looked hungry as
well.  When the leader reached the top, he looked expectantly around on
all sides, then, stepping briskly towards an outcrop near by, from which
a better view was obtainable, he looked again long and carefully.  Then
he came back to the path where the others had already assembled, and
cursed the country and all in it from the bottom of his bitter soul.

"There's no house and there's no kraal, and there's no God-damn-nothing.
It's eight hours since we started on the `two-mile' tramp, and I knew
from the start we were fooled.  If Choky Wilson had _known_ anything he
would have come himself, and not told _you_."

He scowled at a younger member of the party who was standing by chewing
a stem of grass and looking down across the Crocodile and Hlambanyati
valleys.

"What did the Swazie boy say?" asked another, turning readily on the
youngster as the convenient scapegoat.

The younger one answered good-temperedly:

"He said that the White Induna was on the Maconchwa, near the first
water that came out of the white rock."

"Maconchwa!" snarled the leader, "why, it's twenty miles long!  The
whole damned range is Maconchwa.  Any idiot might be expected to know
that."

"Yes, that's why I didn't offer to explain," said the younger one.

The thrust passed unnoticed, and while a general _indaba_ was going on
the last speaker moved to the same spot from which the leader had viewed
the country.

He knew the Kaffir and his language and his habits, and he could read
the face of the country as well as the niggers themselves, so they
heeded him when he spoke, although he was the youngest member of the
party, and when a few minutes later, he cut into the conversation with
the remark that "there was a cattle kraal near by and they had better go
on there and ask the way," there was a general chorus of "Where?" and an
incredulous "Darned if I can see it!" from the leader.

The youngster replied again:

"Nor can I, but it's there all the same."

"How do you know?"

"Look," he said, pointing to a slope about a mile distant.

"Well, look at what?"

"Can't you see that red patch on the rise there?"

"What, those water-worn dongas?"

"Not dongas--cattle tracks.  They are from the drinking-place.  That
must be the White Rock up there, and I expect the house must be behind
the clump of trees."

They walked on until the trees were reached and they could see the small
rough stone house through a thinner portion of the Bush, and there they
waited awhile to take counsel.  It was finally decided that they should
all go up together, but they looked to the one who seemed to be their
leader to act as spokesman.

"If he's a white man at all," remarked he in front, "he won't refuse us
grub, anyhow; but that's just it.  They say he's no more white than old
Bandine, that he hates the sight of white men, and keeps as far from
them as he can.  He's been so long among the darned niggers that he's
just one of them himself."

They passed along the path to the house, and six of the party waited
below while the leader mounted the steps of the mud stoep.

A tall man with a long brown beard stepped out of an open doorway and
met him.

The whole party offered "good-evening" with more or less _empressement_,
and certainly with a greater show of politeness than was customary with
them; but the man only slid his hands easily into the pockets of a light
duck-coat, and looked with critical and not too friendly glance at the
leader, ignoring the others.

"We're out prospectin' about here," began the leader, "and we thought
we'd just come along and look you up."

As there was no reply to this, not even a change in the look nor a
twitch of a muscle to be construed into acknowledgment of the remark,
the speaker resumed quickly and with less composure:

"The niggers told us you hung out about here, and, bein' the only white
man in these parts, we kind o' came along to see what was doin', and if
there was any chance of reefin', and about the licences and water and
that."

The owner of the house continued to look steadily and in silence at the
speaker.  The latter, when the invitation of a second pause passed
unaccepted, flushed up and, abandoning the previous method, asked
curtly:

"Can you sell us any food?  Fowls or crushed mealies, or anything.
We're half dead o' trampin' over your damned hills, and I want food for
self and mates.  We're far down enough, but we reckon to pay for what we
get.  We're not loafin'!"

The man did not appear to notice this hostile tone any more than he had
the former conciliatory one; but, after another deadly pause, he asked,
in a quiet, clear voice:

"Your name?"

"Bankerpitt," said the other.  The faintest trace of a smile lit up the
man's face as he remarked quietly:

"Ah, _H_. Bankerpitt"--and glancing for the first time at the rest of
the party--"_and twenty-nine others_!"

He turned and walked slowly into the house, closing the door after him.

Bankerpitt had scarcely strength to say, "Well, I'm damned!"

The party turned away, tired and hungry, and marched in silence to the
clump of trees near the spruit below the house.  There was no other
water near, so they made camp for the night there.

It was dark.  Occasionally the brighter gleams of the fire lighted up
the circle of sullen faces.  There was nothing to eat or drink, so they
had settled down to a monotonous chorus of curses on the renegade he had
turned his back on his own colour.  One by one each added his quota of
bitter, unmeasured abuse until their vocabularies, comprehensive as they
were, began to give out, and only now and then a mere exclamation of
disgust, or a well-brooded curse, would break the heavy silence.

There being nothing to cook, there was nothing to do at that time of
evening but to brood on their wrongs.  They did this thoroughly until a
faint rustle in the wood made them look round, and then a child's voice
close behind the group gave the Kaffir salutation "Makos!"  Someone
raised a brand from the fire, and by its light they saw two _umfaans_
bearing on their heads a large earthen bowl each.  One bowl contained
fresh milk, the other a stew of fowls and stamped mealies.

The boys had the look of bright intelligence characteristic of the Zulu
race, but when Bankerpitt asked sharply, "Who sent this?" they exchanged
one glance, and a cloud of the densest stupidity settled on their faces.
Bankerpitt repeated his question, dragging one urchin closer to the
fire.  The reply, given in a thin, childish treble, was:

"It is food, white man!  It is here!"

"Tell me!" he said fiercely, giving the child's arm a shake, "does it
come from that white dog up there?"

Even in the urchins of the race there is the instinct of evasion which
enables them to baffle the closest inquiries.

"It is food for the white man.  It is here!" was all that Bankerpitt's
bullying could elicit.

"If we take it, it's because we must; but, by God! we'll pay him for it,
same as we would any other blasted nigger!" exclaimed Bankerpitt
savagely; and he drew from his leathern belt-pouch the three shillings
it contained and thrust them into the _umfaan's_ hand.  The coins were
dropped like hot coals, and the child said:

"I want no money, white man; I bring a gift."

But the men were hungry and took the food; and presently the two
_umfaans_ drew nearer to the fire, and, squatting on their haunches,
awaited with ox-like patience the emptying of their bowls.  When at last
the boys stood up to go, the youngest of the party, who had been a
silent and amused witness of his leader's attempt to get information out
of them, said something in a low tone, to which one boy replied:

"Inkosikaas."

A soft significant whistle was the only comment.

"What was that, Geddy?" said Bankerpitt quickly.

"I asked who sent them with the food."

"Well, who did?"

"He says `The missis'!"

"Shrine of the Mighty!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

That was the first experience of Induna Nairn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The second came this wise, about a year later.

There had been a row in Delagoa about some cattle which had been stolen.
The rightful owners took their own way about getting them back, for
they had more confidence in themselves than in the Portuguese; but,
unfortunately, just at the last moment, an accident happened which made
trouble for them.  That was why they had been across the border away in
Swazie country for so many months, and that was why they were coming
back over the mountains and in a quiet way, for they were not sure of
the reception which might await them.

One of them was Geddy, the youngster of the former party.

Geddy had not forgotten his experience of Nairn's "hospitable roof," and
had given his companion, with considerable force and numerous
illustrations, a fair picture of the well-remembered night.  It is not
surprising that they decided to give "the damned white nigger's" house
the "go-by."

Nairn's house stood on the track; in fact, the only feasible road up the
Berg was a bridle-path cut by Nairn up to his house; thence the ordinary
native paths led in all directions, and--by reason--one or more led to
the Kaap.  In order to pass the house in mid-trek they made their
morning off-saddle below the Berg, intending by noon to be some miles
beyond the Peak.  Near the Berg there are two climates, one for "below"
and one for "on top," and it was quite reasonable and natural to rise,
as they did, out of the placid spring morning on the flats into a
first-class thunderstorm with high wind and driving rain as soon as they
reached the exposed plateau.  The tired horses refused to face the
sheets of rain, and snorted and shook with fright at the lightning
stabbing here and there and everywhere, and the deafening crashes of
thunder.  There was nothing for it but to dismount and, as the poor
brutes turned their tails to the storm, to crouch to leeward of them for
such shelter as they could give, and pray to Heaven that hail would not
follow the rain.

Drenched, sopping, numbed and pierced by the cold wind that succeeded
the storm, they resumed their ride half an hour later.  Their clothes
were setting hard in the wind, their blankets--strapped over the
pommels--carried pounds weight of water, and the pulpy saddles clung
like indiarubber.

The poor horses toiled on, slipping and sprawling along the greasy,
smooth-worn Kaffir path, and when they rounded a little koppie that
flanked Nairn's house, and came suddenly on the well-worn track that led
to the house itself--not twenty yards off--they pricked their ears, and
with a low whinny of welcome and joy trotted towards the house.  Geddy
pocketed his pride and, bowing to circumstances that were too much for
him, allowed his horse to follow the other's lead.  He did not, however,
dismount as the other did, but sat in the saddle with an air of
neutrality, awaiting the turn of events.

Geddy was prepared for many possible developments, and--by reason of the
feeling description given him of the previous visit--his companion was
also forearmed against contingencies, and was ready with replies suited
to any form of incivility; but when Nairn stepped out on to the stoep
looking infinitely amused, and remarked frankly, "By Gad! you are two
miserable-looking objects!"--when this happened the two just looked down
at themselves and then at each other, and finally burst into laughter
more genuine and prolonged than the ostensible cause would seem to
warrant.

The house must have contained four rooms; but they only saw two.  It was
a very quiet place.  Oddly enough there were no dogs about, and the
fowls did not seem to be as self-assertive there as Swazie fowls usually
are.  There were no noises at all about the place, not even the welcome
sounds of life.  All seemed to be toned down, _weighed_ down, to about
the level of sociability which had marked Nairn's manner on the first
visit.  Geddy, feeling a little mean, it is true, was careful not to
betray any indications of having been there before, but while they were
getting into dry clothing in Nairn's bedroom, he drew his companion's
attention to a large calabash that stood on the window-sill half full of
milk.  It had been cracked, and there was a small V-shaped nick in the
rim, below which, and encircling the gourd itself was a delicate network
of plaited brass, copper, and iron wires.

"That was the one the milk came in that night," said Geddy, in a
whisper.  "I remember spilling some on account of that nick, and then I
noticed the wire."

His companion nodded.  It was not an important nor even a very
interesting discovery.

The younger waited a little, and then, slightly disgusted at the other's
slowness, said:

"Well, either he sent the grub to us himself or--"

"Or what?"

"Or--Where's the missis?"

They took in the room at a glance; but there was no answering evidence
there.  And when they joined Nairn they found that there were
easy-chairs in the dining-room; so there they sat and smoked, and
watched the rain set in as the regular spring drizzle does above the
Berg.

The chairs, like the rest of the furniture, were rough-made from
bushwood; but it seemed odd that a hermit should have three.  There was
a bookcase in the room, and it was full of well-bound and well-worn
books, "mostly odd volumes--very few series," as Geddy remarked
afterwards.  There were a good many books of science, and all the poets
he could recall; and there were books in Latin, French, Greek, and
German.  Somehow he did not like to ask the real questions he wanted to
put about the books.  He did not quite know how far to go.  In reply to
one question, Nairn had said dryly that he had brought them with him,
and was apparently indisposed to say more.  He was not an easy man to
draw.

During the day they had evidence of the respect in which Nairn was held
by his dependents.  He spoke to them in the lowest possible voice and in
the fewest possible words, and never--except once, when something had
occurred which annoyed him--never looked at, or even in the direction of
the individual addressed.  On that occasion he was asking a question of
a tall and remarkably good-looking Swazie woman.

She stood like a bronze statue while he spoke, and when he looked at her
and his eyes blazed anger, although his voice did not alter, the colour
rose to the woman's face, and turned her brown skin a reddish-bronze.
Her head was slowly lowered, and the only answer was a faint whisper of
the word, "Inkos--chief!"  The incident was trifling, but Geddy noticed
it, and noted that his way with his boys and the men about the place was
the same, and began to see why they called him "Induna Nairn."

As the rain had not abated Nairn insisted upon their remaining
overnight.  He was pleasant, courteous, and most interesting, full of
the strangest and most intimate knowledge of the country and the
natives.  He frequently illustrated remarks by references to other
countries and other people, but neither of his guests cared to put the
direct question as to whether he had been to those countries or only
read of them.  He gave no information about himself Geddy was not
satisfied with this, and with his sense of what is due to one's host
somewhat dulled--doubtless by the recollection of his previous visit--
took every opportunity of leading up to those topics which Nairn most
avoided, but which Geddy hoped would throw a light upon the man himself.

Beaten on the subject of the books, baffled when he led up to personal
experiences, foiled gently but firmly at every attempt, Geddy at last
got an inspiration and laid for a bold stroke.

They were at dinner, and the peculiarly savoury character of the stew
recalled to the youngster again the question that had been puzzling him
all along.  Summoning all his nerve, he said with cheery zest:

"By Jove, Nairn, after months of roast mealies and tough game--without
salt, too--this does taste delicious!"

"Glad you like it," said his host quietly.  "Staple dish, you know.
Just stewed fowl and stamped mealies!"

"Yes, by George! but such a stew!  Who--who's your cook?"

"Well, I suppose it becomes an easy task when the bill of fare doesn't
vary once a month;" and Nairn looked up curiously at his guest.

"But how do you manage it, eh?  No boy ever cooked like this."

Nairn delayed replying until a faint guilty flush touched up the other's
cheeks, and then laughingly--and with a significant look of complete
intelligence--he said:

"I was just wondering, Mr Geddy, if you were as favourably impressed
with it _the last time you were here_?"

Had the roof dropped in on him the collapse of Geddy would not have been
more complete.  Heron laughed unrestrainedly, perhaps because (as has
been said) there is something not altogether displeasing in the
misfortunes of our friends; perhaps, too, because his view of the
incident referred to was untinged by the bitter sense of personal
humiliation, and his humour had therefore full play.

Nairn did not press his discomfited guest, but, smiling pleasantly, took
up the burden of the talk.

"I know quite well what you thought of me, and I know even something of
what you said about `the white dog,' etc, but I think (and I fancy
neither of you will take offence at plain speaking)--I think that I did
right in repulsing what had all the appearance of imposition."  He
pushed back his chair and turned to the younger man.  "Just put yourself
in my place, now, Geddy.  I came to this place of my own choice.  I seek
nothing of other men, and I desire to go my own way unmolested.  I was
here before your people came in their feverish hunt for gold.  I dare
say I shall be here when you have ended the fruitless search.  If things
should turn against me and your luck be in the ascendant--why! there is
room in Africa for us both.  I can move on."

Nairn spoke in an easy, unemotional way, as though discussing an
abstract question of minor importance.

"Do you know," he continued after a while, "I sought out this spot and I
chose this life because here there is no nineteenth century, no
struggle, no ambition, no unrest.  Here is absolute peace and content
for me because I need take no thought of the morrow.  You who spend your
lives and energies on the outside edge of civilisation paving a way for
others' feet--you are beglamoured by your `life of freedom, adventure,
and romance,' My dear sirs, that is a view that I cannot pretend even to
understand, much less sympathise with.  It may appear unnatural to you,
but it is a fact, that I dislike the society of civilised men, and most
of all that of the pioneers--the sappers and miners of civilisation--who
think a white skin a warrant for anything.  Odd as it may seem to you, I
do not regard each white man as a friend or a brother.  On the contrary,
I see in him a possible enemy and a certain nuisance."

Nairn leaned back in his chair, and thoughtfully polished the bowl of
his pipe.

They had finished dinner, and were lighting up for a smoke.  The others
puffed away in silence.

He had said his say candidly and without heat, and no offence had been
meant or taken.  Presently Heron said:

"What puzzles me, Nairn, is, since you distrust every white man you see,
what the devil made you ask _us_ in?"

"Ay! that's it," said Geddy good-humouredly.  "That's the very question
I was going to ask.  What made you change your opinion?"

"Well," said Nairn, with simple directness, "your case is peculiar.  I
had a certain sympathy with you, you see, for we are all outlaws
together--I from choice!"

Both men coloured faintly, and Geddy asked at once:

"How could you know that at the time?  How did you know us--or me?"

"My dear fellow, I knew you by several means.  In the first place, I had
met you before--you see, I do not see so many white faces that I can't
remember them; and in the second place, the _umfaan_ to whom you spoke
that night, you recollect, also recognised you."

Geddy, who recalled in a flash both the question he had asked that night
and the answer given by the boy, shrank under Nairn's direct, calm look.

"But," he continued without pause, "you forget--or did you not know?--
that for a month there was a detachment of police on the watch for you
here."

"Lucifer!  What luck we didn't come sooner!" exclaimed Heron, aghast.
"They'd have had us, as sure as God made little apples!"

"Oh, that was all right," said Nairn, smiling.  "I was well posted as to
their plans and movements.  You see, I heard of your affair in Delagoa,
and I knew you had gone for a spell to Mahaash's and Sebougwaan's, and
you were safe enough there.  In any case, I took the precaution of
sending word to Mahaash to stop you if you wanted to come back before
the coast was clear.  He had a letter for you from me for some time, but
returned it yesterday with a message to say you were coming this way,
and that was why I was expecting you when you turned up this morning."

Geddy put out his hand, saying:

"By God, Nairn, you are a trump!  You've been a perfect Providence to
us; and--and I take back all I said about you that other time."

Nairn smiled and shook his head.

"I'm afraid," he answered, "that it was only because you were in a
scrape that I sided with you at all.  It seemed a bit of a damned shame
that the Government should set on a couple of fellows because they had
chosen to settle their grievances their own way, which is what you did,
I believe?"

Heron smiled grimly, and nodded reply.

"You seem to have had pretty good information about us," Geddy remarked.
"I suppose your neighbours keep you well posted?"

"Yes; there are Boswells among them, too.  I have had faithfully
retailed to me the whole of the affair of Mahaash and the silver spur.
Don't put another chief to ride a bucking horse with a spur.  They may
not all fall as lightly as Mahaash, and they may not all be as
good-tempered."

"Upon my soul," said Heron, "I did it in perfect good faith.  He wanted
a present, and I gave him what I could best spare.  How could I possibly
know that that old crock would buck?"

"Well, you had a lucky escape.  Umketch would have had you kerried.
They don't like to appear ridiculous.  How did you lose your
pocket-book, Geddy?"

"How--the--deuce--"

Nairn laughed heartily.

"Why, man, it has been here for weeks, waiting for you!  They bring me
all these things, with their gossip and their troubles.  An old fellow,
a witch-doctor, brought the pocket-book.  He said he found it by
divination--casting the dollas; the old fraud!  He walked up here, some
forty miles, just to gossip about you.  It took him three days before he
produced the book.  The first day he talked of the prospects of rain,
and the grass and the cattle; the next he spoke about the rumours that
were afloat about white men working into the ground and bursting it open
with guns, and wondered if white men would overrun Swazieland; and he
wound up with the admission that he had _heard_ of two having been seen,
and on horseback, too, and with rifles.  Notwithstanding which, he
believed them to be English, for one had given a shilling to a young
girl as a present, and the other had a book in which he wrote.  There it
is on the shelf beside you.  He wanted to sell it, but I took it from
him, and told him he would probably have bad luck, and one of his cows
would be barren or lose her calf this year because he had meddled with
your goods, and failed to return the book to you.  He stole it, of
course?"

"The old scoundrel!" said Geddy, reaching for the book; "he must have
found it while we were yet in sight.  I left it in a hut in one of the
kraals."

"Yes; I'm afraid he was an old thief," said Nairn.  "The raw Swazie
would think nothing of a twenty or thirty mile jaunt to return it; but
these witch-doctors are mostly old Basuto ruffians, steeped in guile.
They have few scruples when there is a prospect of profit."

"On my word," laughed Heron, "I don't know what you may not know about
us with agencies like this, and a whole nation making a confidante of
you!  What a rum life you do lead!"

Nairn looked at him curiously, and remarking dryly that they were a very
peculiar people, rose from his seat, and made it clear that he thought
it time for bed.  He showed them to his own room, where an extra bed had
been fixed up, and wishing them "Good-night," left them.

Quoth Geddy:

"I didn't like to ask him where he would sleep if we took his room, as
one feels bound to do in common civility.  I'd have got another of those
gentle cold-blooded sneers for my pains.  You know, old chap, with all
due respect--and all that sort of thing--for our host, he's beastly
uncivil the moment you ask questions.  It's a regular case of scratch
the Russian and you find the Tartar."

"Yes; you're right.  Although it seems a bit ungrateful to say so, I'm
dashed if I'd care to have much to do with him.  Did you see him shut up
when I remarked about his living a queer life?  Gad! his lips closed up
until they fitted like the valves of an oyster.  He's as suspicious as
the devil!"

"I say, look here--a photo!  Just look, man!  `Harrison Nairn' on the
back of it!  Quite a decent-looking chap.  Heron, I wonder who _she_
is?"

"God knows!  I don't!"

"Someone else's, you can bet, or he wouldn't lie so low, eh?"

"H'm! looks devilish like it."

"I say, Heron."

"What?"

"I wonder what he'd say if he heard us, eh?"

"Shut up, man; go to sleep!"

"I say!  The ideal white man--`a possible enemy and a certain
nuisance.'"

"For Heaven's sake, man, shut up!  They'll hear you sniggering.
Good-night!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TWO.

It was a dark night and still--the stillness that often precedes a
thunderstorm.  The clouds were banked up thick, and only here and there
on the outer fringes, where cuts in the hills gave a glimpse nearer the
horizon, was there a faint lighting of the gloomy canopy.

Low's Creek runs through one of Nature's perfect amphitheatres and finds
its outlet at the Poort.  If that were blocked, there would be a lake
many hundred feet deep; but as it is not blocked, there is only a very
clear, sparkling stream rippling over stony bottoms, or swirling under
the overhanging thorns and fig-trees--the one constant babbler on such
nights as this.  The road through this valley is not over-good at the
best of times, and it is something worse than bad on a really dark
night--which was exactly what the driver of the spider-and-four thought
as he pulled up with his near fore-wheel foul of a dead tree-stump.
There was no damage done, for the horses were pleased to take the sudden
check as an excuse, if not indeed a hint, to stop; and when by the light
of matches the size of the obstacle was determined, and means were found
to free the wheel, the driver said, "Come!" and the horses toiled on
again up the hill towards the Neck.  Every now and then, as they climbed
slowly up, the ladies--there were two ladies in the spider--would point
out the camp-fires of the prospectors at various heights and distances
on the tops or slopes of the surrounding hills, and their companion
would tell them which was French Bob's, and which the Cascade, and point
out, high and far, the famous Kimberley Imperial; and the Hottentot
driver would peer out in front, silently intent upon the road.

Toiling, swaying, and straining, they at last reached the Neck, and gave
the horses a blow.  Behind them, or rather below them, black as the
bottomless pit, lay the valley out of which they had risen.  In front
lay the broader, shallower, furrowed basin, through which the road
winds, cross-cut by Honeybird and Fig-tree Creeks; and beyond Avoca,
where the waters meet, they could see, through the gap of the Queen's
River Poort, the lightning playing in the distance--silent, clear, and
not too vivid.

Down the easy slope the horses trotted out freely, swinging their heads
and snorting as the faint, cool breeze, the sure precursor of the storm,
fanned and freshened them.  On they went gaily for a couple of miles
till the deep, dry donga was reached, where the road dips down suddenly
into a black, murky, impenetrable darkness.  Above, the trees on either
side of the high banks intertwine their branches; beneath, the soft dead
leaves lie upon a sandy bottom, and the road is flanked by jungle, pure
and simple.  It is like a tunnel.  It is not possible to leave it except
at the ends.

The driver gave the leaders their heads, and trusted to their knowing
that he couldn't see, whilst they might.  The heavy grating of the
brake, hard pressed, sounded loud on the night air as the leaders
disappeared into the dark trough.  Down went the trap and horses with a
diver's plunge at first, and then more steadily and slowly they neared
the bottom; but before it was reached, the leaders shied violently to
the off, the spider swung down the slope, slid a little, poised for a
moment on two wheels, and turned slowly over on its side on the bed of
leaves and sand.  The horses, with their heads jammed in the bush, were
effectually stopped.

The ladies did not scream!

It seems wrong--unnatural; but they did not.  Urgent need and sudden
danger, as they overwhelm and stupefy some, so do they brace and
brighten others; and when one of the horses whinnied in a friendly way,
it seemed odd that it should be a girl's voice that exclaimed quickly:

"Listen! they're not frightened.  It must be another horse!"

"Are you hurt?"  "Where are you?" and, "Are you all right?" were
exchanged in the darkness; and then someone struck a match, and, making
a dark lantern of his hat, threw the light on the late occupants of the
spider.

The girls were dusty, pale, and frightened, and the men looked anxious.
The Hottentot driver was swearing to himself in a discontented
undertone, and endeavouring concurrently to loosen the wheelers'
harness.

"I am the culprit," said the man with the light.  "I can only say I am
very delighted that no one is hurt, and awfully sorry that I gave you
such a fright.  I'm sure I never meant it.  I did not know there was a
soul within miles until the sound of your brake frightened my horse into
backing into the bush here.  The brute wouldn't budge, so I sat still,
hoping that you would pass without seeing me."

"Oh, it really doesn't matter in the least!" came from one of the girls,
as the match died out.  "You don't know how relieved, how grateful we
are to you for not being a lion or a highwayman."

The driver Piet had rummaged out a stump of candle, and lighted it.  It
flickered uncertainly on the capsized spider, on the scattered cushions
and shawls, on the faces of the two young girls and their companion, and
faintly lighted up the lank form and the dark bearded face of the enemy.

"I thought I knew your voice, Heron!" said the latter quietly.

"Nairn!  By all that's great and wonderful!  What on earth were you--"

"Well, I wasn't waylaying you with evil intent, and I do hope that the
ladies--"

"Oh, I forgot.  My sisters," said Heron, with an explanatory wave.
"Girls, this is Mr Nairn, a friend of mine.  Very much in disguise, you
must admit, Nairn!"

"Indeed I do.  I confess, I repent, and I beg for mercy; and, to give
practical proof of my sincerity, let me help you.  Come on, Heron; let's
right the trap first."

No damage had been done to the trap, and the three men soon succeeded in
getting it on its wheels again.  The boy drove through the donga and up
the other bank without further difficulty, the others preferring to
walk; but out there, when he had room to move round his team, the driver
found that the off-leader had gashed his shoulder badly in the bush, and
would have to be turned out.

Heron's heart sank, for it would be a serious matter to attempt the four
drifts of the Queen's River in a heavy spider with only a pair.  He
looked at the overcast sky, and turned in despair to Nairn, who had
remained with the ladies, and knew nothing of the injury to the horse.

"Nairn, you know the road best.  Is there _any_ place where we can stay
the night?  We can't tackle the rivers.  One of the leaders has cut his
shoulder badly and won't face the harness.  We must put up somewhere for
the night!"

"There's Clothier's," the other answered; "but I'm afraid that won't
do--a grass hut, and sardines, gin, and rough customers.  Charlie
Brandt's--ditto!  There's the Queen of Sheba's at Eureka City; but,
then, you'd never reach there alive--at night.  Let's see!  No; there's
no fit place between this and Barberton."

"There!" said Heron, "we'll spend a pleasant night in the veld, rain and
all.  I wish we'd come on a bit further with the waggons.  It will be
rough on you girls."

But they did not seem dismayed at the prospect; in fact, they considered
it a romantic sort of picnic adventure.  Heron, who had had malarial
fever, took no count of the romance.

While the matter was being discussed, Nairn went forward and carefully
examined the injured horse.  Heron had decided to outspan where they
were, under a big Dingaan apricot-tree, and the ladies were busy making
plans for the disposal of cushions, wraps, and rugs to fend off the
coming rain.

"That horse will be worse to-morrow than he is to-night.  He won't be
well for weeks," said Nairn coolly.  "How do you propose getting on at
all, even if you do stay here to-night?  What do you gain by the delay?"

Heron was somewhat taken aback.

"Well," he answered, "we gain the daylight, anyway; that's something."

"Something--yes; but daylight won't take you through the rivers with one
pair of horses.  They'll be pretty fall, too, after to-night's rain."

"That's true," said Heron gloomily; "and it's raining like old Harry now
up at the headwaters.  Look at the lightning over the Kaap Valley!"

They looked, and the quick play of the distant flashes left no room for
doubt.  Then Nairn spoke again--without impulse, without enthusiasm, but
deliberately, as though he had considered the matter and reluctantly but
finally made his decision.

"You will have to put my horse in place of the injured one, and go on
to-night.  I can walk."

He did not affect that the idea was the happy thought of the moment, or
that it was from all points of view a good one.  He seemed from his tone
to be making the best of a bad job, and Heron saw that so distinctly
that he could only stammer out weakly:

"Oh, really, it's awfully good of you, but we couldn't allow you to
walk."

But the taller of the two girls came to her brother's assistance.

"I think it's a _capital_ idea!  Don't you see, Jack, Mr Nairn wants
`to give a practical proof of his sincerity'?"

The lazy, mischievous imitation of Nairn's tone and manner in quoting
his own words brought a hearty laugh from the others against Nairn, for
he had "given himself away"; and once or twice as they were changing
horses and preparing to start, Nairn found himself looking curiously at
the girl who had "let him down."

They were nearly ready to start when she came over to him, and said:

"You are not going to walk.  You will come with us, won't you?"

He shook his head.

"My way is not your way, Miss Heron."

"No, no; you express it wrongly.  _My_ way is _your_ way.  We have room
for you and you must come."

"But I have just come from Barberton, and I live in--in the Swazie
country."  And his voice dropped to nothing on the last words.

"Now, Mr Nairn, I know you are afraid of overcrowding us.  You _have_
to come for your horse, so that excuse won't do; and since you compel me
to tell the whole truth, Jack says you know the road best, and we want
you to come because we are just a tiny little bit afraid of those horrid
rivers.  Now I've told you."

Nairn submitted; but as they drove along in the dark more than once the
thought occurred that even the best of women will stoop to the most
unfair means to gain their points.

After many years it was all fresh to him again.

They spun along the smooth soft road, slowing up in places for the
dongas--those deeply-worn furrows in Nature's face, the result of many a
heavy storm.  They passed the huge old fig-tree standing sentinel where
the waters meet, and crossed the Fig-tree Creek, which, to the
experienced ear of the men, had a fuller and angrier tone than was its
wont.  They passed "Clothier's" in silence.  To the girls the grass
shanty leaking candle-light at every pore in its misshapen sides, the
shouts of laughter, the half-heard songs, the glimpse of the interior as
they passed the door, showing the rough gin-case counter, backed by
shelves laden with "square face," and the bare-armed, bearded man
craning over to dodge the glare of guttering candles and see who or what
was passing by--all made a picture unique and indelible.

They wound slowly round the bend and over the big smooth rocks down to
the Fourth Drift.

The water ran silently over the sandy bottom, and when the horses were
in breast-high and their movements no longer caused a splash, the
absolute stillness begat a feeling of awe and fear of the black-looking
water that is so silent, so strong, and so treacherous.

To everyone there comes a sense of strain relieved and spirits reviving
on coming through a bad river, and to the young girls, whose first
experience it was, the splashing of the leaders' feet in shallow water,
and the rising up the sandy bank, brought an ecstasy of relief.

Driving up the valley of the Lampogwana, Nairn and Heron cheered them
with tales of the gold-fields and of the country, and ignored the river
and the coming storm; but the steep rush into the Third Drift, and the
tossing and jolting over the boulders, and the angry racing of the water
and the more distinct roll of the thunder, were features in a first
experience which were not to be talked away, and if Nairn felt his
conversational powers disparaged by very evident non-attention, perhaps
this was compensated for by occasional graspings of his arm--mute
appeals for protection which men take as compliments.

Going slowly down the cutting to the Second Drift, the course of the
river was shown up by the lightning, and one bluish gleam in particular
lit up the scene with such unsurpassable vividness that long after all
was black again the eye retained a view of dark water in swirls and
curves of wonderful grace, of foam-crested breakers and jets of spray,
of swaying shrubs and bent, quivering reeds.

Nairn recalled another such night when his horse, which had paused to
sniff before facing the flood, jerked his head up with a snort as a
blinding flash had shown him a white face for an instant above the
water.  The fixed stare that the dead eyes gave him lingered long after
succeeding flashes had shown an unbroken surface of river again.  But he
did not speak of this.

They drove slowly over the little flat through which the river ran, and
as that was barely covered by the flood they knew that the river was
just passable for the spider, but it meant getting a wetting as it was
dangerously near flood mark.

Piet pulled up.  The ladies and the baases, he said, could take the
footpath along the mountains over the krantzes and avoid the two drifts.
It was only four miles to the next hotel.  He would like to outspan and
stay where he was--the river was too full, and the next drift would be
worse still.  The river was coming down.

But Heron was obstinate, and Nairn, who knew the footpath past the
Golden Valley, knew it to be an impossible alternative for ladies, at
night; so Heron called out: "Kate, you grip the rail, and Nairn will
look after you!  You hang on to me, Nell!"  They went in, and the water
washed on to the seats, and the spider swayed to the stream; but the
horses headed up bravely, and buoying on the waters, or sousing
underneath, half swimming and half wading, they pulled through.

"Hold up, Nell! hold up, little woman!  Don't cry now, we're as safe as
houses!" was what Nairn heard from the opposite seat.

What happened beside him was that his companion's grasp loosened on the
rail, and as the spider rose up the soft, sandy bank, she slid back
against him with her weight on the arm he had passed behind her as
protection, and her cheek against his shoulder.

When they pulled up on the level road again, while her sister was
laughing off her tears, Kate pulled herself together with an effort, and
said, with a half-sobbing laugh:

"I was very fri--frightened that time.  I--I think I should have fallen
out but for you."

Then the storm broke over them, and the rain came down in blinding
torrents, and the horses, ducking and swaying before it, moved slowly
on.  Flash after flash lit up the hills above and the river below as
they toiled along where the road was cut out of the precipitous
hillside.  Every furrow was a stream, every gutter a watercourse; the
water seemed to gush from the very earth; the river itself was a
seething mud-red torrent.

The First Drift, which, as they were coming up stream, was their last,
is broader, and not as deep as the others; but in those days it was full
of boulders, and the water raced down in three separate channels,
although the surface showed but one broad stream.  The drift is now
higher up, where the bed is even, and the current is not so strong.
They have also a wire rope across, and a ferry-boat; but it was not so
in '87.  They have done a good deal to improve things, but still the
river is king, and asserts itself upon occasion; as when it took a
thousand tons of solid masonry from the Cerro de Pasco dam a hundred
yards below this drift, and carried samples of dressed stone and
Portland cement to the barbel and crocodiles of Ingwenye Umkulu, thirty
miles away; or when, later still, it rose in protest against the
impudence of man, and swept battery houses off like corks, and flung the
huge girders of the railway-bridge from its path, and tossed fifty-ton
boulders like pebbles into the Oriental water-race, seventy feet above
the river's bed.

They crossed the first channel safely; and they even got through the
second and worst.  The little Hottentot Piet sat tight, and handled his
team with the most perfect skill.  At times it seemed impossible that
horses or trap could withstand the surging mass of water that piled up
against them; but they did.  A cheering word or a timely touch of the
whip seemed once or twice to avert catastrophe.

Nairn's horse had made a perfect leader, and faced the water like a
steamboat; but the other seemed to be losing heart, and but for Piet's
whip would have headed down-stream in the second channel.

They were into the third channel, and were going slowly and steadily
through, when one front wheel came block up against a boulder, and the
near leader again headed down.  Whip, voice and rein failed, and as Piet
made one more determined effort, something gave, and he dropped back in
his seat, calling out:

"Baas, baas, the rein's broken!"

Nairn jumped up instantly, but the frightened girl clung to him, crying
out:

"Oh, don't leave me!  Mr Nairn, for the love of God, don't leave us!"

Her one hand grasped the collar of his coat, the other held his right
hand.  He loosened her grasp, and holding both her hands tightly, forced
her back into the seat.

"Hold _that_!" he said, placing her one hand on the rail, and stooping
until his face almost touched hers.  "Sit still, and wait for me.  I
won't desert you!"

Vaulting over into the driver's seat, he seized the sjambok and jumped
into the river.  The near leader, free of the check of the rein, was
giving before the stream, and had turned fairly down the river.  Nairn
was swept off his feet in an instant, but, anticipating this, he had
grasped the wheeler's near trace, and was able to work his way forward
until he was abreast of the swerving leader.  Keeping with his right
hand a firm grasp of the lower trace, he shouted to the quaking animal,
and struck it sharply on the neck and jaw with the sjambok.  The
suddenness of the attack startled the horse, and he plunged up stream
again.  At the same moment Piet's whip whistled overhead, and his voice
rang out; the other three horses strained together, and the spider rose
over the stone, and, lurching and bumping, came through the third
channel.

The excited animals rushed the last narrow strip of water, and Nairn,
stumbling over rocks as best he could, was dragged with them, until,
losing his hold and his footing with the last plunge of the horses, he
was hurled forward on his head as they reached the bank.  One of the
horses trampled him, and two of the wheels went over his chest.  The
little Hottentot saw it all, and before the others knew anything, he had
jumped off, leaving the horses to pull up as they were accustomed to on
the bank, and grabbed Nairn by the arm just as he began to swing into
the current and float down-stream.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Bungalow was perched on the hillside, and overlooked the camp.  The
thatched roof and wide veranda made it cool and pleasant, and the view
across the great valley of De Kaap was grand.

Nairn's head was still bandaged, and he was propped up on a cushioned
lounge, unable to stir.

The French window of the room opened out upon the stoep, and from the
couch itself Nairn could overlook the camp and see the bold parapets of
the Devil's Kantoor five-and-twenty miles across the valley.

Nairn moved his head slowly and painfully as he heard a light footstep
upon the stoep.  Miss Heron walked in with a cup of something in one
hand, and with the other grasping the folds of her riding-habit.

"Well, how is the head?" she asked, putting down the cup and busying
herself at once, fixing the cushions more comfortably, and moistening
the lint and bandage over his temples.  "Better, aren't you?  See, I've
brought you something cool and nice to drink.  It will freshen you up
again.  Try some!"

Nairn closed his eyes, and half turned his head away, ignoring the
offer.

"You are going out again, riding?" he queried, in an uncivil tone.

"Yes; as far as the river, to see how it looks in daylight, and in its
better mood.  They say it is beginning to fall; but it is banks over
still.  They say that the morning after we crossed, Welsh, whose house
is on the rise above the drift, got out of bed into two feet of water.
He says he felt it in bed, but thought it was only the roof leaking
again.  I wish you could come with us--but you will soon, won't you?"

"No; I've stayed too long already," was the surly answer, and Nairn
turned his face further towards the wall.

"To-morrow we shall be able to move you out on to the stoep, and perhaps
you will let me read to you there?  It won't seem so lonely and dismal
then," said Miss Kate, gently ignoring Nairn's tone.

"Thank you!" he answered tartly; "I don't mind being alone.  I like it!"

She had got to know his humours, and so, standing back a little where he
could not watch her face, and keeping the laughter out of her voice, she
said: "Oh!"

"Perhaps the others are ready," he remarked after a pause.  "I am
keeping you from your ride."

"I don't think so.  They promised to call for me here."

"Don't wait on my account, please.  I don't mind being alone."

"So you said before.  If you _object_ to my sitting here, of course I
can wait on the stoep.  I thought perhaps you liked me to be here."

Miss Kate switched gently at her foot, but did not move from her seat,
and Nairn played a tattoo upon the woodwork of the lounge.  He broke the
silence with an impatient sigh and, after another pause, his companion
remarked airily to the opposite wall:

"I wonder why sick people are called _patients_?"

Nairn twitched visibly, but offered no explanation, and there was
another silence.  Presently the girl observed genially:

"You remember, Mr Nairn, while we were driving along that night, you
were telling us about the training of horses?  You remember, don't you?"

"Yes," said Nairn grumpily.

"You remember," resumed the girl, smiling sweetly--"you remember telling
us that you considered the various types of animals higher or lower
according to their susceptibility to kindness and gentle treatment--that
the horse, for instance, stands higher than the mule or the donkey.
Now," said she, turning to him with laughing eyes but earnest mien, "I
wanted to ask you which of those two is the one upon which patience and
kindness and good temper are most wasted."

"You mean, whether I am a mule or an ass?"

Nairn looked round, vainly endeavouring not to smile.

"Oh dear, oh dear!" said Miss Kate, laughing and moving to the door;
"I'm afraid the poor old head is very bad to-day!  Here are the others.
I must go.  Good-bye."

"_Did_ you mean that _I_--"

"Say good-bye at once, or I'll sit down again and refuse to leave."

"I won't!  Tell me, did--"

"Good-bye, Ursa Major with the sore head, and don't ask questions."

The girl curtseyed to him in the doorway as she left, and Nairn turned
his face to the wall again with a groan.

A girl knows when a man's eyes follow her about the room, and she knows
why--long before the man does.  But the man finds it out soon enough.

Nairn pushed away the books and papers.  They had no charm for him, and,
as he could not sleep, he fell presently to tracing the design of the
wallpaper and counting how many varieties or bunches of flowers went to
make up the general pattern.  He detected small irregularities in the
joinings, and they annoyed him.  So he turned round and stared at the
ceiling; but he had studied that before, and he knew which board
contained the most knots, and how many boards had apparently been cut
from the same log.  There were two boards which were twins; so exactly
did they match, they must have been parted by but one saw-cut; and he
speculated if there could be any sort of intelligence in them that could
be roused to wonder or gratitude that they, cut in Norway from one
stately old pine, should pass through many hands and yet find a
resting-place side by side ten thousand miles away in the gold-fields of
the Transvaal.

Nairn's eyelids drooped heavily.  One sleepy chuckle escaped him at his
own quaint conceit, as he wondered whether the ceiling boards considered
the flooring boards beneath them, and if they ever put on side on that
account; and the smile of lazy content remained long after he was fast
asleep.

It was the scent of flowers that roused him.  Violets!  And he had not
smelt them for twelve years!

Miss Kate was sitting there looking at him, and, but for the scent of
the flowers and the slanting sunbeams, he might have thought she had
never left.

"Does the big bear like flowers?"

He was too contented to do more than smile.  "And he won't eat me now?"

"When Beauty picked the flowers, what did the Beast do?"

Kate looked up with a shade of alarm.  She was not quite sure where
analogies might lead them--they get to mean so much.

"Well, well," she laughed, "who would have suspected you of a leaning
towards fairy tales?  Why don't you ask if I enjoyed my ride?"

"Well, did you?"

"Listen to him!  Well, _did_ I?  Oh," said Miss Kate, pushing back her
chair with a sigh of mock despair, "you'll _never_ learn!  It is not in
you to be ordinarily civil.  Now listen, and I'll teach you; and now
repeat after me: `I hope--'"

"I hope--"

"No, no!  You must hope with greater warmth.  Say, `I _hope_ you have
enjoyed--'"

"I _hope_ you have enjoyed--"

"`Your ride _immensely_!'"

"Your ride _immensely_!"

"That's better.  And `I'm very glad indeed--'"

"And I'm very glad indeed--"

"`That you went out.'"

"No, I'm hanged if I'll say that!"

"Mister Nairn!"

"No; I don't care what you say!  I won't say that!  I'm not going to
perjure myself."

"You must say it!"

"Not if I die for it!"

"You won't say it to oblige me?"

"N-no."

There was a curious pause.  Kate looked down, saying softly:

"Well, if you won't do the first thing I have ever asked you, I suppose
I'd better go."

Women, not excepting the very best, are often most unfair, and sometimes
even mean.  Why change in a breath from chaff to deadly earnest, and
wring a man's heart out with half a look and a catch in the voice?
Nairn succumbed.

"No, don't go.  I'll say it."

"Well?"

"But I've forgotten the words."

"No; you can't have forgotten so quickly.  Say, `I'm very glad indeed
that you went out.'"

"I'm very glad indeed that--"

"Go on!"

"That--that you've come back."

"I can see that you want to drive me away."

"No, don't--don't go!  `That you went out.'  Heaven forgive me!  There,
are you satisfied?"

"Yes, I'm satisfied now.  I hate to give in--especially to a man."

"And to a woman?"

"Oh, I never give in to a woman.  Women are so obstinate, and they're
always wrong!  What are you laughing at?  Oh, well, I'm not like a woman
now.  I'm--you know what I mean--I'm stating the case.  Besides, I meant
_other_ women."

"Now, if I tell you something, you won't laugh at me and point the
finger of scorn and press the heel of triumph?"

"No, I won't."

"Promise."

"I promise."

"Well, then, I _am_ glad that you went out, and I _was_ a bear to grudge
it to you.  And you--you have been far too good to me--far too good."

"No, no--indeed no!  You are my charge, and I am your nurse.  And,
remember, had it not been for us you would not have been hurt.  Had it
not been for you we should not have been here.  We brought you to
death's door, and you saved us.  I--I was only teasing you.  I never
meant--"

"Kate, child, Kate!"

"Hush!  No, no--not now.  Here is George.  Good-night."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yes, truly!  The--man--finds--it--out--soon--enough!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the morning Nairn and his horse were gone, and there was not a
vestige of a trace to show how, why, or where!  It was several days
later that Geddy, who had been away for some weeks, dined at Heron's,
and, as they were sitting on the stoep smoking and chatting, remarked:

"By the way, fancy whom I met on the way in!  Our old friend Induna
Nairn, looking ghastly, poor devil!  Said he'd had a spill crossing a
river or something.  Surlier than ever.  Glared at me with positive
hatred when I asked him where he was going to to escape civilisation,
and said, `Zambesi, or hell.'  I could make nothing of him.  Can't stand
chaff, you know; never could.  But I heard all about him from old Tom
Callan--`Hot Tom,' you know."

Heron looked up curiously, but did not interrupt.

"It seems he's quite a great gun among the niggers--a real Induna.  Did
you know that?  I thought it was only a nickname, but it isn't.  He's a
sort of relation of the king's, etc."

"What the devil are you talking about?"

"Eh? what?  A--a relation of the king's, I said."

"A _relation_!  Nairn?"

"Well, a connection.  You know what I mean.  He married the king's
favourite daughter."

"Great God!"

"Yes.  You see, we were quite on the wrong tack.  By George!  I did
laugh when I heard it."

Heron walked out on to the gravel path for a breath of air--out to ease
the choking feeling in his throat; and he saw his sister rise from her
chair, draw a shawl over her head, and move away to her own room.

That night there had come to the house a little Swazie boy.  He had one
very miserable fowl for sale, and he squatted on his haunches near the
gate, heedless of the fact that his offer had been twice refused.
Through the night he stayed, and into the morning, and as the hot sun
swung overhead he sat and waited still, never taking his eyes off the
front stoep.  And when at last Kate came out he tried his luck again.

She turned her armchair so as to get a good light on her book, and began
to read, but in a few moments the child's voice close by startled her.
She looked up and saw a little black face, lighted by bright eyes and a
flash of white teeth; in front of that, a wretched fowl lying on the
cement stoep; and in front of that again, a folded note bearing her
name.  She picked up the note and read it.

"I had forgotten what a good woman was.  Heaven bless you, Kate!  It is
not that I am ungrateful, but I wish to God Piet had left me to the
river."

Kate leaned back quietly in the Madeira armchair, and closed her eyes.
When she looked again the little _umfaan_ was gone; but he had forgotten
his fowl upon the stoep, which was an unusual thing for any _umfaan_ to
do.

CHAPTER FOUR.

CASSIDY.

  "And the greatest of these is charity."

I met Cassidy under trying circumstances.  But it worked out all right
eventually, principally because, so far as I knew him--and that got to
be pretty well--Cassidy was not amenable to circumstances.  He beat them
mostly, and some of them were pretty tough.

The circumstances surrounding our meeting were trying, because Cassidy
was in bed after a hard day's work, and I aroused him at 3 a.m. by
firing a revolver at his bulldog.  His huts were on the railway works,
and near the footpath to Jim Mackay's canteen--a pretty hot show.  He
used to be roused this way every Saturday and Sunday, and occasionally
throughout the week, by visitors, black and white, warlike and friendly,
thieving and sociable, but all drunk.  At first he got a bulldog, but
they got to know him, and after awhile the tip went round that half a
pound of beefsteak was a good buy and better than a blunderbuss for
Cassidy's Cutting.  Then he loaded fifty Number 12's with coarse salt,
mixed with pebbles and things, and, as he said to me afterwards:

"Ye were the fourth that night, and ye 'noyed me wid yer swearin' an'
shootin' an' that, so I just passed the salt an' wint for the dust shot
as bein' more convincing like; but the divil an' all of it was, I
couldn't get the cartridge in by reason of drawin' the charge that was
there already.  Too bad! too bad! for dust shot it was, av I'd only
known it, an' me thinkin' it was nothin' but salt.  Lord, Lord! we're a
miscontented lot!  Av it wasn't for bein' greedy, I'd 've had ye wid the
dust shot safe as death.  Faith, ye niver know yer luck!"

That was all right from his point of view, but as I had left my horse
dying of Dikkop sickness just this side of Kilo 26, and had walked along
the formation carrying saddle and bridle up to Kilo 43--about ten
miles--without a drink, and twice lost my way between unconnected
sections, and twice walked over the ends of the formation where culverts
should have been and rolled down twenty feet of embankment, and once got
bogged in a bottoming pit in a vlei, and many times hacked my shins
against wheelbarrows and piles of picks stacked on the track, I think it
was reasonable to let out at a bulldog that came at me like a hurricane
out of the darkness and silence of 3 a.m. in the Bush veld, to say
nothing of a half-finished railway cutting.  And I think it only human
to have cursed the owner with all my resources until the dog was called
off.

I don't exactly know how it came about, but I slept in Cassidy's hut
that night.  He pushed me in before him, guiding me to the bed with a
hand on each elbow.  He said that there were no matches in the show and
that it wasn't worth while looking for the candle, which, as he had no
means of lighting it, I suppose it wasn't.

He had a rare brogue and a governing nasal drone, but it was the brogue
that emboldened me to ask for whisky.

"Spirits!" said he; "not a drop, an' niver have; but jist sit ye where
ye are, an' I'll fetch ye out some beer--Bass's, no less, av ye'll thry
that; and can dhrink from the bottle."

He talked in jerks, and had a quaint knack of chucking remarks after an
apparently completed sentence, evidently intending them to catch up to
it and be tacked on.  He dived under the bed somewhere, and a minute
later I heard the squeaking of a corkscrew and the popping of a cork.

"Here y' are," said he, as he pressed the bottle into my two hands;
"drink hearty, me lad, and praise yer God Dan O'Connell there's got too
fat an' lazy to pull ye down."

I dare say he knew what he was talking about, but, for my part, I
confess that nothing in the whole business had impressed me less than
any lack of earnestness on Dan O'Connell's part.  I sat awhile munching
biscuits from a tin which he had placed on the table and gurgling down
beer from the bottle.  Cassidy was asleep.  Ten minutes passed, and I
was finishing the beer, when he sat up again, as I judged from the
sound, and remarked in a brisk, clear tone:

"Ye called me a mud-dollopin', dyke-diggin', Amsterdam'd Dutchman!
Ye'll take back the Dutchman, I believe?"

"I will indeed," I said, laughing.

"An' the mud?"

"Yes, and the mud."

He settled himself in the bunk again with a grunt, and murmured in a
tone of indignant contempt:

"Mud, sez he, mud!  An' me shiftin' granite boulders for soft rock, an
shtruck solid formation a fut from surface, an' getting two an' six a
cubic fer the lot!  Mud, faith!  An' not enough water this three miles
to the Crocodile to make spit for an ant, barrin' what I can tap from
the Figaro Battery pipe!  An' mud, sez he?  Holy Fly!  Mud, be Gawd!"

It died away in a sleepy grunt, and Cassidy was off I groped about for a
blanket, and, rolling back into the meal-sack stretcher, forgot all
about mad Irishmen, sick horses, and earnest bulldogs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One always experiences a curious sensation on seeing by daylight that
which one has only known in the dark.  Persons do for years a certain
journey or voyage, always starting and always arriving at regular hours.
One day something happens which necessitates their passing in daylight
the places formerly passed at night.  On such occasions even the most
matter-of-fact must marvel at the wanton freaks of their imaginations.
The real thing seems so inconceivably wrong after what the mind had
pictured.  The appearance of a room, the outside of a house, are
ludicrously, hopelessly at variance with what one had thought they
should be.  But it is, if possible, worse when the subject is a person.
I have many times travelled with men at night by coach, on horseback, on
foot, and in a waggon; have chatted sociably and exchanged all manner of
friendly turns; have slept at the same wayside hotel, and in the morning
found myself unable, until he spoke, to pick out of any two the one with
whom I had spent hours the night before.

In the case of Cassidy the difference was appalling.

I awoke in such light as might leak through the grass hut; which was
very little for light, but not bad for leakage.

The boy brought breakfast--coffee, bread, and cold venison, which suited
me well--and I was turning my thoughts to the matter of a fresh horse
for my homeward journey when I met the eye of one of my friends of the
previous night.  I say the eye, because I don't count the one in the
black patch--I couldn't see it.  But when Dan O'Connell stood in the
doorway and allowed his one bloodshot, pink-rimmed eye to rest
thoughtfully on me, it fairly fixed me.  I used to recall his bandy legs
and undershot jaw long afterwards whenever I thought of Cassidy's
Cutting; but it was only when the luminous eye uprose before me that I
used unconsciously to twitch about and draw my legs up as I did the
morning I saw him in the flesh.  Cassidy _was_ a surprise; O'Connell
wasn't.  His appearance was only the cold chill of proof following a
horrible conviction.  I was much relieved when the boy cleared Dan out
of the doorway with a bare-toed kick in the ribs and a vigorous "Ow!
Foosack!"  I admired the boy for that, and even envied him.

Through the open doorway I saw a white man walking briskly towards the
hut, and I stepped out to meet him.  He was a man of medium height, but
there was something in his walk and figure that arrested attention.  I
am sure I have never seen in any man such lithe, active movement and
perfect symmetry.  A close-fitting vest and a pair of white flannel
trousers were what he wore.  I remember that because, somehow, I always
recall that first view in the morning light--the springy walk, the bare
muscular arms, the curve of the chest, and the poise of the head, as the
face was turned from me.

If I could tell this story without saying another word about his
appearance, I would stop right here.  I would greatly prefer to do so,
but it is not possible.  I hope no one will feel exactly as I felt when
this man turned his face to me.  It serves no good purpose to give
revolting details, so I will only say that the man was disfigured--most
horribly so.

I cannot recall what was said or done during the few minutes that passed
after we met, but there are some impressions seared into my brain as
with red-hot irons; there are some recollections which even now make me
feel faint and dazed, and some which make me burn with shame.  I take
shame--bitter, burning shame--that I failed to grasp his outstretched
hand, and that I let him read in my face the horror that seized me.  It
is one of those pitiful things that the longest lifetime is not long
enough to let a man forget.  Surging across this comes the vivid
recollection of my conviction that this man was Cassidy.  The first
instant my glance lighted on him I felt what I can only call a sort of
joyous conviction that it was he.  I felt, in fact, that I recognised
him.  No doubt it seems odd, illogical, contradictory, even impossible,
that, strong as the gratifying conviction was, the other, when he turned
his face to me, was a thousand times stronger.  It ought to have been a
reversal of the first conviction.  It wasn't.  It was a smashing,
terrible corroboration.  It crushed me with a sense of personal
affliction.  It never germinated a doubt.

I had to stay all that day with him, and he was most gentle and
courteous; most kindly and considerate.  Every act heaped coals of fire
on my ill-conditioned head.  God knows I tried my best, but I could
hardly look in his face, and I could not control my physical repugnance.
I schooled myself to speak, and even to look, without betraying my
thoughts, but I could not eat with him.  I could not sit opposite a face
half of which was gone; I could not use the plate, the cup, the fork,
that he had used.  I pleaded illness, and feigned it; but by night-time
I was ill enough to need no feigning.

It was common enough for anyone benighted on those unhealthy flats to
pay the penalty with a dose of fever.  I got fever, and no one seemed
surprised; but for the life of me I cannot even now help attaching some
significance to the fact that I was certainly not ill before the scene
at the hut door.

I lay in that grass hut for a week or more, some of the time delirious--
all the time panting with fever and shivering with ague; tossing
wakefully and gasping for air; complaining of everything, unutterably
miserable and despondent; hating the sight of food, shrinking from each
act of kindness, scowling at the sound of a voice.  My case was not
worse than hundreds of others.  I mention these things only to make
clear what I mean when I say that never at any moment during that time
did I awake or want anything but Cassidy was there to tend me.  His was
the care, the watchfulness, the gentleness, of a good woman.  Can one
say more?

It is odd that during that time I only saw him as he ought to have
been--as I am sure at one time he had been--a man whose countenance
matched his character.  It is not so odd, perhaps, that as I recovered
and became rational the feeling of repulsion did not return, only an
infinite pity for a hardly-stricken fellow-creature whose physical
endowments and whose prospects must have been far above the average, and
whose affliction was proportionately great.

When I left there was one feeling that was stronger than simple
gratitude to him.  It was thankfulness that something had occurred to
prevent me from leaving with only horror and repulsion.  I was thankful
for the sickness that left me richer by a heart full of pity and--I
think the right word is--reverence!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My lines were laid in other places than Cassidy's, and as months passed
by without my either seeing or hearing of him, I might, for aught I
know, have forgotten him, or come to recall him only as one recalls,
after lapse of years, some curious experience.  This _might_ have
happened, I say; but it didn't.  Mainly because of a conversation which
revived my keenest interest in him.

Several of us had walked out to dine and spend the evening at the
Chaunceys', and as we sat on the stoep smoking and chatting, the ladies
being with us, the conversation turned on a concert or entertainment of
some kind which was being got up for the relief of some distressed
families in the place.  Somebody hazarded the opinion that the
"distressed family" business was being somewhat overdone, and that there
was no evidence of it as far as he had been able to see.

The remark was unfortunate, for Mrs Chauncey happened to be one of the
promoters of the charity.  She--good little woman!--had her young
matron's soul full of sympathy still; her store had not been plundered
by impostors, and she vehemently defended her project.  She did more;
she carried war and rout into the enemy's quarters and surmised that
men, young men, whose lives are divided between money-making and
pleasure-seeking, are not the best judges of what those who keep their
troubles to themselves may have to endure.

"When you," (the young men) "are settling differences on shares or
cards, or having your occasional splits--or whatever else you do all day
long--there are women and children aching for one good meal, shrinking
back for want of ordinary clothing, languishing and dropping for want of
a man's arm to fend and support them."

Jack Chauncey--good chap!--must have thought this from his wife just a
wee bit spirited, for, after a pause, he gently drew a herring across
the trail.

"By--the--by, dear," he asked thoughtfully, "what became of that
good-looking young widow who came here with her kid and looked so jolly
miserable?  By Gad! her face has been haunting me ever since.  Did you
manage anything for her?"

"You mean Mrs Mallandane.  She would not take anything.  She wanted to
work; to earn, not to beg, she said.  I have managed to get her some
needlework, but, oh, so little, poor thing!  And the pay is too
dreadful!  Now, there is a case in point.  A widow, absolutely
penniless, with a child of four or five to support.  A woman of
education and breeding, without a friend in the world, apparently;
shunned by everyone--by some on account of her poverty, by others for
her good looks and reserve.  She certainly is difficult to approach.  I
have been to her now four times, and it was only on the last occasion
that she thawed enough to tell me anything of herself.  She has lived
for years on what she believed to be the proceeds of her husband's
estate.  Until within the last few months she was under this impression.
But something happened which made her suspicious, and she found out
that the income left by her husband was pure fiction, and that what she
had been living on was an allowance from the only real friend she or her
husband ever had--the man who was her husband's partner when he died."

"Does she say that her husband is dead?" asked Carter, the unfortunate
"young man" who had before provoked Mrs Chauncey's ire.

Carter was very young, and I could see that he had no _arriere pensee_
in asking that question.  He did not mean to be impertinent.  But I
could also see that Mrs Chauncey did not take that view.  Her little
iced reply finished poor Carter.

"I said that she was a widow, Mr Carter, and I do not care to make
another's misfortunes the subject of an argument."

I felt sorry for Carter, he was such an ass; and I believe the other two
fellows pitied him also; so we did not refer to the subject as we walked
home together in the moonlight.  That, however, did not suit Carter.
After awhile he gave an uncomfortable laugh, and said:

"The little woman was rather down on me to-night about the charity show.
I rather put my foot in it, I think."

"Think!" said Lawton (one of our party), with heavy contempt.  "Think!
I wonder you claim to be able to think!  I never in my life saw anyone
make such a blighted idiot of himself!"

"Dash it all, man! give me a chance.  The `distressed family' allusion
was unlucky, I admit; but I hadn't the faintest intention of returning
to the subject when I asked about the husband.  Man alive!  Why, the
nerve of the Mallandane woman fairly knocked the breath out of me.  The
cheek of her cramming poor Mrs Chauncey with yarns of her husband's
death and estate, when everyone knows that he isn't dead at all; that
she gave him the slip, and went off with the `only friend'--his partner!
A man with half his face eaten away by disease.  I've seen the fellow
at the house myself Old Larkin, of the Bank, knew them in Kimberley.
They were claim-holders and contractors there and used to bank with him.
The firm was Cassidy and Mallandane.  I only wonder she continues to
call herself Mallandane.  It's a formality she might as well have
dispensed with."

I knew Carter to be a gossipy young devil, so I held my peace about
Cassidy; but it was with an effort.  My impulse was to give Carter the
lie direct, but I remembered Mrs Chauncey's last words and refrained.

We walked along in silence, and after a while Carter stopped in the road
opposite a small house, the door of which stood partly open.  There were
voices outside, and as Carter said, "Hush! listen!" we stopped
instinctively, and my heart sank as I recognised a voice that said
"Good-night."  I moved on hastily, disgusted at being trapped into
eavesdropping, and Carter laughed.

"That's the only friend!  There's no mistaking _that_.  But I wonder why
he's coming away," said the youth, with unmistakable and insinuating
emphasis on the last words.

No one answered his self-satisfied cackling.  I was listening to the
brisk walk behind us.  I would have known it in a million.  Closer and
closer it came; his sleeve brushed mine as he stepped lightly past.  I
let him go, and I don't know why.  But I felt like a whipped cur for
doing it.

It seemed to me that I must heretofore have been living in extraordinary
ignorance of what was going on round about me in a small place; for, as
though it only needed the start, from the first mention of this story by
Carter I was always hearing it, or a similar one, or one half
corroborating it.

I made an effort to see Cassidy the first thing next morning, but he had
left his hotel--presumably having gone out to the works again.  After a
day or two had passed I felt glad that I had not met him--glad because I
felt sure that he would have noticed that there was something wrong.  He
would instinctively have detected the cordiality and confidence which
were controlled by an effort of will, and were not--as they should have
been, and as they did again become--spontaneous and real.

This worried me exceedingly and I turned it over and over again to get
at the truth, and eventually it came to this.  I knew that they were
right as to the cause of his disfigurement; it was impossible to look at
him and not accept it.  I had no high moral prejudices about this.  I
only pitied him the more.  But I did not believe a word of the rest of
the story.  All presumption and a heap of circumstances were against me,
but I am glad to say that, but for the first hesitation, I never, never
doubted him.

It may have been a week or two after this that I met Mrs Chauncey in
camp one afternoon.  I had not seen her since the evening already
referred to, and, as it was an off afternoon, I asked leave to join her
in her walk home.

We wandered on slowly through the outskirts of the camp, along the most
direct road to the Chaunceys' house.  Since I had heard and seen what I
had that evening my interest in Mrs Mallandane had increased.  I never
passed the house without looking.  I claim--even to myself--that it was
real interest and not curiosity that prompted me.  Once or twice I had
seen the figure in simple black, but not sufficiently clearly to have
known the face again.  Her figure I don't think I should have mistaken;
it was rather striking.  There was also a little girl who used to sit
under a mimosa-tree studying her lessons or doing sums on a slate.  She
and I became friends.  I was drawn to the youngster because, when
passing one day, I took the unwarrantable liberty of looking over her
shoulder to see what the sum was.  After a decent pause, during which I
might have taken the hint, she turned up at me a very serious little
face lighted by large blue eyes, and lisped slowly:

"I don't like people to thtand behind, becauth I fordet my thums."

I laughingly patted the little head, and went on; but after this I
always stopped to chaff my little friend about her "thums," and I
generally brought an offering of some sort--sweets, cake, or fruit.

Thinking of the house and its people as we walked along, I was not sorry
when Mrs Chauncey asked if I would mind waiting for a minute or two
while she went in to see her _protegee_ about some work secured or
promised.

I sat down in my little friend's seat and waited.  I had not long to
wait.  Presently I heard behind me the awkward tiptoeing of a child
trying to walk very silently.  Like Brer Rabbit, I lay low.  Then came
the climbing on to the seat, and finally a pair of childish hands were
clapped over my eyes to an accompaniment of half-suppressed squeals of
laughter, broken by panting efforts to maintain the blind-folding hug.
I was busily keeping up the illusion by extravagantly bad guesses as to
who it was, when I heard the rustle of a dress, and someone ran out,
calling:

"Molly, Molly! how can you be so naughty, darling?  Oh, do excuse her!"

I was released.  My hat was in the dust and my hair rumpled.  I saw Mrs
Chauncey in the background in peals of laughter; Mrs Mallandane before
me, looking most concerned, and holding the bewildered Molly by the
hand; and Molly vindicating herself by saying with much dignity:

"Mother, it's only the gentimell that dooth my thumth an' kitheth me."

As a defence this was, of course, adequate--not to say excellent; but it
was rather embarrassing for me.  It was so effective, however, that I
was spared the necessity of saying anything myself Mrs Chauncey
introduced me to her _protegee_ as she would have done to any of her
lady friends, and the _protegee_ bowed, as it seemed to me, with a great
deal more grace and quite as much easy composure as the best of them.
That was my first thought.  The next was to take myself indignantly to
task for instituting a comparison.

As we resumed our walk I was wondering what could be the tie between
this woman and Cassidy.  There was no mistaking her class.  She was a
gentlewoman to her finger-tips.  I was roused from my rather
discourteous distraction by Mrs Chauncey saying:

"You are not so surprised now, perhaps, that I lost my temper with Mr
Carter the other evening.  I am sorry I spoke as I did, but I felt it
deeply--indeed I did."

"I can well understand it," I answered.  "How do you like her?" she
asked abruptly.  "What! after on interview of two minutes--and such an
interview?"

Mrs Chauncey smiled, and said: "Well, I only wanted to know your
impression.  And, after all, you have had time to form one, for you have
been thinking of her all the time since we left the house!"

"Perfectly true--I have.  And to speak candidly, I think I have seldom--
indeed, I think, never--seen a face that interested me more; partly, I
suppose, because of what you told us.  And I don't think I have ever
seen anyone look so infinitely sad.  It is a pitiful, haunting face."

"I feel that also.  I have never been able to forget her look since she
came to me a month ago for work--needlework or any work.  I will never
believe that she could be an impostor.  No, no!  Truth is stamped in her
face--truth and sorrow."

I had always liked Mrs Chauncey.  Just at that moment I was mentally
patting her on the back and calling her "a little brick," for it was
clear that she too had heard something--heard it and passed it by.  Good
woman!

I was a bachelor, and not too old to feel; and, over and above my
interest in Cassidy, this whole affair fascinated me considerably.  From
this time forward I never passed the house without greeting mother or
child with sincere warmth, or missing them with an equally genuine sense
of disappointment.  I never met Mrs Chauncey without inquiring with
interest the latest news of her friend and all details of her affairs.

There was never much to tell.  Now it was some commission for a dress,
now the mending of children's clothes--another time the trimming of hats
or working a tennis-net, that helped to make ends meet without hurt to
her pride.  These were petty details which might pass in woman's chat,
but should fail to interest a man, you would think.  Nevertheless, they
interested me.  They did more.  In the evenings, as I sat alone and
smoked out in the starlight they helped me to conjure up pictures and to
see her as she would at those very moments, perhaps, be employed.

I would have done anything to help her had I been able, but there was
nothing I could do.  I had even learned that I might not as much as
evince sympathy or interest, except at the cost of insult to her.  On
one occasion when I happened to meet and walk with her in one of the
main streets of the camp, I was frigidly cut by two ladies with whom I
thought I was on quite friendly terms.  This disturbed me considerably,
not on my own account, but because of the insult and injustice to one
who was powerless to resent it.  It hurt me even more to realise that it
would be wise to bow before this and prove greater friendship by showing
less.

I was still smarting under this next morning when I was accosted by one
of those puddle-headed, blundering idiots of whom there seem to be one
or more in any community, no matter how small.

"I say, old chap," he began, "look here, ye know!  You're not playin'
the game, ye know, old chap!  The missis has been complainin' to me
about you.  You know what I mean."

I detest this "dontcherknow," "g"-dropping kind of animal at any time--
the thing that fondles you with "old chap" and "dear boy" and refers to
its wife as "the missis."  But apart from this, I was to-day especially
unprepared to submit to further outrage.  I was still smarting, as I
said before.

"My good man," I said, "may I ask you to be more explicit?"

"Why, dash it all, old chap! you know what I mean--er.  It's no affair
of mine, of course, if you only keep it quiet, don't you know.  But you
don't give one a chance, don't you know; and, after all, you can't run
with the hare and hunt with the hounds, and all that sort of thing,
don't you know!"

I was trying to keep my temper, but with no very marked success, I fear;
but I said as calmly as I could:

"That's a very original remark, my friend, and no doubt equally
intelligent, but I shall be pleased if you will be good enough to apply
it so that _I_ can understand it."

"Look here, old chap.  If you will go and walk in broad daylight with a
woman like that, you know--well, you can't expect--"

"Stop now!"  I said.  I had hardly breath enough to speak, and there
must have been something unpleasant in my face, for he stepped back a
pace or two.  "So far you are only a babbling fool.  If you go on now
you will be an infernal cad and must take the consequences.  You
understand what I mean.  And further, as you have been good enough to
hint that I should choose my line, I may tell you--to adopt your happy
illustration--that I elect to `run with the hare.'  You see!  Perhaps
_you_ understand what I mean!"

Now, before two minutes had passed, I did not need anyone to tell me
that I had done the worst and most unwise thing possible under the
circumstances.  Of course I knew well enough that when a woman is
concerned two things are very essential--that the man shall keep his
temper, and that he shall be judicious, even circumspect, in defending.
Having failed in the former, I necessarily failed in the latter, and I
felt sick with impotent rage when I realised it.

I knew how the story would circulate, and I knew exactly how it would be
touched up, amplified, and illustrated with graphic gesticulations when
it reached the club and Exchange and passed through the hands of certain
expert _raconteurs_; and to avoid the lamentable result of chaff and
further provocation I got away for a couple of days to give myself--and
the story--a chance.

Several weeks passed after this incident, during which I saw but little
of Mrs Mallandane, and heard not much more.  Occasionally I heard of
Cassidy from men coming up the line.  In spite of his grumbling and
seeming discontent with the nature of the country in his section nobody
believed that Cassidy's Cutting was such a very unprofitable job as he
gave out.  Cassidy was too old a hand to be drawn into any admission
which could be used against him for the purpose of cutting down prices
in future contracts.  Those best able to judge put him down to make
close on 10,000 pounds out of that job.  His section lay some sixty
miles from Barberton, and, as far as I knew, he had been into camp only
twice during the five months that had passed since I had first met him.
One occasion was the night on which I had seen him; the other when he
called at the office to see me.  I was out of camp that day and missed
him.  I do not know how often he may have been in besides those two
occasions.

Mrs Chauncey and I were real friends.  Jack was one of my oldest chums,
and when he married I found--what does not necessarily follow--that his
wife was just one to strengthen the friendship and not weaken it.  With
regard to her, I felt that if an occasion should arise requiring that I
should make a confidante of any woman Mrs Chauncey would be the one.  I
don't know that I ever realised this sufficiently forcibly to express it
even to myself until after a remark which she made to me about this
time.

She had been telling me some little thing about Mrs Mallandane, and I
may have shown by my attention--perhaps even by questions--more interest
than she expected or thought called for.  There was quite a long
silence, during which I felt that she was thinking of something
concerning me.  When she turned towards me her expression was one of
almost tender consideration, and in the gentlest possible voice she
said:

"It is good to be kind and generous, and to help those who need it; but
when a man means to help a woman it should be clear to him from day to
day, from hour to hour, not only how far _he_ means to go, but also what
she will understand."

The words went home to me, and I suppose I showed it, for she added a
little nervously:

"You must not mind that from me.  `Faithful are the wounds of a
friend.'"

"Taken as meant, Mrs Chauncey; and--thank you!"  I meant it.

I made a careful and impartial examination of conscience that night when
I had the silence and darkness to favour me; and although I honestly
acquitted myself, there was just the faintest suggestion of the finding
of the Irish jury: "We find the prisoner not guilty; but he's not to do
it again."  I told myself again that Mrs Chauncey was a "little brick"
for her timely and well-judged warning; for I thought it was quite
possible that I might have drifted on and "gone soft" before knowing it.
I am satisfied that there was no cause for alarm, as the resolution to
"ease up" cost me neither effort nor pang.

I abided fairly by the spirit of my unspoken pact.  I changed my daily
route to one that did not lead past Mrs Mallandane's house.  I ceased
to talk of her; I even tried not to think of her.  But just there I
failed--for the effort to forget makes occasion to remember.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was the tail end of summer.  The heat was terrible, and in all the
outlying parts--even in the lower portions of the camp--malarial fever
was prevalent.  The accounts from the line were particularly bad, nearly
all the engineers, contractors, and sub-contractors being more or less
laid up by attacks of the summer fiend.  One of the engineers suffering
from a mild attack was brought in, and, being at the hotel when he
arrived, I heard accounts of what was going on.  He told me that Cassidy
had had attack after attack, but that he would neither lie up there nor
come into hospital.  It was work, work, work, with him, all day and
night, except when he was looking after others--and, in truth, his camp
was a kind of improvised hospital Cassidy, he said, with his superb
strength and physique would not give in.  He would not believe that
fever could beat a man who was game, and he fought it.

There was no suitable conveyance to be got before night, so I arranged
to start after dark, for I was determined to do something to repay the
kindness I had had at Cassidy's hands.  I took a serious view of his
case, for I knew how these things usually ended, and he was not going to
die without an effort on my part to save him.

I walked home that night worrying considerably about poor Cassidy and
wishing to Heaven that the trap was ready to start at once.  I had
reached the crossing-stones in the little stream, where my old and new
paths forked out.  It was dusk, and I was not thinking of whom I might
meet, so I started at the sight of Mrs Mallandane a few paces off
coming towards me, evidently to meet me.

"Oh, I have waited for hours to meet you!" she began without any
ceremony, and talking nervously and fast.  "I thought you had gone
already, and yet I feared to annoy you by going to your office.  Look
here--look!  Tell me, is this true?  Oh, you can't see--I forgot; it's
too dark.  Here in the paper they say you are going down the line
to-night to bring in someone who is ill, very ill with fever.  Tell me,
is it true?"

"It is quite true.  I leave to-night after nine," I answered--I hope
without betraying surprise; but I could not help noticing that she did
not mention Cassidy's name, and that she was painfully excited.  I drew
no conclusions--I had no time for thought; but these things left a
weight on my heart for all that, and it was not lightened as she went
on.

"I have come to ask you something.  You will please bring him to my
house.  I must nurse him!  He must come to me!"  This was not a favour
sought, it was rather a direction given, and there was only the
slightest note of interrogation in her voice.  I could only repeat in
surprise: "To your house, Mrs Mallandane?"

"Yes--yes!  You will do that for me, please?"

"I am sorry, but I do not think that would be right.  His place is
clearly in the hospital, and I have no right to take him elsewhere."

"You refuse?  Oh, you cannot refuse me!"

"Mrs Mallandane, you put it very harshly.  You must see that I cannot
do otherwise.  I know of nothing to justify me in not sending him to
hospital.  It will be better for him, and far better for you."

She drew a sharp breath and faced me drawn up to her full height,
looking me straight in the eyes.

"I half expected this," she said.  "I only asked you because I feared to
worry him.  Your refusal is nothing.  He will come to me all the same.
You will not refuse to take a letter to him, will you, if I detain you a
few minutes longer?"

We were quite close to her little cottage, and as we walked towards it I
tried to soften my refusal as best I could.  She, however, did not seem
to hear me.

She left me seated in the little parlour.  There was no light in the
room, but she carried in a lamp from an adjoining one; and I have never
been so struck by a face as I was by hers when the glow of the lamp
lighted it up.  The charm of her beauty was not one whit abated--for
beautiful she was; and yet there was only one thing to be read in her
face, and that was resolution.  It lay in her lips, the curve of the
nostrils, a peculiar look in the eye, and a certain poise of the head.
In very truth, she looked superb.

I sat waiting while the minutes passed, and not a sound broke the
perfect silence in the house.  Everything was so still that it seemed as
if there could be no one within miles of me.

There was a book on the table before me, and I took it up unthinkingly.
It opened where a cabinet-sized photograph had been left in it--as a
marker I suppose.  The photograph showed the head and shoulders of a
man, and the face shown in full was one of the gayest and most resolute
that I ever remember to have seen.  There was something very attractive
about it, and there was, as I thought, a faint suggestion of somebody I
had known or seen.  It was a _good_ face, splendidly strong and honest,
and, from a man's point of view, a right handsome face too.

To look at a photograph uninvited may be an impertinence; to read the
inscription on the back certainly is.  And yet these are things which
one is apt to do unthinkingly and even instinctively.  I turned the
photograph round and read:

"O death, where is thy sting?  O grave, where is thy victory?" and under
that a date.  I put it back in the book, feeling that I had been prying
into the secrets of a woman's grief.

Presently I heard a chair pushed back in the next room and Mrs
Mallandane's step approaching.  She handed me a closed note.

"You will give that to him, please," she said politely, but very firmly.
"He will come here if he receives it; but it is possible that he may
still be delirious, and if so, I only ask you again if you will be good
enough to bring him to me."

With the knowledge which after-events have given me it is difficult to
say whether I was concerned only for Cassidy's health and Mrs
Mallandane's good name, or whether I was not pricked to anxiety by some
other feeling.  My heart did sink at her suggestion, I don't know
whether through selfishness or something better.  I felt that I was
beginning to yield before her evident purpose, but my answer was
evasive.  I said I did not see how I could promise anything.

She waved that impatiently aside.  I recall the motion of her hand, as
though she could literally brush such things away.  She came a step
nearer to me, the light shone full in her face, on the waves of her
hair, on her slightly-parted lips, and glinted and flashed back from her
eyes.  For half a minute she stood so looking at me, and I was conscious
of the grip of her hand on the back of a chair, and of the rise and fall
of her breast as she breathed.

"You know him!  You have seen him?" she queried in a low, deliberate
voice.

"Yes," I answered.

"You know he is disfigured?"

I could barely answer again, "Yes."

"When I tell you, then, that _I am the cause of that_, will you deny me
the privilege of any reparation I can make?"

The words met me like a blow in the face.  I was crushed!  God knows
what I would have done but that I saw the flame of colour that leapt
into her face, and the trembling and quivering of her lips.  I gasped
out:

"No, no!  I will do it."

She seemed so upset, so unsteady, that I made a half-step towards her,
but she motioned me back, saying:

"Go now--go!  Please go, and leave me."  A hundred thoughts were surging
and churning in my head as I drove down the long, long valley of the
Lampogwana River that night.  I felt as miserable as man need feel.
Everything seemed wrong--most of it horribly so--but turn as I might
from one phase to another, the one thing always recurred, pervading,
dominating everything: "I am the cause of that."  The words rang in my
ears again and again, and the horrible significance shamed me afresh
each time, always to be answered by something which said, "No, I will
believe!  I will trust!"

Poor Cassidy was very, very bad when I reached him, and his lucid
intervals were far between.  His appearance was terrible, the ghastly
pallor adding, as I had thought nothing could add, to the face from
which one eye, the nose, half the upper lip, and portion of one cheek,
were gone.  It was terrible--truly terrible!

There is no need to dwell on it all.  I got him in and he lived for five
days.  Fever didn't kill him; it couldn't have; he was too strong and
too stout-hearted.  It was haemorrhage resulting from some old injury
received in an accident years before.  The doctor told me that when the
artery had gone Cassidy knew he would be dead in a few minutes.  He
begged the doctor to leave him, and turning to Mrs Mallandane, asked
her to cover his face with a handkerchief, and to hold his hand.  He
said to her, "God bless you, Molly!  Good-bye!" and died like the man he
was.

Mrs Chauncey was the real friend in that time of need.  It was she who
had supplied everything that an invalid could want; it was she who
stayed all that long night through with Mrs Mallandane, who went with
her to the funeral and stood by her, and stayed with her when all was
over.

The day after the funeral I sat in my office dazed and stupefied with
worrying and puzzling over many things in connection with these people
whose affairs and whose lives seemed to have become suddenly entangled
with mine.  Not the least of my worries was the document before me,
which was Cassidy's will: "I give everything absolutely to Mary
Mallandane," and nominating me as his executor.

I dreaded the first interview--so much so, in fact, that I got Mrs
Chauncey to go with me.  The tall black figure and the excessive pallor
of her face smote very hard on my heart, but I was relieved by the
presence of little Molly, who stuck to me from the time I entered the
room until Mrs Mallandane sent her away.  I had already stated my
object in calling when she sent Molly out, and I was about to resume,
when she asked me abruptly:

"Do you know anything of his past life?"

"Nothing whatever," I said.  "Nor of mine?"

"No, Mrs Mallandane."

She laid a hand on one of Mrs Chauncey's, who was sitting near, and
said gravely:

"You, who have been my friend, know nothing either.  It is right that
you should--that you both should."

We were sitting at a table in the parlour; the writing materials were
lying on it ready for my use.  The two ladies sat close together
opposite me.

I cannot give Mrs Mallandane's own words, nor can I convey her manner
when telling us the story of her life.  Sometimes she would talk in a
subdued monotone, telling, with an absence of feeling that was
infinitely pathetic, of their troubles.  Sometimes she would be roused
to a pitch of feeling that left her voice but a husky whisper.  Once--
just once--I fancied there was the faintest trace of contempt in her
tone when referring to--well, not to Cassidy.  If it was so, it was at
any rate instantly lost in a flow of pity.

This is substantially what she told us.  Mallandane and Cassidy had
owned claims in the Kimberley or one of the neighbouring mines, and were
in fact partners doing business together.  They were both young
Irishmen, and had come out on the same boat some years before--which
were considered sufficient reasons for their entering into partnership.
Cassidy was the one with the brains, money, and work; and, from what I
gathered, there seems to have been no reason, except Cassidy's
good-nature, for the alliance with Mallandane at all.  However, they
prospered, and Mallandane went home for a trip, and married and brought
his wife back to Kimberley.

For a couple of years all went well--in fact, until the firm began to
lose money.  Reverses only stimulated Cassidy to harder work and more
cheery, indomitable effort.  You couldn't beat him.  But it was
different with Mallandane.  All his wife said was that he lost heart;
used to go away day after day and night after night to where he could
forget his worries--drinking and gambling.  When Cassidy first
recognised that his partner was falling, he gave up his own house,
suggesting that it would be doing him (Cassidy) a good turn if they
would let him board with them.  He gave himself up to a splendid effort
to save his partner from ruin.

For a time it answered, but Mallandane, besides being naturally
unstable, must have been bitten by drink, for he broke out again, and
nothing either wife or friend could do could save him.  There came
scenes--brutality and insult to the wife, ingratitude and insult to the
friend.  She told us nothing except in pity and forgiveness of her dead
husband--nothing, that is, that justice to Cassidy did not require; but
it is not difficult to imagine what happened, and, indeed, I know now
that it was only the pitiful helplessness of the wife and child, and the
knowledge that his presence was food, and even life, to them, that held
Cassidy to his partner; for in his fits of drunkenness Mallandane would
have murdered both wife and child.

Cassidy worked from four in the morning until eight at night, and at
times through the day he would run up from the claims to the house, to
see that all was well.  All he made went to keep the house going, and it
was given as a matter of course.  No complaint was made, although
Mallandane now ceased even the pretence of work and spent the whole day
in the canteens.

But the end came when least expected.  Mallandane, when he did come home
at all, did not get up until hours after Cassidy was at work.  He used
to awake drunk and dazed, and wander off at once, unshaven, dirty and
half dressed, to the nearest canteen.

One morning, however, there was a change.  He was grey-faced, puffy and
sodden, it is true, but he fussed about the house briskly, talking to
himself.  He got out a clean moleskin suit, and told the servant that he
could not wait for breakfast, as he had to fire the eight o'clock shots,
and the holes were all charged and waiting for him.

Within a quarter of an hour Cassidy had come up for breakfast.  Mrs
Mallandane met him on the way and told him what the servant had in the
meantime told her; and Cassidy raced back to stop his delirious partner.
With a madman's cunning and instinct he had slipped down the mine from
ledge to ledge and along dangerous slopes until he reached the lowest
workings, and when Cassidy, after some delay in getting a bucket on the
hauling-gear to go down in, reached the spot, the boys told him that
Mallandane "umtagati" (bewitched) had gone into the drive to fire the
charges, and would let no one go near him.

Cassidy looked at the black mouth of the drive.  He did not think of the
worthless sodden wretch who had gone in there.  He recalled the partner
of years, the mate of good times and bad, and he recalled, too, the
horror-stricken look on the face of the woman he had just left.  He
dashed in to the sound of a warning yell from every man in the mine.

When occasion calls there is still no lack of brave men.  Heroes spring
into recognition from every grade of life, from every class of material;
and while the half-dozen explosions still echoed and reverberated in the
circle of the mine, there were men dashing in to the rescue at the
imminent risk of their lives, heedless of the deadly fumes and of
possible unexploded charges.

"The firm" lay in one heap--Cassidy on his back, Mallandane athwart him.
To the only person to whom he ever spoke of the affair, Cassidy said:
"He was stooping to light another fuse when I reached him.  I gripped
both arms round him as he turned on me and tried to carry him out.  It
was a wrestling match, for he showed fight.  My face was over his one
shoulder, as his was over mine; but mine was turned towards the shots."

A piece of the rock that shattered poor Cassidy's face entered the back
of his partner's head, and _he_ never stirred again.

Cassidy lay for months in hospital, bandaged, blindfolded, barely alive;
and the woman he had stood by, stood by him.  When he was able to walk
about, it was on her arm he leaned.  When he was fit to leave, it was to
her house he went to be tended for months longer.  He never complained
nor lost heart, although he knew that one eye was gone and thought he
would lose the other.

Some seven or eight months had passed, and he was getting well and
strong--he was healing.  She had always dreaded the effect of the first
sight of himself, and for this reason had removed the mirrors from the
rooms he frequented; but one day, when she had been out for a while, she
found him lying on the sofa, the bandage off his eyes, and a hand-glass
dropped on the carpet close by.  It was the only time he had fainted or
in any way given in.

Later in the evening he said:

"I don't really mind so much now that I know.  It was the suspense that
worried me."  And, after a pause, he added in a voice that seemed to let
you _hear_ his heart lifting: "I'll be able to tackle work again soon,
and will be all right again."

"That was the only allusion," Mrs Mallandane said, "that he ever made
to his disfigurement.  I believe it was out of delicacy and
consideration for my feelings that he never spoke about it.  You could
not even see that he ever thought of it, for he had that splendid
manliness that doesn't know what self-consciousness means.

"Only one thing showed unmistakably that he did feel it, and that he
felt he was dead to all the promise of his past.  You must have remarked
his manner of speech?" she observed, turning to me.  "He spoke like a
working man.  _That_ was his only shield.  He deliberately sank himself
to that level to be spared the prominence and pity that would be given
him as a gentleman.  It was his hope to pass through life unnoticed.
With me, and with me only, he had no disguise, no concealment, no
reserve!"

He used always to talk of their affairs as one and the same, in order to
keep up the illusion he had encouraged in her from the beginning when he
had told her very seriously that "it would never do to liquidate the
firm's business now.  It would mean sacrificing _everything_."  She
agreed to do whatever he thought right; and at the end of every month he
used to hand to her, scrupulously accounted for, a sum greater or less,
according to "the firm's profits for the month."

From his own "profits" he always managed to have something--no matter
how little--to spend on Molly, who was his pet and companion always.
The proceeds of the sale of house and furniture--when they had to be
given up--were handed over to Mrs Mallandane "for a stand-by," and she
went into lodgings because she "would feel more comfortable and have
more time to give to Molly there,"--not because he was watchful over her
good name and would not stay in the house once he was well enough to
walk alone.

When Cassidy extended the firm's "business"--that is to say, went to the
Cape Colony, Natal, and Transvaal, in search of contracts on the various
railway lines--he continued to remit the "profits" with the most
elaborate statements, which Mrs Mallandane, as a partner, felt bound to
study, and, as a woman, often wept over in despair.

This had gone on for several years, and it was not until after she had
gone to Barberton, "to be near the business," that something had made
her suspicious that the joint capital locked up in the business was all
a generous imposition.

"It only needed the suggestion," said Mrs Mallandane, "to show me an
appalling chain of evidence--evidence of his generosity and patient
tactful help--evidence of my blind content and foolishness.  I spoke to
him when next he came in.  He could see that I knew, and he simply said
that `Ralph would have done the same for him.'  God forgive me!  He gave
up his life to me!  He suffered living death for me!  He lived when it
would have been a million mercies to have died.  He bore all that man
could bear and never grudged it.  And I--I cut his heart in two when I
refused his help!  I know it!  I wished I had died before I got the look
he gave me when I told him that I could not take his help.  Month after
month went by and he did not come to me--he, who used to be here on the
first day of every month.  But I knew he was near.  Twice I saw him
passing slowly by at night when he had come to watch over us.  The first
time I was too surprised to call.  The second time I called him and he
came to me.  He stayed until late that evening; and he went away happy
again because we registered our second compact: that if we (Molly and I)
were ever in real need I would send for him; that if he were sick or in
need of friends the privilege of friends should be ours."

She stopped for quite a while, and when she spoke again her voice
trembled and it was all she could do to control it so that she could
speak at all.  I could not bear to look in her face.

"You two have seen him," she said, and, turning to me, added, "You have
known him.  I have liked to tell you all about him; and I like to tell
you now that I know he loved me--that I think it is the greatest honour
a woman can have to be loved by such a man: for not any woman that I
have ever known, or heard of, or read of, was good enough for him!"

She left the room for a moment, and returning laid something on the
table before us, saying:

"You remember him as you saw him.  Try--try to think of him as I do--
like _this_!  It is all you can do for the memory of a good and
honourable man."

It was the photograph I had seen in her book the day I left to bring him
in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All those things happened some years ago.

Out on the grass there, in front of my window, there is a little girl
trying to dissuade a very small boy from pulling the black ear off an
old white bulldog; but the fat little fists keep their grip, and as he
staggers under the effort the little chap says:

"Molly mus' pull Danl Conn! olla ear!  _Make_ him det up!"

Watching them with the brightest, merriest smile in the world, and
looking years younger than when I first saw her, Mrs--

But if I mentioned her name this would not be an anonymous story.

CHAPTER FIVE.

THE POOL.

Everyone remembers the rush to De Kaap some years ago.  How everyone
said that everyone else would make fortunes in half no time, and the
country would be saved!  Well, my brother Jim and I thought we would
like to make fortunes too; so we packed our boxes, donned flannel
shirts, felt hats and moleskin trousers, with a revolver each carelessly
slung at our sides, and started.  We intended to dig for about a year or
so, and then sell out and live on the interest of our money--30,000
pounds each would do.  It was all cut and dried.  I often almost wished
it wasn't so certain, as now one hadn't a chance of coming back suddenly
and _surprising_ the loved ones at home with the news of a grand
fortune.

Full of excitement (certainties notwithstanding) we went down to Kent's
Forwarding Store, and there met Mr Harding, whose waggons were loaded
for the gold-fields.  This was our chance, and we took it.

On November 10, 1883, we crossed Little Sunday's River and outspanned at
the foot of Knight's Cutting.  The day was close and sultry, and Harding
thought it best to lie by until the cool of the evening before
attempting the hill.  It wasn't much of a cool evening we got after all;
except that we had not the scorching rays of the sun beating down upon
us, it was no cooler at 10 p.m. than at mid-day.  We were outspanned
above the cutting, and the oppressive heat of the day and the sultriness
of the evening seemed to have told on our party, and we were all
squatted about on the long soft grass, smoking or thinking.  Besides my
brother and myself there were two young Scotchmen (just out from home)
and a little Frenchman.  He was a general favourite on account of his
inexhaustible good-nature and unflagging high spirits.

We were, as I have said, stretched out on the grass smoking in silence,
watching the puffs and rings of smoke melt quietly away, so still was
the air.  How long we had lain thus I don't know, but I was the first to
break the silence by exclaiming:

"What a grand night for a bathe!"

There was no reply to this for some seconds, and then Jim gave an
apathetic grunt in courteous recognition of the fact that I had spoken.
I subsided again, and there was another long silence--evidently no one
wanted to talk; but I had become restless and fidgety under the heat and
stillness, and presently I returned to the charge.

"Who's for a bathe?"  I asked.

Someone grunted out something about "no place."

"Oh yes, there is," said I, glad of even so much encouragement; and
then, turning to Harding, I said:

"I hear the water in the kloof.  There is a place, isn't there?"

"Yes," he answered slowly, "there is _one_ place, but you wouldn't care
to dip there...  It's the Murderer's Pool."

"The what?" we asked in a breath.

"The Murderer's Pool," he repeated with such slow seriousness that we at
once became interested--the name sent an odd tingle through one.  I was
already all attention, and during the pause that followed the others
closed around and settled themselves to hear the yarn.  When he had
tantalised us enough with his provoking slowness, Harding began:

"About this time last year--By-the-by, what is the date?" he asked,
breaking off.

"The tenth!" exclaimed two or three together.

"By Jove! it's the very day.  Yes, that's queer.  This very day last
year I was outspanned on this spot, as we are now.  I had a lady and
gentleman with me as passengers that trip.  They were pleasant,
accommodating people, and gave us no trouble at all; they used to spend
all their time botanising and sketching.  On this afternoon Mrs Allan
went down to the ravine below to sketch some peculiar bit of rock
scenery.  I think all ladies sketch when they travel, some more and some
less.  But Mrs Allan could sketch and paint really well, and often went
off alone short distances while her husband stayed to chat with me.  She
had been gone about twenty minutes when we were startled by a most awful
piercing shriek--another, another, and another--and then all was still
again.  Before the first had died away Allan and I were running at full
speed towards where we judged the shrieks to have come from.
Fortunately we were right.  Down there, a bit to the right, we came upon
a fair-sized pool, on the surface of which Mrs Allan was still
floating.  In a few seconds we had her out and were trying restoratives;
and on detecting signs of returning life we carried her up to the
waggons.  When she became conscious she started up with oh! such a look
of horror and fright.  I'll never forget it!  Seeing her husband,
however, and holding his hand, she became calm again, and told us all
about it.

"It seems she had been sitting by the side of the stream sketching the
pool and the great perpendicular cliff rising out of it.  The sunlight
was playing on the water, silvering every ripple, and bringing out every
detail of the rocks and foliage above.  Feathery mosses festooned from
cliff to cliff; maidenhair ferns clustered in every nook and crevice;
the drops on every leaf and tendril glistened in the setting sun like a
thousand diamonds.  That's what she told us.

"She sat a few minutes before beginning, watching the varying shades and
hues, when, glancing idly into the water, she saw deep, deep down, a
sight that horrified her.

"On the rocks at the bottom of the pool lay the body of a gigantic
Kaffir, his throat cut from ear to ear, and the white teeth gleaming and
grinning at her.

"Instinctively she screamed and ran, and in trying to pass along the
narrow ledge she slipped and fell into the water.  Had her clothes not
buoyed her up she would have been drowned, as when the cold water closed
round her it seemed like the clasp of death, and she lost
consciousness."

"Well, what about the nigger?"  I asked, for Harding had stopped with
the air of one whose tale was told.

"Oh, he was dead right enough--throat cut and assegai through the heart.
A fight, I expect."

"What did you do?"  I asked.

"Raked him out and planted him up here somewhere.  Let's see--yes,
that's the place,"--indicating the pile of stones my brother was sitting
on.

Jim got up hurriedly; perhaps, as he said, he wanted to look at the
place.  Yet there was a general laugh at him.

"Did you think he had you, Jim?"  I asked innocently.

"Don't you gas, old chap!  How about that bathe you were so bent on?"

Merciful heavens!  The words fell like a bucket of ice-water on me.  I
made a ghastly attempt at a laugh, but it was a failure--an utter
failure--and of course brought all the others down on me at once.

"The nigger seems to have taken all the bathe out of you, old man," said
one.

"Not at all!"  I answered loftily.  "It would take more than that to
frighten me."

Now, why on earth didn't I hold my tongue and let the remark pass?  I
must needs make an ass of myself by bravado, and now I was in for it.
There was a perfect chorus of, "Go it, old man!"  "Now, isn't that
_real_ pluck?"  "Six to four on the nigger!"

"I pet fife pound you not swim agross and dife two times."  This last
came from the little French demon, and, being applauded by the company,
I took up the bet.  The fact is I was nettled by the chaff, and in the
heat of the moment did what I regretted a minute later.

As I rose to get my towel I said with cutting sarcasm:

"I don't care about the bet, but I'll just show you that _everyone_
isn't afraid of his own shadow; though," I added forgetfully, "it's
rather an unreasonable time to bathe."

Here Frenchy struck a stage attitude, and said innocently:

"Ah! vat a night foor ze bade!"

The shout of laughter that greeted this sally was more than enough to
decide me, and I went off in search of a towel.

Harding, I could see, did not like the idea, and tried to persuade me to
give it up; but that was out of the question.

"Mind," said he, "I'm no believer in ghosts; yet," he added, with rather
a forced laugh, "this is the anniversary, and you know it's uncanny."

I quite agreed with him, but dared not say so, and I pretended to laugh
it off.  I was ready in a few moments, and then a rather happy idea, as
I thought, struck me, and I called out:

"Who's coming to see that I win my bet?"

"Oh, we know we can trust you, old chap!" said Jim with exaggerated
politeness.  "It'd be a pity, you know, to outnumber the ghost."

"Very well; it's all the same to me.  Good-bye!  Two dives and a swim
across--is that it?"

"Yes, and look out for the nigger!"

"Mind you fish him up!"

"Watch his teeth, Jack!"

"Feel for his throat, you know!"  This latter exclamation came from Jim;
it was yelled out as I disappeared down the slope.  Jim had not
forgotten the incident of the grave, evidently.

I had a half-moon to go by, and a ghostly sort of light it shed.
Everything seemed more shadowy and fantastic than usual.  Besides this,
I had not gone a hundred yards from the waggons before every sound was
stilled; not the faintest whisper stirred the air.  The crunching of my
heavy boots on the gravel was echoed across the creek, and every step
grated on my nerves and went like a sword-stab through me.

However, I walked along briskly until the descent became more steep and
I was obliged to go more carefully.  Down I went, step by step, lower
and lower, till I felt the light grow dimmer and dimmer, and then quite
suddenly I stepped into gloom and darkness.

This startled me.  The suddenness of the change made me shiver a bit and
fancy it was cold; but it couldn't have been that, for a moment later
the chill had gone and the air was close and sultry.  It must have been
something else.  Still I went down, down, down, along the winding path,
and the further I went the more intense seemed the stillness and the
deeper the gloom.

Once I stood still to listen; there was not a stir or sound save the
trickling of the water below.  My heart began to beat rather fast, and
my breath seemed heavy.  What was it?  Surely, I thought, it is not
fright?  I tried to whistle now as I strode along, but the death-like
silence mocked me and choked the breath in my throat.

At last I reached the stream.  The path ran along the side of the water
among the rocks and ferns.  I looked for the pool, but could not see a
sign of it.  Still I followed the path until it wound along a very
narrow ledge of rock.

I was so engrossed picking my steps along there that, when I had got
round and saw the pool lying black and silent at my feet, I fairly
staggered back with the shock.  There was no mistaking the place.  The
pool was surrounded by high rocks; on the opposite side they ran up
quite perpendicularly to a good height.  Nowhere, except the ledge at my
feet, would a man have been able to get out of the water alone.  The
black surface of the water was as smooth as glass; not a ripple or
bubble or straw broke its awful monotony.

It fascinated me; but it was a ghostly spot.  I don't know how long I
stood there watching it.  It seemed hours.  A sickening feeling had
crept over me, and I _knew I was afraid_.

I looked all round, but there was nothing to break the horrid spell.
Behind me there was a face of rock twenty feet high with ferns and
creepers falling from every crevice.  But it looked black, too.  I
turned silently again towards the water, almost hoping to see something
there; but there was still the same unbroken surface, the same
oppressive deadly silence as before.  What was the use of delaying?  It
had to be done; so I might as well face it at once.  I own I was
frightened.  I would have lost the bet with pleasure, but to stand the
laughter, chaff, and jeers of the others!  No! that I could never do.
My mind was made up to it, so I threw off my clothes quickly and came up
to the water's edge.  I walked out on the one low ledge and looked down.
I was trembling then, I know.

I tried to think it was cold, but I _knew_ it was not that I stooped low
down to search the very depths of the pool, but I could see nothing; all
was uniformly dark.  And yet--good God! what was that?  Right down at
the bottom lay a long black object.  With starting eyes I looked again.
It was only a rock.  I drew back a pace and sat down.  The perspiration
was in beads on my forehead.  I shook in every limb; sick and faint, my
breath went and came in the merest whispers.  So I sat for a minute or
two with my head resting on my hands, and then the thought struck me,
"What if the others are watching me above?"

I jumped up to make a running plunge of it, but, somehow, the run
slackened into a walk, and the walk ended in a pause near the ledge, and
there I stood to have another look into the dark, still pool.

Suddenly there was a rustling behind me.  I jumped round, tingling,
quivering all over, and a pebble rolled at my feet from the rocks above.
I called out in a shaky voice, "Now then, you chaps! none of that; I
can see you."  But really I could see nothing, and the echo of my voice
had such a weird, awful sound that I began to lose my head altogether.
There was no use now pretending that I was not frightened, for I was.
My nerves were completely unstrung, my head was splitting, and my legs
could hardly bear me.  I preferred to face any ridicule rather than
endure this for another minute, and I commenced dressing.  Then I
pictured to myself Jim's grinning face, Frenchy's pantomime of the whole
affair, Harding's quiet smile, and the chaff and laughter of them all,
and I paused.  A sudden rush, a plunge and souse, and I was in.
Breathless and gasping I struck out, only twenty yards across; madly I
swam.  The cold water made my flesh creep.  On and on, faster and
faster; would I never reach it?  At last I touched the rocks and turned
to come back.  Then all their chaff recurred to me.  Every stroke seemed
to hiss the words at me, "Feel for his throat!  Feel for his throat!"  I
fancied the dead nigger was on me, and every moment expected to feel his
hand on my shoulder.  On I sped, faster and faster, mad with the dread
of being entangled by the legs and pulled down--I swam for life.  When I
scrambled on the ledge I felt I was _saved_!  Then all at once I began
to feel my body tingling with a most exhilarating sense of relief after
an absurd fright, a sense of power restored, of self-respect and triumph
and an insane desire to laugh.  I did laugh, but the sepulchral echoes
of my hilarious cackle rather chilled me, and I began to dress.

Then for the first time occurred to me the conditions of the bet: "Two
dives and a swim across."  Now, this would have been quite natural in
ordinary pools--a plunge, a scramble on the opposite bank, another
plunge, and back.  But here, with the precipitous face of rock opposite,
it meant _two_ swims across and _two dives_ from the same spot.  But I
did not mind; in fact, I was enjoying it now, and I thought with a glow
of pride how I would rub it into Jim about fishing up his darned old
nigger with the cut throat.

I walked to the edge smiling.

"Yes, my boy," I murmured, "I'll fish you up if you're there, or a
fistful of gravel for Jim and Frenchy--little devil!  It'll be change
for his fiver;" and I chuckled at my joke.

I drew a long breath and dropped quietly into the water, head first;
down, down, down--gently, softly.  A couple of easy strokes and I glided
along the bottom.  Then something touched me.  God in heaven! how it all
burst on me at once!  I felt four rigid fingers laid on my shoulder and
drawn down my chest, the finger-nails scratching me.  Instantly I made a
grasp with both hands; my left fastened on the neck of a human body, and
my right, just above, closed, and the _fingers met_ through the ragged
flesh of a gashed throat.

I tried to scream--the water choked me.  I let go and swam on, and then
up.  I shot out of the water waist high, gasping and glaring wildly, and
then soused under again.  As I again came up I dashed the water from my
eyes.  I saw the surface of the pool break, and a head rose slowly.
Kind Heaven! _there were two_!  Slowly the two bodies rose across the
black margin where the shadow ceased, full in the moonlit portion of the
pool--cold, clear and horrible in their ghastly nakedness.  And as they
rose the murderous wounds appeared.  The dank hair hung over their
foreheads; the glazed and sightless eyeballs were fixed with the vacant
stare of death on _me_.  One bore a terrible gash from temple to eye,
and lower down the bluish red slit of an assegai on the left breast.

On the other was one wound only; but how awful!  The throat was cut from
ear to ear; the bluish lips of the great gash hung wide apart where my
hand had torn them.  I could even see the severed windpipe.  The head
was thrown slightly back, but the eyes glared down at me with an awful
stony glare, while through the parted lips the teeth gleamed and grinned
cold and bright as they caught the light of the moon.  One glance--half
an instant--showed me all this, and then, as the figures rose waist
high, I saw one arm rigid at right angles to the body from the elbow,
and the stiff hand that had clawed me.  For one instant they poised,
balancing; then, bowing slowly over, they came down on the top of me.

Then indeed my brain seemed to go.  I struggled under them.  I fought
and shrieked; but I suppose the bubbles came up in silence.  The dead
stiff hand was laid on my head and pressed me down--down, down!  Then
the hand of death slipped, and I was free.  Once I kicked them as I
struggled to the surface, and gasping, frantic, mad, made for the bank.
On, on, on!  O God! would I never reach it?  One more effort, a wrench,
and I was out.  Never a pause now.  One bound, and I had passed the
ledge; then up and up, past the cliffs, over the rocks, cut and
bleeding, on I dashed as fast as mortal man ever raced.  Up, up the
stony path, till, with torn feet and shaking in every limb, I reached
the waggon.  There was an exclamation, a pause, and then a perfect yell
of laughter.  The laugh saved me; the heartless cruelty of it did what
nothing else could have done--it roused my temper; but for that, I
believe I should have gone mad.

Harding alone came forward anxiously towards me.

"What's the matter?" he asked.  "For God's sake, what is it?"

The laugh had sobered me, and I answered quietly that it was nothing
much--just a thing I would like him to see down at the pool.  There were
a score of questions in anxious and half-apologetic tones, for they soon
realised that some thing was wrong; but I answered nothing, and so they
followed me in silence, and there, on the oily, unbroken surface of the
silent pool, floated in grim relief the two bodies.  We pulled them out
and found the corpses lashed together.  At the end of the rope was an
empty loop, the stone out of which I must in my struggle have dislodged.
Close to the nigger we laid them, with another pile of stones to mark
the spot; but who they were and where they came from none of us ever
knew for certain.

The week before this two lucky diggers had passed through Newcastle from
the fields, going home.  Four years have now passed, letters have come,
friends have inquired, but there is no news of them, and I think, poor
chaps! they must have "gone home" by another route.

CHAPTER SIX.

TWO CHRISTMAS DAYS.

It was Christmas Day at New Rush--the Christmas of '73.  No merry peals
rang out to celebrate the occasion--there were no bells.  The streets
were not decorated with festoons or bunting--there were no streets to
decorate.  The usual lot of church-goers: men in broadcloth, women in
gay colours, children neat and spotless, Prayer-book in hand--these were
not the features of the day.  There was no broadcloth, there were no
women, there was no church--only long straggling rows of white tents,
only a lot of holes of various depths and a lot of heaps of debris, only
a lot of men in flannel shirts and moleskins, broad-brimmed hats and
thick boots, the bronzed, bearded, hardy pioneers of the Diamond Fields.
They had no church, but they could celebrate Christmas as well as those
who had.  There was a function which appealed to their feelings as
Britishers--a popular, time-honoured function, whose necessary
auxiliaries were at hand.  They could not go to church, but they _could_
get drunk; and they did.

All through the day the songs and cries and curses of the celebrants
bore ample testimony to their devotion.  The canvas canteens were
crowded, and the bare spaces around them were strewn with empty bottles
and victims of injudicious zeal.  Within and without the one
never-ending topic was diamonds; diggers backed their finds for weight
or colour, shape, or number.  Fortunes were held in clumsy, grog-shaken
hands, and shown round as "last week's finds;" all was clamour,
festivity, and drink.

And this was Christmas Day!  And the same sun that blazed down so
fiercely on the drinking, and scorched the unconscious upturned faces of
the drunk, shone softly on the dark hedges and snow-clad meadows of old
England.  It saw the fighting and drinking of a turbulent New World and
the peace and quietness of a respectable Old one.  It saw the
adventurers seeking fortune and the homes for which they worked.  And
across six thousand miles of land and ocean it looked down alike on the
men who waste or struggle and the women who wait and pray.

In a fly-tent, away from the noisy portion of the camp, sat John Hardy--
sober.  Out of sorts, out of heart, and dead out of luck, he had neither
the means nor the inclination to get drunk.  Ten months on the fields
had about done for him.  Other men came with nothing; they had made
fortunes and left.  He came with a few hundreds, the proceeds of the
sale of his farm and stock.  He had sacrificed everything to come to
this El Dorado--and now!  Now the farm was gone and the money too.  Bit
by bit it had slipped away.  The last thing to go was the cart and mule;
he had managed to keep those till yesterday, but the grub score had to
be met--one must live, you know--and the old mule and cart went the way
of the rest.  Last night he had changed his last fiver and paid his
boys.  Now all he had in the world was a bit of ground (thirty by
thirty), a few old picks and shovels, two blankets, and a revolver.

All through the day he had heard the noise of shouting and singing, but
it awoke no responsive chord.  Every burst of merriment jarred on him.
The first man he had met had smilingly wished him a merry Christmas.
Great Heaven! was the man a fool, or was it a devil jeering at him?
Merry!  Ay, with black ruin on him, his hopes blasted and his chances
gone.  And this was Christmas, when human beings were gasping and
blistering between the parched plain and the blue sky, where a fierce
relentless sun blazed down upon them.  Everything mocked him.  Truly,
when a man is down, trample on him!  When it comes to this, that his own
feelings are a hell to him, the more material things matter little.
There is a limit to mental as well as physical pain; the mind becomes
numb and the feelings spent.  But Hardy had not yet come to this, and he
felt acutely the sarcasm on his own fete that this Christmas Day
presented.

At sunset he went out to take a last look at the hole that had swallowed
up his all.  Indeed, it was a poor exchange for the grand old farm and
the cattle and sheep and horses, and, above all, the home that his dead
wife had made a heaven of for the five years of their married life.  For
himself he cared little, but his little girl--her child!--whom he had
left behind with friends!  In his mad speculation he had robbed her--his
darling, the one loving memento of his dead wife!  Well, to-morrow at
sunrise he would take the 15 pounds for the claim, and hire himself out
as a miner to the new owner.

The setting sun glinted over the workings and shed its golden light on
the mine, ribbed out by roads and divisions, all in little squares like
the specimen-cases in museums.  There were hundreds of those squares,
and his was _one_, and a worthless one at that.  Yes, he would take the
15 pounds, and lucky to get it, for every man in camp knew he had not
found a stone worth mentioning.

For over two hours he sat in the little low tent; a dusty lantern
dangled from the ridge-pole and shed its weak, uncertain light around.
His supper he had forgotten, and he sat at the rough packing-case table,
his forehead resting on his arms, inwardly and silently cursing his luck
and himself and the place with the bitterest curses his mind could
frame.  A revolver lay on the table before him--a grim sort of companion
for a ruined man.

Presently a step came along the path--the step of one walking cautiously
to avoid the scores of tent-lines and pegs that were stretched and stuck
in every direction.  As the step came closer Hardy looked up, and a head
was thrust through the flap of the tent.

"I was taking Jack Evans home and he asked me to give you this.  It came
yesterday, but he's been spreeing and forgot it."

The man stepped in and tendered a square envelope, and stood silent.

"Won't you sit?" asked Hardy, scarcely glancing at him as he pushed an
empty gin-case forward.

"Well, just a minute, thanks."

The young fellow sat down and watched Hardy in silence.  The latter took
the letter mechanically, but brightened up instantly as he saw the
writing.

Gently and carefully he opened it, and from the envelope came a cheap
Christmas card of flowers done in flaming colours--common and garish.
That was all!  No letter, nothing else.  On the back was written, "For
dear Father, from his little girl, Gracie."

For a moment Hardy looked at it steadily, and then the hard sunburnt
face softened, the mouth twitched once or twice, and two tears trickled
slowly down and dropped on the card.  The man's head was lowered slowly
until it rested on his arms again, and for a couple of minutes there was
silence in the tent.  The bitterness, the loneliness, the desolation
were gone from his heart.  What no reverses could bring about, and what
no philosophy could resist, was done by a cheap, tawdry Christmas card
sent by a child.

Presently he looked up and reached a small framed photograph from above
his bed.

"It is from my little girl," he said, and handed the card and photograph
to the youngster.

The boy looked at them.  The photograph was that of a child of about
eight, with a rather pleasant expression and large, wondering,
honest-looking eyes.  He looked at it closely for a minute or so, and
nodding kindly once or twice, handed it back without a word.  As Hardy
turned to replace the photograph the youngster leant forward quickly,
took up the revolver, and slipped it into his pocket.

He had been gone ten minutes or so, when again a step came along; the
flap was lifted, and without a word the youngster re-entered, drew the
gin-case up opposite Hardy, and took a long steady look at him.  To
Hardy's "Hallo! what's up?" he returned no direct answer, but his eyes,
which before had borne a calm, uninterested look, now shone with an
eager brilliancy that could not fail to attract attention.  His
olive-brown face was pale, almost white now, and when he did speak it
was, though slowly, with evident excitement, and he coughed once or
twice as if feeling a dryness in the throat.

"The chaps say you are broke," he said.

"Dead broke!"  Hardy replied wonderingly.

"Have you anything left?"

"Nothing--absolutely nothing!"

"Where's your claim?"

"Going to-morrow!"

The youngster shook his head and smiled faintly.  He was so evidently in
earnest that Hardy submitted in simple wonder to the cross-examination.

"Have you found any stones?"

"Not five pounds' worth in ten months!"

"Where are your boys?"

"Gone.  I paid them off yesterday."

"No, they're _not_ gone.  Look here," he added more quickly, "when I was
here before I took your revolver.  You see, it looked to me as if you
meant using it.  Here it is.  You can use it now on someone else."  The
youngster leant forward and spoke lower and faster.  "When I left you I
walked along the old path a bit, but my sight was spoilt by the candle
here and I got off the track.  I stood for a minute, and then heard some
Kaffirs talking, and I went towards the sound.  I called to them, but
they didn't hear me; and I was walking up closer when I caught something
that made me listen all I knew.  I heard more and crept closer.  I got
quite close up and looked through the grass.  There were five boys
sitting round a stump of lighted candle; there was a bit of black cloth
before them, and they _were counting diamonds_!  There was a mustard-tin
full.  I crept back about twenty yards and called out.  The light was
blown out at once, and when I called again one boy came out.  I asked
him who was his baas, and he brought me to your hut."

Hardy sat dazed for a moment.  Mechanically his hand closed on the
revolver that was placed in it, and then, rising, he followed the
lantern which the youngster had taken.

They entered the hut and caught the boys in the act of dividing the
spoil.  They found the mustard-tin full, and on each of the Kaffirs a
private supply hidden there from his mates.

John Hardy slept that night as those sleep who have borne their burden
and have reached the place of rest.  And he saw a picture in his dreams.
The canvas tent was a palace of white marble, and as he lay there
things of beauty were strewn around him; but, surpassing all these,
there hung in mid-air before him a wreath of bright and many-coloured
flowers, more lovely than any he had ever seen; and within its circle
was the face of a child, and above it all there was a line of little
crooked writing, and the letters, which stood out in shining gold, were,
"For dear Father, from his loving little girl, Gracie."  That was John
Hardy's Christmas dream.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 1885 New Rush and Colesburg Kopje were names well-nigh forgotten, and
there reigned in their stead Kimberley and its neighbouring camps.  In
proportion as the tented camp had grown into a great city, in proportion
as the puny diggings had become a mighty mine, in like proportion had
men and things altered; and even so had John Hardy thriven and
prospered.  One stroke of luck had placed his foot on the first rung of
Fortune's ladder, and a cool shrewd head had done the rest.  Hardy the
digger, in his little canvas tent, was no more, and in his place stood
John Hardy, Esq, capitalist, speculator, director of companies, etc.
But the change, after all, was no change at all: the man was the same,
and the very traits which, with his fellow-diggers, had stamped him as a
white man, now won him the respect of a different class.  Calm and
self-contained, straightforward and incorruptible, he was as popular as
such men can be.  In one particular especially was he unchanged.  His
"little girl" was still his "little girl," in spite of the fact that she
was now over twenty.  During ten years he had not lost sight of her for
a week, and in all the world he had not one thought, one wish, one
desire, that had not for its aim her happiness and pleasure.  On the
banks of the Vaal River he had made his home.  It was an old farm, with
great, big old trees and shady walks and green hedges, and there was an
orange-grove that ran down to the river-side, and a boat on the water,
where one could glide about breathing the breath of the orange-blossoms.
Here Hardy spent nearly all his time, perfectly happy and contented in
the society of his "little girl."

But even so there were crumpled rose-leaves in John Hardy's bed.  The
first was the thought that some day she, his child, would love someone
else, and he who had idolised her all his life would be superseded by a
stranger of whose existence even she was not yet aware.  The other was a
now half-forgotten ungratified wish--the wish to find the youngster who
had done him such service twelve years before.  Every effort had failed,
every expedient proved fruitless.  Not knowing his name, having hardly
noticed his appearance, what chance was there of finding him?  He had
but one guide.  Leaning across the rough table in the weak uncertain
light of the lantern that night, he had looked full and Mr in the
youngster's eyes, and he thought he would know them.  If ever he got the
chance of looking into them again, he would make no mistake.  He
remembered their colour, he remembered them dark and dormant when he
brought in Grace's letter; he recalled them again, lustrous and
expressive, when he returned to the little hut, and could see them now,
warming, quickening, brightening, till they flashed with excitement as
he said, "They were counting diamonds."  Every little incident of that
night was burned into his memory, but of the general appearance of the
boy he knew nothing.  He had not seen his figure, standing or walking,
except for an instant, and that when he was paying little heed.  He had
not seen his face, except in one position--full--and that so close as to
miss the general impression.  So many years had passed without a sign or
clue that Hardy had long given up all hope of discovering his friend,
and, indeed, he seldom thought about him now.  When the thought did
recur to him it came more as a regret that he had not found him than as
a hope that he would.

It was Christmas Eve, and John Hardy was going into camp to arrange
matters so that he would be free from all business during the holidays
and could spend his Christmas and New Year at home undisturbed.  The
cart and greys had already disappeared over the rise.  Grace had waved
her good-bye and wandered off into the garden.  There were the cheerful
sounds of life about which seem peculiar to a bright summer morning.
The finks on the river, the canaries in the field, the robbers in the
orchard, vied with each other in pouring out volumes of song, lavishly
squandering the wealth of their repertoire, and, as a sort of
accompaniment to them, came the distant and pleasantly monotonous
cackling of hens.  Every variety of time, key, and voice was there, and
all in rivalry, yet forming together a drowsy harmonious symphony of
peace.  Miss Grace wandered on, pruning here, plucking there, now
stooping to see where the violets hid their heads, now running her hand
lightly through the clusters of roses.  She made her way slowly towards
the house, looking fresh and bright in her white dress.  The
brown-holland apron was caught up and filled with bright azalea
blossoms.  The broad-brimmed garden-hat had slipped back, showing waves
of golden hair; her lips and fingers, too, were stained with mulberries;
at her breast was a bunch of violets to match the eyes above them.
Altogether, she was not the least attractive part of the picture that
summer morning, and probably she knew it.  From the broad-flagged stoep
of the house to the gravel sweep in front there were a dozen or so
steps, and on the top step of all Miss Grace turned and stood.  The
gravel walks and big trees, the flower-garden wildly luxuriant, the
orange-grove, and beyond them the reach of river, looking placid and
blue in the morning sunlight, all made up a delightful picture; and she,
with her snow-white dress and bright-coloured flowers, looked and
enjoyed it.  The gentle morning breeze, laden with the scent of flowers,
played on her cheeks and just stirred the feathery golden hair on her
temples as she stood there.

Presently someone, a stranger, rode up and, dismounting, led his horse
to the foot of the steps, and, raising his hat slightly, asked for Mr
Hardy.

"He has just gone into Kimberley.  He is not half an hour gone," Miss
Grace replied.

The man looked disappointed.

"That _is_ unfortunate.  I have come a long way to see him.  I _must_
see him.  When will he be back?"

"This afternoon or this evening, I hope; but possibly not until
to-morrow morning.  But won't you come in and rest a little?"

The man gave his horse to a boy and walked slowly up the steps.  For
some moments he made no reply, and at last, looking at her in an
abstracted kind of way, apparently without really seeing her, muttered:

"Well, that _is_ awkward!"  He paused again, deep in thought, and,
seeming to arrive at some conclusion, he said, "Miss Hardy, I _must_ see
your father; it is a matter almost of life and death, and I am almost
certain to miss him if I follow him now.  Will you allow me to wait
until he returns?"

"I shall see Mr Whitton, my father's agent, at luncheon, and if he can
put you up you are very welcome to stay."

The stranger bowed, inwardly a little amused perhaps at Mr Whitton's
position in the matter.

Miss Hardy suggested that possibly he had not yet breakfasted, and as
the surmise proved entirely correct he was left to entertain himself
while she went off to give the necessary orders.

Breakfast over, the young man returned to the stoep, and in an enclosed
portion of it discovered Miss Grace among the ferns and hot-house
plants.  For some minutes after the first few remarks he watched in
silence, and then, as she paused to study the effect of a rearrangement
in a small basket of ferns he asked quietly:

"Are you Miss Gracie?"

She looked up quickly, flushing a little, and then said coldly:

"Yes, I am Miss Hardy."

"I mean no impertinence, Miss Hardy.  I asked if you are Miss Gracie
because I heard of you by that name twelve years ago."

"Indeed!  Then you are an old friend of my father's?"

"Well, yes, I believe he would consider me so.  But I should have told
you my name before this.  Pardon the omission.  Ansley it is--George
Ansley."

"Ah--Mr Ansley!  Yet I don't remember ever hearing him speak of you.
But be sure of this, if you were his friend then, you will be his friend
now.  He does not forget old friends.  Let me see.  Twelve years ago.
Those were the early days--those were his hard times when you knew him."

"Yes, he was down then--very down; and I am very glad he has prospered.
No man better deserved it."

The girl's eyes grew a little misty--this was her weak point.  She
looked up at him, saying simply: "Thank you."

Ansley smiled slightly, and said: "There was a photograph of you that he
had then.  A little girl in short dresses, a very serious,
earnest-looking little girl--all eyes.  I can remember wishing to see
you then.  I wanted to see if your eyes really looked like that.  They
_do_, you know.  But, still, I can't imagine that you are his `little
girl.'"

Miss Grace laughed and blushed a good deal under the scrutiny and
criticism, and suggested good-humouredly that if he would go with her
she would show him the original photograph, and he could satisfy himself
on that point.

From one of the drawing-room tables she took a folding frame made to
hold two photographs, and pointing to the right-hand one, handed it to
him.  After a full minute's close inspection, Ansley looked up, smiling
gravely at the girl.

"There is no mistaking it," he said; "that is the photograph.  I would
know it anywhere.  It made a great impression on me when I first saw it
on account of a little incident that was in a sort of way connected with
it."

"What was that?"

As she asked the question he glanced from the photograph to the other
side of the frame, where there was a little faded, old-fashioned
Christmas card.  As it caught his eye a half-suppressed exclamation
escaped him, and, oblivious of the girl's presence, he drew the card out
and read the writing on the back; and then, glancing out through the
open window, he thought of how he had first seen it.

As Miss Grace looked at him, she saw that his brown sunburnt face looked
a little lined and careworn.  Under the dark moustache the mouth drooped
rather sadly at the corners, and the eyes were large and sad too just
now.  She watched him for a little while, and then, interrupting his
thought, said gently:

"Well, Mr Ansley, I am waiting to hear the incident of which I was the
unconscious heroine."

"A thousand pardons.  It was thinking of that very incident that made me
forget your question.  It cannot be an accident that those two cards are
in the same frame.  Of course, you must know the history?"

"Of course, _I_ do; but surely you cannot; why, the Christmas card it is
impossible that you could have seen."

"No, not impossible, Miss Hardy.  It was I who brought it to your father
the night he found the diamonds!"

The girl stood before him, hands clasped, and amazed.  Wonderingly she
looked at him, and the more she looked the more she wondered.  How
utterly different from what she had fancied!  In her mind's eye she had
seen a tall, awkward youth, loose-jointed and rough, silent and stupid,
and here was the real Simon Pure, tall and slight, certainly, but supple
and well-knit, quiet and courteous.

"Well, this is wonderful!" she exclaimed at last in helpless amazement;
and then her face flushed with generous enthusiasm.  "Oh, Mr Ansley,
you don't know what pleasure, what happiness this will be to my father!
You don't know how he has longed to find you.  This will be the happiest
Christmas he has ever spent."

"Do you really think he will be glad to see me?"

"Oh, you don't know him if you can ask such a question.  But why did you
never come to us before?"

"Because I never wanted his help before, and I could not have refused
it.  He is the only man in this world from whom I would ask help, and I
have come to ask it now.  It is no trifle.  It will be the hardest task
he has ever had."

"Whatever it is, Mr Ansley, if he can do it he will.  I would pledge my
life on that.  He owes you much, and I owe you what I can perhaps never
in all my life repay.  At least, you will let us be your friends."

She extended both hands to him as she spoke.  The soft firm touch of the
girl's hands sent a pleasant tingle through him.  It was genuine.  It
made him feel that this time he had fallen amongst friends.  A feeling
that he had never known in his life came over him, the feeling that
there was a home where he would be always welcome, and that there were
two people who would always be genuinely glad to see him.

The first surprise over, she made him recount most minutely every detail
of that Christmas night.  He told how the letter had been entrusted to
him for delivery by the tipsy digger, and every little incident up to
the finding of the diamonds.

"When we found the tin full," he said, "we were so excited that we
thought very little of the boys.  We searched them one by one and passed
them behind us.  I had passed the last, when I turned and found your
father standing by me looking helpless and dazed, instead of guarding
the door, as I thought he was doing.  I looked round, and saw that the
boys had bolted, so I took the packets we had found on them and put them
down on the piece of oilskin with the tin.  I thought it best then to
leave him to himself, and as he stooped slowly to pick up the diamonds I
stepped out of the hut and went home.  I should have seen him the next
day, I am certain, but when I got home I found my father and a digging
friend mad with excitement about a new find some thirty miles off.  We
started for the place that night, and did not return for some months."

"But how was it you did not meet him even then?"

Ansley laughed, as he answered hesitatingly:

"Well, Miss Hardy, the fact is, I did often meet him; but I was a
youngster then--very foolish, and sensitive, and proud in my silly
boyish way, and though I knew well and often heard that he wanted to
find me, I could not bring myself to go up to him and say, `I am the man
who saved your fortune for you.'  It seemed to me I might as well have
said, `What do you mean to pay me?'  I could not do it.  And though I
knew, too, that he could not possibly recognise me from the very
imperfect view he had of me in the dark little tent, yet when I met him
in camp I used to turn away from him and feel hurt and sick and sore
that he did not know me.  Then a little later, as you know, he left
Kimberley, and was away for a long, long time, and so it has been during
twelve years.  He has been much away, and so have I, and although I have
often seen him, we have never actually met.  Once in London I would have
spoken to him.  I was then, as I thought, a rich man, and I could afford
to speak without fear of being misunderstood, but I missed him.  I wish
to God I had not, Miss Gracie; I wish I had met you both then.  Nothing
has gone well with me since.  Bad luck has followed me and all connected
with me since then.  It is the last and worst stroke that has brought me
here."  He looked into the lustrous eyes and sympathetic face of the
girl, and added, half playfully, half sadly: "I wish I had met you
before; I believe you would have changed my luck.  Do you know, I think
you are one of those who bring good luck.  You have a good influence--I
can feel it."

"If I have,"--and the girl laughed brightly--"_I_ mean to exert it from
this very moment.  Firstly, then, you must get out of the blues.
Secondly, you must make up your mind to stay till my father returns; and
thirdly, you will have to submit with the best grace possible to the
infliction of my company while I show you the sights and do the honours
of our home."

Whatever sacrifice of personal feelings Ansley may have made in the
cause of gallantry was borne with Spartan fortitude and concealed with
admirable skill; in fact, a casual observer would have been inclined to
think that he rather liked it.

If he was not very talkative and lively, he made up for it by being an
admirable listener--one of those listeners whose very look is full of
quiet and intense appreciation of all that is said.  She was content to
play the cicerone, and it pleased him too, and so the morning passed.

She took him through the grounds, idling along amongst the summerhouses
and trellised rose-walks, telling him of their life there, of their
plans, of her own life during the years that had passed since he first
heard of her--in feet, all the reminiscences which form the heart and
charm of the meeting, whether of old friends, or of the friends of old
friends, or of those who have a common bond of sympathy wrought in a
distant country or in a troublous time.

Luncheon over, Miss Grace may have thought she had answered the calls of
hospitality, or she may have been tired of his company, or she may have
thought that the change could do him good--it is hard to say.  But, any
way, she handed her guest over to the tender mercies of Whitton, and for
the rest of the afternoon, instead of her talk and her company, Ansley
had to put up with the agent and his dissertations on farm prospects for
the coming season.

At about sundown, returning with Whitton from an inspection of the
stables, Ansley saw with no little relief and satisfaction a slim figure
in a grey dress moving about the lawn; and, leaving the estimable but
prosy Whitton with the flimsiest of apologies, he joined his hostess.

"Really, Miss Hardy," he said, coming up to her, "I began to think you
had vanished like the `baseless fabric.'  I was afraid you were going to
leave me with Whitton for the evening as well."

"Did you not enjoy his company, Mr Ansley?  I think him so entertaining
and instructive," she added demurely.

"Oh yes, indeed!" he answered hastily; "but I mean, I think he knows too
much for me.  You see, I don't quite follow his theories--at least, some
of them."

"What a prettily--inferred compliment, Mr Ansley!" and, making him a
mock-curtsey, she added, "Then you think _I_ am sufficiently stupid to
be entertaining?"

"Quite so, Miss Hardy--more of my own calibre, you know," he returned,
laughing.

"Thank you for that, too.  My friend, you have a ready wit, and have got
out of it better than you deserved; and, though you don't merit it, I
mean to show you the river this evening--that is, if you are quite sure
that you wouldn't prefer listening to Mr Whitton."

"Well, Miss Hardy, I could devote a lifetime to agriculture, but the
passion of my life is certainly exploring.  Your descriptions have so
fired my soul with enthusiasm and ambition that I am afraid I shouldn't
die happy if I didn't know the geography of this part of the river.  In
the cause of science, let us go."

The girl answered gravely:

"In the cause of science, we shall go."

The evening was one of those stilly, cool summer evenings so common in
South Africa, when the night seems full of still life; the moonlight,
strong and clear, has nothing sombre in it, and the gentlest of cool
breezes plays through the leaves, bearing along with it the commingled
scents of all the blossoms.

As they walked down the gravelled path through the orange-groves the
crickets sang merrily all around, and from the river came the sound of
the frogs--that most curious of all evening sounds.  From the house it
sounded like one monotonous roar, but as one drew nearer the river the
individual voices could be distinguished, and every note on the gamut
was given by that orchestra.  Now and again, without any apparent
reason, the music would suddenly cease and a dead silence ensue; and
then, doubtless at a signal from the conductor, the whole band would
strike up again.

They strolled on down to the little jetty where the boat was moored, and
helping his companion to the cushioned seat in the stern, Ansley pushed
the little craft out and rowed lazily up in midstream.

From the river the groves and gardens showed up most distinctly, and
over and beyond them the house was discernible under the huge trees that
stood at the sides and back of it.  The moonlight softened and silvered
everything, and the scent of the orange-blossoms gave a dreamy,
exquisite, impalpable finish to the night.

Pausing in midstream, Ansley asked his companion if she knew the song
"Carissima," adding, "You know, I think it must have been on such a
night as this that he serenaded her in his boat.  `The moonlight
trembling on the sea,' and `the breath of flowers,' that he sings of are
here, and `the orange-groves so dark and dim'--now all we want is the
dreamy, distant sound of the `Vesper Hymn.'  Will you sing the song
itself Miss Hardy?  That will be better than any `Vesper Hymn.'"

She sang, as he asked, in a sweet, low voice suited to the song and the
time and the surroundings; and as the last call of "Carissima," so
appealingly gentle, so soft and clear, floated away, he rested on his
oars and watched her.  Presently he said:

"There is, I think, no power so far-reaching, so universally felt, as
the power of music.  There is none--excepting, of course, the magnetic
power of individuals over each other--which can so stir a man's better
nature.  It seems--and especially at night--to elevate one's thoughts
and hopes, to strike a higher chord in human nature."

"Yes, it is so.  It raises a feeling of devotion.  To me, it is the
poetry of religion."

And so they talked as the boat glided along; talked of the "little
things we care about," which are of no interest to anyone else, but
which help us greatly to know one another.  And the time slipped quietly
by, like the silent water moving to the eternal sea.  Now and then there
were scraps of conversation, but more often the long silences of
content.  The girl lay back in the cushioned stern trailing one hand in
the water, barely cool after the long summer day; the man dipped his
oars now and again for the slowest, laziest of strokes, and watched the
blades glisten in the moonlight and the diamond drops plash back on the
shining surface of the water.

Once or twice in the long silences Ansley had roused himself, and half
bent forward, as though about to say something, but, changing his mind,
had taken a few lazy pulls at the oars and sent the boat gliding along
again.  But when they turned to drift down-stream again he shipped the
oars, and, after a little pause, said:

"If you do not mind, I should like to tell you something of the business
that has brought me here.  I want help for a friend, and I want advice--
your advice!  But, even apart from that, I should like you to know."

She answered promptly and truthfully: "I should like to know, and oh!  I
would give anything to help you!"

"I believe you would like to help me, Miss Gracie; indeed I do!"  Ansley
said, flushing a little nervously.  "You can scarcely realise what a
difference this day has made to me.  This morning I would have said I
had but one friend in the world, now I believe I have three; and that
makes all the difference in the world to me.  I confess I did hope,
though I was by no means sure, that I could count on you and your
father; but I feel more confident now.  You have been more than kind to
me, and even if your father cannot help me, yet for the welcome you have
given me I shall always count you as my friends."

The girl, for answer, put out her hand to him.  The firm, honest grip,
or the mere act perhaps, seemed to confuse him for the moment, to put
him off; and he sat silently looking down into the hands which had just
released hers.  It was only for a few seconds, however, and then he
looked up at her and began abruptly:

"My other friend is a man named Norman.  It is on his account that I
have come here.  He has been on the Diamond Fields off and on ever since
they were found, and, like all others, he made and lost money
alternately until about two years ago; then the death of his father,
with whom he had always shared interests, left him large holdings in
several of the best companies.  The business had been conducted under
the style of Norman and Davis, and on the father's death young Norman
left everything in the hands of Davis and went off on an eighteen
months' trip.  About six months ago he returned, and found that his
position was not all that he had imagined it to be.  He found Davis as a
man a pretty wealthy man, but he found the firm of Norman and Davis as a
firm an exceedingly poor one.  The first glance showed him that Davis
had worked with system.  Whether the conversion had been effected during
his absence only or during his easy-going father's lifetime it was
impossible to say; but the fact remains that the assets which he had
looked upon as his had been converted to Davis's personal estate, and
were as secure to him as law could make them.  After some weeks of
search, however, he found amongst his father's papers something which,
though not in itself of great importance, yet gave him a good clue, and,
making a guess at the probabilities in the case, he wrote to Davis
demanding a full settlement in the matter of certain shares which he
could now prove belonged to the firm.  To cut a long story short, Davis,
not knowing what documents had been discovered and fearing a complete
exposure, offered to compromise.  The more the one yielded the firmer
was the other's stand, and it was not till after several interviews that
any arrangement was come to.  Throughout the whole business Davis's tone
had been one of contemptible cringing and meanness.  Pleading his
family, heavy losses, bad times, and a lot more in that strain, he
begged Norman not to be too hard on him.  A day was appointed for final
settlement, when Davis would hand over some of his ill-gotten wealth.
Norman called at the office as appointed, and found his father's partner
in a more cheerful frame of mind, seemingly resolved to accept the
inevitable with the best possible grace; he treated the matter as a
purely business transaction.  Finally, he asked Norman to leave the
documents with him to allow his clerk to take copies of them.  If Norman
would call back in half an hour a lawyer would be in attendance, and the
business would be finally settled.  Norman rose to go, and as he opened
the door, Davis said in a clear, low voice these words: `I am sorry you
have done it, Norman.  I cannot have anything to do with that kind of
business.'  As he turned to inquire what Davis alluded to, the door
closed sharply, and he found himself in the passage and two strangers
looking very hard at him.  There is no use telling you all the details,
Miss Gracie.  I feel like a demon when I think of it now.  He was
arrested and searched, and in one of his side coat-pockets they found a
small packet of diamonds.  This was proved against him at the trial by
the detectives, who swore also that they had heard, as they stood
outside the door, Davis refuse to `have anything to do with that kind of
business.'  The clerk swore to Norman's several visits, when he always
refused to state his business, wishing to see Mr Davis privately.
Davis himself of course with great reluctance gave evidence against his
late partner's son.  He told how he had of late been so pestered over
this business that he had at last given information in self-defence,
fearing that one day it would be discovered, and that he, though wholly
innocent, would be incriminated.  He hoped the Court would not be hard
on the prisoner, as he was sure this was his first offence, and a lesson
would suffice.  The prisoner, he said, was naturally a straightforward,
honest man, and he had never known anything against him before, etc.
The defence was characterised as a miserable failure, and the sentence
on the prisoner was `seven years.'  I cannot tell you, Miss Hardy, half
the horrors of that time.  It was so terrible that I believe when the
trial was over the certainty was no worse to him than the suspense had
been.  But the cruellest blow of all was to see friends drop away and
sheer off when friends were most sorely needed.  Norman said he had
never seen the diamonds until they were found in his pockets by the
detectives, and he could only think it was Davis's fiendish device to
place them there while they were talking over the documents in the
office.  This explanation was openly laughed at.  However, the law did
not take its course--whether it was an act of negligence or covert
friendship it is hard to say--Norman himself does not know; but an
opening occurred two days after the trial, and he took it.  Next to him
stood one of the police-inspector's horses, saddled and ready, even to
the revolver in the holsters.  The act was so sudden that no attempt at
pursuit could be made till he was well away towards the border.
Galloping along in the early morning, he met no one for some miles out
of camp, until on nearing the border, on the road before him, and coming
leisurely towards him, he saw another horseman alone.  Slackening his
pace to allay suspicion, it was only when close up that he recognised
his late father's partner--the cause of his ruin--Davis; and not until
Norman drew up before him did Davis recognise the man whom he believed
to be in gaol.  Paralysed with fright, he sat his horse speechless and
helpless.  Norman rode up closer until their knees touched, and taking
one rein in his hand, he held Davis's horse.  `You see I'm out,' he said
curtly.  Davis, white and trembling, could not answer a word.  `Give me
all the money you have--everything of value.  It is all mine, and I want
it.'  The miserable wretch handed out all his money and his watch,
together with several diamonds, only too probably the fruits of that
early ride.  Then Norman spoke again, with, you might say, pitiless
hatred.  `You know, Davis, what you have done!  You know it is _worse_
than death to me.  Death would have been a thousand times better.  You
know--of course, a religious man like you must know--that retribution
means an eye for an eye; but I will not be as hard on you as you were to
me.  I cannot have your liberty, or your reputation.  I cannot break
your heart; but I _can_ shoot you, and, by God, I will!  Don't whine,
you cur--I didn't, when you dealt me a worse blow.  Stand back and take
it.'  There was a report, a scream, and--Davis was settled with."

Ansley stopped.  Before him shone the lustrous, anxious, frightened eyes
of the girl.  Her face was colourless, and her hands clasped tightly
together.  As he stopped there came from the closed lips a breathless
whisper--"Ah, God!"

For a full minute he sat looking at her, expecting, hoping she would say
more; but what she had heard seemed to fill her with thoughts too full
for words.  She asked no explanation--no reason--she could see them all
herself.  For the present she cared no more about his friend's
after-fate--the fatal scene seemed too complete of itself to admit of
anything more.

He looked at her wistfully, and said in a husky, pleading voice:

"Nothing can justify that, Miss Hardy, I know: but before you judge him,
before you refuse your sympathy and help, think of the awful trial;
think of the fiendish cruelty of the man who had ruined him; and think
of how they met."

"My sympathy is stronger than ever," she answered, looking up at him.
"It was a terrible revenge, but no one can say it was more than
justice."

The girl sat silent again, thinking on what she had heard.  Ansley was
silent, too, feeling a little sore and disappointed at what he thought
her disapproval of his friend; but in reality he was mistaken, and her
sympathy was the deeper that it was not expressed.  Several minutes
passed thus before either stirred or spoke again.  Then Miss Hardy rose
and gathered her shawl about her, saying:

"Come, let us go home.  I feel chilly, and oh!  I cannot bear to think
that a human being's life can be so spoiled, so utterly, irretrievably
ruined.  It is too cruel.  Indeed, it almost makes one think that this
world is not the work of a God of Justice and Mercy.  It is horrible!
It frightens one to think that misfortune can so single out one man for
persecution worse than death.  We have but one life--one short little
life, to live, and then, to think that, do what we can, that may be
spoiled for us for ever!"

"Do you think that his chance is gone, then--gone for ever?  He is still
young.  Do you think nothing can wipe it out?"

"Why do you ask me?  You know it is a thing one cannot outlive.  What
would it help that you and I were his friends--you and I and father?--
for I know it will be so.  I would honour him for his wrongs.  I would
be proud to be his friend.  But it would always hurt to feel the sneers
and insults levelled at him.  Were they never so well hidden, he would
know that they were there.  But, for that very reason, I would be proud
to take his hand before all the world."

Ansley's glance kindled with pleasure to see the girl's earnestness,
and, as he looked at her, he thought again of the photo he had seen that
night twelve years ago.  The honest, fearless look of the child came
back to him, and it seemed to him that the woman was that child--and
something more.

As they reached the stoep she turned to him, standing on the bottom
step, and said gently:

"You will pardon my thoughtless chaff about your melancholy, won't you?
I did not know then, but now I understand."

"Never speak of it, Miss Grace.  I knew you well enough even then to not
misinterpret it.  However, we have finished with melancholy now, haven't
we?  Do you know," he added, smiling up at her, "that it is past twelve
o'clock, and Christmas morning?  Let me wish you every happiness and
every blessing.  I think you deserve them.  I told you I thought you had
a good influence, and were born to make others happy.  Now I am sure of
it.  I can speak from experience, for I have felt happier to-day than
for many a long day past."

"If I am that, what are you?  Why, you are a Christmas-box yourself.
Remember, I have taken possession of you, and mean to present you to
father to-morrow morning as my Christmas-box.  In the meantime you are
mine."

"And right welcome is my fate, my lady.  Good-night."  He held her hand
lingeringly as he spoke, then slowly bent and touched it with his lips,
saying, "Good-night, Gracie, my good angel!"

There was a faint whisper, "Good-night," and she ran quickly up the
steps and disappeared indoors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The sun had barely risen when Ansley, restless, and anxious for Hardy's
return, left his rooms.  Whitton, the overseer, was starting on
horseback to go his morning rounds, and Ansley, glad of any means of
passing the time, accompanied him.  For a couple of hours he rode along
with the overseer, listening absently to his one theme of conversation,
but as it neared breakfast-time he struck off by a cross-path and rode
slowly in the direction of the house.

This Christmas morning Miss Hardy was unusually late, and at seven
o'clock she was startled by hearing the sound of a cart on the gravel
outside.  Catching her father's voice, she hastened to dress, and in a
few minutes was downstairs to meet him; but the servant told her that he
had just ridden off with three others, and had left word that he would
be back again shortly, and that she must not wait breakfast for him, as
he had some most important business to attend to.  Wondering much what
business could have been important enough to take him away so suddenly,
especially on a Christmas morning, Miss Grace resolved, at any rate, to
prepare her surprise for him, and sent for Ansley.  But he too had gone
out with Whitton, and not returned yet; and she, none too well
satisfied, had to be content with her own company.

Having been unable to get away again the previous day, and having
resolved to spend Christmas Day with his daughter, Hardy had left
Kimberley long before dawn that morning.  Driving along as he neared
home, Hardy presently heard the sound of horses' hoofs coming on fast
behind him, and, looking round, he saw two men ride up.  One was a
neighbouring farmer with whom he was slightly acquainted, and the other
a stranger to him.  The farmer told him hurriedly that Norman, the
escaped I.D.B. convict, highwayman, murderer, and horse-thief, had been
seen in the vicinity, and the detectives--pointing to his companion--
were out after him.  Hardy could give them no information, having just
come out of Kimberley himself, and they were in the act of parting when
another horseman came up--the second detective--with the news that he
had seen Norman within the last half-hour, but, as he was well mounted
and armed, had come for help.

People at a distance from the Diamond Fields cannot realise the hatred
and contempt felt by the honest section there for the I.D.B.'s.  It is
the crime without parallel there, so that it is not to be wondered at
that John Hardy instantly eagerly offered to join the party if they
would accompany him to his house, a short way on, where he would leave
the trap, and get a mount and arm himself.

Very few minutes elapsed before Hardy, the farmer, and two detectives
were riding along fast in the direction in which Norman had been seen.
A quarter of an hour's riding brought them to a rise at a considerable
distance from the house, and, coming up first, Hardy, who had the best
horse, signalled to the others to stop at once; and, dismounting at
once, he crept up to watch the man who was riding slowly towards them.

Walking his horse leisurely along, Ansley was lost in the thought of his
mission, in speculation as to how Hardy would receive it, and in the
recollection of the previous day and evening.  A happier look floated
across his face as he thought of the young girl standing on the step
above him, bathed in the soft moonlight, and his blood quickened a bit
as he recalled the timid whispered "Good-night."

Suddenly a sense of danger came upon him, and, looking up quickly, he
fancied he saw a man's head duck behind the ridge of hill.  Reining up
his horse instantly, he waited for a moment or so, watching intently and
warily the while.  Then, turning his horse's head, he rode towards
another elevation, still watching the spot where the head had
disappeared.

As he turned four horsemen dashed out, and scattering wide apart, rode
towards him.  With a muttered curse he tightened the rein and galloped
off in an opposite direction.  The man's face, soft and gentle as a
woman's a moment before, grew hard and colourless; his mouth was set,
and his eyes had a bright and wicked gleam in them.

Riding at their best over the rough ground, Ansley kept his lead easily;
but Hardy drew away from the others, and they, seeing the chase tend
towards the river, took a cut down to the nearest crossing, hoping to
cut the pursued man off on the other bank, or take him while swimming
the river, as he would have to do further down.

Seeing that Hardy was alone, Ansley slackened his pace till only thirty
yards divided them, then, raising his open hand, called to him by name
to stop.  The answer was a revolver shot, closely followed by a second
one, one of which whistled unpleasantly close.  Seeing the man with whom
he had to deal, Ansley let his horse go, and heading for the deepest
part of the river, soon had a lead of several hundred yards.  Plunging
into the river, he swam his horse across, and as he neared the other
side, Hardy, who had ridden his best in the last bit, came up to the
bank and again fired at him.  The bullet splashed far behind him, and,
looking round, he saw Hardy force his horse into the stream to follow
him.

As he reached the bank Ansley slipped off and loosened the girths, then
turned and watched his pursuer.  The look on his face was not good to
see: the expression was vindictive and cruel, for the man's spirit was
bitter with rancour.  This was the sorest blow of all, that the man who
owed him all he had--ay, even his life most likely!--should go out of
his way to hunt him down and shoot him like a dog.  As he watched, a
gleam of light shot into his eyes and a smile flashed across his face,
for Hardy's horse began to fail, and once or twice it stopped.  The
third time it reared up as it felt the spurs again, and Hardy, to save
himself, swung off and tried to seize the pommel of the saddle; but the
frightened, tired horse swayed round and, striking out wildly with his
front feet, brought one down with a crash on Hardy's bare grey head.  He
was but twenty yards from the bank; he made one weak effort to swim--a
white upturned face showed for a moment and then disappeared.

Ansley stood perfectly still, the same smile still curling the corners
of his mouth as he watched his pursuer go down.  As the water closed
over the pale set face, there came to him the faint, trembling sound of
a whispered "Good-night!"  A run, a spring, a few quick strokes, and he
had the drowning man by the collar and was dragging him out.  A minute
later he stretched him out on the bank, and waited for the effects of
the blow to pass off.

"My God!" he thought, "what a demon I have become!  _Her_ father and
_my_ friend, and I would have let him die because unknowingly he injured
me.  I _would_ have done it, too, but for her!"

Hardy lay against a grassy bank, and at the first sign of returning
consciousness Ansley leaned over him, chafing his hands and watching his
eyes for a sign of recognition.

"Where am I?" he asked faintly.  "Ah, I see--I know!"  And as he became
stronger, he said: "Ah, I have you; you are my prisoner."  He made a
feeble effort to grasp Ansley's throat, but, looking up into his eyes,
he dropped back suddenly with a look of intense excitement, exclaiming
eagerly: "Man!  Who are you?  What is your name?  Surely--surely you--
the diamonds, you know, that Christmas night!  I know you!  Now I know
you!"  Ansley looked at him steadily, and answered: "Yes, Mr Hardy, I
am the man you have looked for.  My name is George Ansley Norman.  But
just lie quiet for a few minutes, and you'll be all right.  And then
we'll get back to the house as soon as we can!"

Hardy closed his eyes and groaned aloud, but after a pause said
falteringly:

"Norman--but the convict--it _can't_ be true! my God! it _can't_ be
true!"

"It _is_ true, Hardy.  I am the convict, but there was no crime.
Between man and man, and by the God above me, I am as innocent of it as
you are."

"My boy, I believe you, and thank God for it," said the old man
fervently, and the tears came into his eyes as he added brokenly: "And
to think that I tried to shoot you.  _You_, my best of friends--how can
you forgive me!"

"Oh, that's all right now--you see, you didn't do it, so it doesn't
matter; besides, you did not know me, and how could you help it?"

While they were talking, on the same bank, a few yards off, the farmer
and the two detectives were crouching behind the bushes and creeping
closer up.

Hardy spoke again, and a painful flush suffused his face.

"It is the revolver you took from me that night.  I have kept it ever
since.  I might have shot you with it.  Take it from me again, and keep
it, for my sake!"

He handed it up as he spoke, and Ansley took it, turned it round once or
twice, and stooped to help his friend to rise.

As he bent forward, a voice called out: "Shoot quick, before he kills
him!"  Two revolver shots rang together, and with a half-stifled cry,
Ansley threw up his arms and dropped at Hardy's feet.  A wild scream of
agony burst from Hardy, and, weak as he was, his arms were in an instant
round his friend.

"My God!" he cried wildly, "you have murdered him!  Stand back I leave
him!  Speak to me, my boy, speak!  Where is it?  Where are you hit?"

But Ansley shook his head; his face was drawn and pale, and there was a
look of intense suffering in his eyes.  His voice quivered as he
whispered slowly:

"Home--old chap--home--home--your daughter.  I want--to--speak--to--
her!"

So they carried him back as gently, as tenderly as they could--the man
they had hunted and shot down; they laid him on the bed he had that
morning risen from, and three of them left him.  Whitton came in and
would have tried to stanch the wound, but Ansley shook his head.  In
broken whispers he told Hardy how he had come to the house and waited
for him; how he had met Grace and told her all, excepting only his
identity.  He asked him to go to her and tell her that, and ask her
would she come to him that he might see her once more.

The smile of welcome died on Grace's lips as she saw her father's face.
He told her all as best he could.  There was no attempt at control--it
would have been useless.  The sorrow-stricken old man, with sobs and
tears, tried to break it to her, but it required little telling.
Distracted with sorrow, remorse, and love for "his boy," as he called
him, he blamed himself for it.  He lost all control of himself.

"My child! my child! three times I tried to shoot him.  I would have
killed him; and yet I should have drowned, and he saved me--_he_ saved
me--the man I tried to shoot!  He saved me--he was helping me, when--oh,
my God!--they shot him through the back.  Come to him, my child.  Gracie
darling, be brave and bear up.  Oh, God! they have killed him!"

She went alone to where the dying man lay.  Softly she entered, but he
heard her, and his eyes followed her as she walked to his side.  In
silence she sat by him, taking his hand and stroking it gently.  Slowly
he was bleeding to death, yet his eyes were bright as he looked at her.
He smiled at her and whispered huskily:

"I told you you were my good angel, and see, you have come to me.  I
_cannot_ thank you enough.  I asked for you because I want you to bid me
one more good-night--good-night for ever.  I want to hear you say I am
your friend, of whom you are not ashamed.  Can you say it, Gracie?"

The words, the look, were too much.  The girl's pent-up grief burst out
in one heart-broken cry, and, falling on her knees, she kissed the hand
of the man whom rightly or wrongly she honoured above all men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This was their Christmas Day--twelve years since first their paths had
crossed--twelve circles in the web of life!  They were three units
amongst the countless millions of the earth, and so, what of them?  What
of sorrow?  What of death?  What of the wreck of new-born hopes?  For to
the countless millions it is still A Merry Christmas!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The End.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Outspan, by Percy Fitzpatrick

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OUTSPAN ***

***** This file should be named 37260.txt or 37260.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/2/6/37260/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
