The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cycling and Shooting Knickerbocker Stockings, by
H. P. Ryder

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Cycling and Shooting Knickerbocker Stockings
       How to Knit Them With Plain and Fancy Turnover Tops

Author: H. P. Ryder

Release Date: September 16, 2011 [EBook #37456]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Melissa McDaniel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







  Transcriber's note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.




   CYCLING AND SHOOTING
   KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS

   HOW TO KNIT THEM

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]

  CYCLING AND SHOOTING
  KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS

  HOW TO KNIT THEM
  WITH PLAIN AND FANCY TURNOVER TOPS

  BY
  H. P. RYDER

  London
  MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.
  NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO.
  1896

  RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED,
  LONDON AND BUNGAY.




HOW TO KNIT KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS

GENERAL DIRECTIONS


The difficulty in giving knitting directions arises from no two people
knitting alike. Some do so too loosely, others too tightly. In good
work the loops should just run easily on the needles.

In order to secure your stocking being the right size, it will be well
before you start it to test your knitting by casting on 8 stitches and
knitting 8 rows. If, with Alloa yarn and No. 12 needles, the knitting
measures about a square inch, your stocking will work out medium size.
If, however, the square is much larger or smaller, then alter the size
of needles to suit your knitting, taking bigger or smaller needles as
required. _This is a very important point to attend to._ The
directions given are for a medium-sized stocking, both in length and
width. Any one who has knitted a stocking by them will see at _once_
how easy it is to enlarge or diminish the size.


_How to join Wool_

Never make a knot, but knit a few stitches with both wools. The extra
thickness never shows, and the ends may be cut off close with
impunity.


_Raising_

It is helpful and saves much counting, if, when you raise or decrease,
you knit along with the wool, on that stitch _only_, a piece of fine
white wool or thread. It is easily withdrawn afterwards, but it
enables you to see at a glance which is your back needle, and the last
time you raised or decreased.

You _raise_, by putting your needle before knitting next stitch
through the loop below, in reality the stitch of the last round, and
drawing the wool through it. You must be very careful not to make a
hole, a slight twist as you take up the stitch prevents this.


_Tops in Fingering_

When you knit with two wools, carrying them on at the back, the
knitting is much more even if one colour, say the dark, is knitted
with wool from right hand in the usual English way, but keep the
lighter coloured wool over finger on _left_ hand, and take it up as
the Germans always knit. This sounds troublesome, but is really quite
easy with a little practice.

Another simple but useful direction in knitting with wool carried on
at the back I must give.

When you knit 6 or more stitches with one colour, to avoid too long a
loop at the back, which is apt to get pulled, at the 3rd or 4th stitch
lay the wool you are _not_ using level with your needle so as to come
above or rather _between_ the needle and the wool you are going to
knit with. When the stitch is knitted, you will find the wool caught
lightly through at the back.




KNICKERBOCKER STOCKING WITH FANCY TOP. NO. 1.


_Required._--4 needles No. 12, tested by Walker's Bell Gauge, 3 cuts
of Alloa yarn (heather mixture), 1/2 cut of red to correspond.

K stands for knit, P for purl.

With heather mixture cast on 78 stitches, 26 on each needle. Knit 4
rounds of k 1, p 1 alternately.

Purl two rounds.

In the next round you use the two colours alternately. Don't break off
the wool until directed to do so.

[Illustration]

1st pattern round.--With red wool, k 4. Heather wool k 2, but in
knitting these put the wool _twice_ round the needle instead of once
as in ordinary knitting; this is done to lengthen the stitch. Repeat.

2nd round.--_Red_ wool, k 4, slip the 2 knitted stitches on to the
same needle, letting the wool drop to make a long stitch. When you
slip, put in needle, as if to purl, from right to left. Repeat.

3rd, 4th, and 5th rounds.--Same as 2nd.

6th round.--_Heather_ wool. Knit all.

7th and 8th rounds.--Purl all.

9th round.--_Red_ wool, k 1, *, _heather_ wool, k 2, putting wool
_twice_ round needle, _red_ wool, k 4, repeat from *, end with k 3
_red_ wool.

10th, 11th, 12th and 13th rounds.--_Red_ wool, k 1, *, slip 2, k 4,
repeat from *, end with k 3.

14th round.--_Heather_ wool. Knit all.

15th and 16th rounds.--Purl all.

Repeat from 1st round _once_ more.

Repeat up to 9th round _once_.

You will have 5 coloured squares. Break off red wool.

With heather wool k 1, p 1 alternately every round until your stocking
measures, from casting on, a length of _six_ inches.


_Stocking Leg_

Before beginning to rib the stocking leg, you must turn what you have
knitted inside out to make the fancy top fall over correctly. Do this
and arrange your stitches as follows. Place 31 on 1st needle, which
will be called the _back_ or heel needle, 24 on the 2nd, 23 on the 3rd
needle.

1st round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 3, knit 2 together, k 3, knit 2
together, k 1, *, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, repeat from *.

You will have 29 stitches on back needle, 76 in all.

2nd round.--* P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, repeat from *.

This ribbing broad and narrow alternately is carried down the leg. In
future, directions are only given for the increasings and decreasings
made on the 1st or back needle.

Repeat the 2nd round until your stocking measures from casting on
_eight_ inches.


_To increase for Calf of Leg_

1st round.--Back needle. P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, raise 1 (see
general directions), knit till within 2 of end of broad rib, when
raise 1, k 2, _etc._ By _etc._ please understand you are to knit the
ribs according to pattern rest of round.

Rib 5 rounds with 11 stitches in centre back needle, broad rib.

7th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 5 rounds with 13 stitches in centre back, broad rib.

13th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib, with 15 stitches in centre back needle, broad rib, until your
stocking measures _eleven_ inches from casting on.


_Decreasing_

This is done _twice_ in the round at first, afterwards only once.

1st round.--Back needle. P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit two
together; knit until within 4 of end of this broad rib, when knit 2
together, k 2, etc.

Rib 4 rounds.--You will have 13 stitches in back needle rib.

6th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 4 rounds.--11 stitches back needle rib.

11th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 4 rounds.--9 stitches back needle rib.

16th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 4 rounds.--7 stitches on back needle rib.


_Decreasing once in Round_

1st round.--Back needle. P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit 2
together, k 3, etc. After the decreasings, purl or knit the next rib
according to pattern.

2nd and 3rd rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 6, etc.

Observe two rounds only are knitted between decreasings.

4th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

5th and 6th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 5, etc.

7th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

8th and 9th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 4, etc.

10th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

11th and 12th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 3, etc.

13th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, etc.

14th and 15th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, etc.

16th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, knit 2 together, etc.

17th and 18th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, etc.

19th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 2, k 2, p 2,
k 2, p 2, etc.

20th and 21st rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 4, etc.

22nd round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

23rd and 24th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 3, etc.

25th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

26th and 27th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, etc.

28th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, purl 2 together, etc.

29th and 30th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 1, etc.

31st round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

32nd and 33rd rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 4, etc.

34th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

35th and 36th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 3, etc.

37th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, etc.

38th and 39th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, etc.

40th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, knit 2 together, etc.

41st and 42nd rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, etc.

43rd round.--P 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 2, etc.

44th and 45th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 4, etc.

46th round.--P 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

47th and 48th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 3, etc.

49th round.--P 2, k 2, p 1, p 2 together, etc.

This finishes the decreasings. You will have 10 stitches left on your
back needle, 57 stitches in all on the needles. Your decreasings will
have formed a good =V=-shaped slant.

Continue ribbing until the stocking measures, from casting on, 22
inches. You must not pull out the stocking, but place it flat on the
table and measure it with a rule.


_Heel_

Prepare for heel by ribbing to end of back needle, from next needle
knit off on back needle the broad rib of 9 stitches. Knit on a 2nd
needle the small ribs and 5 of the next broad rib stitches, in all 15
stitches. On a 3rd needle k 4 and next small ribs, 14 stitches in all.
Now pass the 9 stitches of broad rib on to the heel or back needle.
This gives you 28 stitches on the heel needle.

The heel is formed by knitting the heel needle backwards and forwards.

1st row.--Slip 1 (when you slip 1st stitch put in needle from right to
left), k 8, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, turn.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 8, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 9, turn.

Repeat these _two_ rows until you have knitted 30 rows.


_To round Heel_

1st row.--Slip 1, k 15, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 5, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

3rd row.--Slip 1, k 6, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

4th row.--Slip 1, p 7, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

5th row.--Slip 1, k 8, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

6th row.--Slip 1, p 9, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

7th row.--Slip 1, k 10, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

8th row.--Slip 1, p 11, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

9th row.--Slip 1, k 12, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

10th row.--Slip 1, p 13, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

11th row.--Slip 1, k 14, knit 2 together, turn.

12th row.--Slip 1, p 14, purl 2 together. 16 stitches will be left on
the heel needle.


_To form the Foot_

This is done by taking up, and as you take up knitting through the
loops down side of length of heel. In taking up be particular to put
your needle through both sides of the loops.

1st side needle. Slip 1, k 15 (these are the heel stitches). Take up,
and as you take up knit 17 stitches down side of heel. Purl 2 stitches
off next needle on this 1st side needle. With a 2nd needle rib all the
stitches on the next two needles but the _two_ last. This needle is
henceforward called the instep needle. On a 3rd needle purl the 2
stitches left, and with it take up, and as you take up knit 17
stitches down other side of heel, also knit on to it 8 stitches off
the 1st side needle; these 8 are the half of the heel stitches left
after rounding it.

Count loops on your needles. You ought to have 27 on each side needle,
25 on the instep needle.


_To shape the Foot_

1st round.--1st side needle. Knit plain until within 4 stitches of end
of needle, when knit 2 together, p 2.

Instep needle. K 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2. 2nd side
needle. P 2, knit 2 together, knit to end of needle.

Repeat this round four times. You will have 23 stitches left on each
side needle.

5th round.--1st side needle. Knit all but 2 last, which are purled.
Instep needle. Rib according to pattern. 2nd side needle. P 2, knit
the rest.

6th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat 5th and 6th rounds until you have only 16 stitches left on each
side needle, 25 on instep needle, 57 in all.

Repeat the 5th round until your foot measures, including the heel,
8-1/2 inches.


_Toe_

Prepare for toe by knitting to end of instep needle, and on that
needle knit 2 stitches off the next.

Next needle. Knit plain. 3rd needle. Knit to within 5 stitches of end,
when knit 2 together, k 2, and pass the last stitch on to instep
needle. You will have 28 stitches on instep needle, 14 on each of the
others.


_To decrease the Toe_

1st round.--Instep needle. K 2, knit 2 together, knit to within 4 of
end, when knit 2 together, k 2. Next needle. Knit 2, knit 2 together,
knit to end. 3rd needle. Knit to within 4 of end, knit 2 together, k
2.

2nd, 3rd and 4th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat these 4 rounds _twice_ more.

13th round.--Same as 1st.

14th and 15th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat 13th, 14th and 15th rounds _once_ more.

19th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat this until you have only 8 stitches left on the instep and 8 on
back needles, 16 in all.

Slip the back 8 stitches on one needle, knit the back and front
needles together, casting off at the same time.




STOCKING, NO. 1.--PLAIN TOP


Cast on same number of stitches as for fancy top.

Rib, by k 1, p 1 alternately, or k 3, p 3 alternately a length of six
inches from casting on. You do not need with plain top to turn your
stocking inside out, as both sides are alike. Arrange your stitches as
directed for "stocking leg," and follow out the pattern.




STOCKING, NO. 2


_Required._--4 needles No. 12, 2-1/2 cuts of blue speckled Alloa yarn,
1/2 cut of blue Alloa yarn, 1/2 cut of tan-coloured ditto.

K stands for knit, p for purl.

_With speckled Wool._--Cast on 77 stitches, 28 on two, 21 on the third
needle. The rib throughout the stocking is knit 5, purl 2.

Work 6 rounds of this rib, k 5, p 2.

_Blue Wool._--One round plain knitting.

2nd round.--The rib, k 5, p 2. Each time you change the wool the 1st
round must be plain knitting, the other rounds are ribbed. Don't break
off the different coloured wool until told to do so.

_Tan Wool._--Seven rounds. Recollect to knit all 1st round.

_Speckled Wool._--Two rounds.

_Blue Wool._--Nine rounds.

_Speckled Wool._--Two rounds.

_Tan Wool._--Seven rounds.

_Blue Wool._--Two rounds.

Now break off all the wools, excepting the speckled.

[Illustration]

_Speckled Wool._--Rib until your stocking measures, from casting on,
_six_ inches. To make your stocking top fall over correctly, you must
now turn your work inside out and continue the rib until your stocking
measures, from casting on, _nine_ inches. Be careful after you have
turned it to knit 5 over the knitted stitches, and to purl over the 2
purled ones.


_Increasing for Calf_

Directions are only given for the _back_ needle, where the increasing
is made. Follow the usual ribbing in the rounds.

Back needle. 1st round.--This must be a needle with 28 stitches on it.
(See directions for _raising_ in general directions.) K 5, p 2, k 5, p
1, raise 1, p 1, _etc._ By _etc._ understand is meant _continue the
usual rib_.

2nd round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 3, etc.

3rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 1, raise 1, p 2, etc.

4th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 4, etc.

5th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, raise 1, p 2, etc.

6th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 1, p 2, etc.

7th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

8th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2, p 2, etc.

9th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 1, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

10th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 3, p 2, etc.

11th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

12th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 4, p 2, etc.

13th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 3, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

14th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, etc.

15th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 4, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

16th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 6, p 2, etc.

17th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

18th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 7, p 2, etc.

Repeat 18th round until your stocking measures, from casting on,
12-1/2 inches. You will have 37 stitches on your _back_ needle.


_Decreasing_

This is done every other round. In the _intermediate_ rounds follow
the ribbing as usual, and where the decreasing has been made knit, if
over knitted stitches, purl when over-purled.

1st round.--Back needle. K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 5,
etc.

3rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 4, etc.

5th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 3, etc.

7th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

9th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

11th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, p 2, etc.

13th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

15th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

17th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

19th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, purl 2 together, etc.

21st round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, knit 2 together, k 4, p 2, etc.

23rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 4, knit 2 together, k 4, p 2, etc.

25th round.--K 5, p 2, k 4, knit 2 together, k 3, p 2, etc.

27th round.--K 5, p 2, k 3, knit 2 together, k 3, p 2, etc.

29th round.--K 5, p 2, k 3, knit 2 together, k 2, p 2, etc.

31st round.--K 5, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 2, p 2, etc.

33rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 1, p 2, etc.

35th round.--K 5, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 1, p 2, etc.

37th round.--K 5, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, p 2, etc.

39th round.--K 5, p 2, knit 2 together, p 2, etc.

41st round.--K 5, p 2, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

43rd round.--K 5, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

45th round.--K 5, p 1, purl 2 together, etc.

47th round.--K 5, purl 2 together, etc.

49th round.--K 5, knit 2 together, k 4, etc.

51st round.--K 4, knit 2 together, k 4, etc.

53rd round.--K 4, knit 2 together, k 3, etc.

55th round.--K 3, knit 2 together, k 3, etc.

57th round.--K 3, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

59th round.--K 2, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

60th round.--K 5, p 2.

Repeat this round until your stocking measures, from casting on, 22
inches. You will have 56 stitches in all on your needles.


_Heel_

Prepare for heel by knitting to end of back needle; from next needle
knit off on back needle as follows, k 5, p 2, k 3. On a 2nd needle, k
2, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2. On a 3rd needle, k 3, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2, then
pass the remaining 12 loops on to the heel needle.

You will have 29 stitches on heel needle, 13 on the 2nd, 14 on the
3rd.

The heel is made by knitting the back needle backwards and forwards.

1st row.--Slip 1 (when you slip 1st stitch, put in needle from right
to left), k 2, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 3, _turn_ and work
back.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 2, k 2, p 5, k 2, p 5, k 2, p 5, k 2, p 3, _turn_.

Repeat these _two_ rows for 30 rows.


_To round Heel_

1st row.--Slip 1, k 15, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 5, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

3rd row.--Slip 1, k 6, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

4th row.--Slip 1, p 7, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

5th row.--Slip 1, k 8, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

6th row.--Slip 1, p 9, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

7th row.--Slip 1, k 10, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

8th row.--Slip 1, p 11, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

9th row.--Slip 1, k 12, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

10th row.--Slip 1, p 13, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

11th row.--Slip 1, k 14, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

12th row.--Slip 1, p 15, purl 2 together.

You will have 17 stitches left on heel needle.


_To form the Foot_

This is done by taking up, and as you take up knitting through the
slipped loops down side of heel. Be particular in taking up to put
your needle through both sides of the loops.

1st side needle. Slip 1, k 16 (these are the heel stitches). Take up,
and as you take up knit 17 stitches down side of heel. On _same_
needle knit 2 stitches off next needle. Work on a 2nd needle ribbing
according to pattern, all the stitches on the next two needles
_excepting_ the two last. This needle is henceforward called the
_instep_ needle. On a 3rd needle knit the 2 stitches left, and with it
take up, and as you take up knit 17 stitches down other side of heel,
also knit on it 9 stitches off 1st side needle (these are part of the
heel stitches). Count loops on your needles. You should have 27 on 1st
side needle, 23 on instep, 28 on 2nd side needle, 78 in all.


_To shape the Foot_

1st round.--1st side needle. Knit plain until within 4 of end of
needle, when knit 2 together, k 2. Instep needle. Rib to pattern. 2nd
side needle. K 2, knit two together, knit to end.

Repeat this round _four_ times.

5th round.--Knit plain side needles, rib the instep.

6th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat 5th and 6th rounds until you have only 16 stitches left on 1st
side needle, 23 on instep, 17 stitches on 2nd side needle. In all 56
stitches.

Repeat 6th round until your foot measures, including heel, 8-1/2
inches.


_Toe_

This is all knitted plain. Prepare for it by knitting to end of instep
needle on same needle, knit 3 stitches off next needle. Knit plain
next needle. 3rd needle. Knit plain to within 2 stitches of end, slip
these two on to instep needle. You will have 28 stitches on instep
needle, 28 on the back needles.


_To decrease the Toe.--Knit_

1st round.--Instep needle. K 2, knit 2 together, knit to within 4 of
end, when knit 2 together, k 2. Next needle. K 2, knit 2 together,
knit to end. 3rd needle. Knit to within 4 of end, when knit 2
together, k 2.

2nd, 3rd and 4th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat these _four_ rounds _twice_ more.

13th round.--Same as 1st.

14th and 15th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat 13th, 14th and 15th rounds _once_ more.

19th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat this round until you have only 8 stitches left on your instep
needle, and 8 on the back needles. Slip the 8 on back needles all on
one needle. Cast off by knitting back and front needles together in
the usual way.




STOCKING, NO. 2.--PLAIN TOP


Cast on same number of stitches as for Fancy Top. Rib, that is, k 5, p
2 alternately, a length of _nine_ inches. (Follow directions from
"Increasing for Calf.")




FANCY TOP, NO. 3


This top can be knitted as a change with either stocking leg. Same
quantity of wool required.

With stocking wool cast on 78 stitches, 26 on each needle. Knit 4
rounds of k 1, p 1 alternately.

5th round.--* Slip 1 (taking it off as if purled, that is, putting the
needle-point through the loop from right to left. All slipped stitches
in this pattern are to be worked in this way). Knit 2 together; repeat
from *. Knit loosely, not to draw the wool tight.

6th round.--* Throw wool over needle _twice from back to the front_,
purl 1. This purled stitch is the slipped one of previous round. With
wool still in front of needle slip 1 (the knit 2 together of last
round), after which pass the wool to the back. Repeat from *.

7th round.--Knit plain, letting the thrown over _twice_ wool drop, and
knit it as one stitch. To make sure you have done this correctly,
count over your stitches; there should be 26 on each needle.

_Coloured stripe._--8th round, knit all.

9th round.--Same as 5th.

10th round.--Same as 6th.

11th round.--Same as 7th.

These four rounds constitute the pattern. With wool your stocking is
knitted; repeat these four rounds _twice_, that is, 8 rounds.

_Coloured stripe._--Repeat pattern _three_ times.

[Illustration]

_Stocking wool._--Repeat pattern _twice_.

_Coloured stripe._--Repeat pattern _once_, break off coloured wool.

_Stocking wool._--Repeat pattern _once_.

Knit 1, purl 1 alternately until your top measures 6 inches from
casting on.

The rest of stocking knit according to receipt No. 1. (See directions
for Stocking Leg.)




[Illustration]

FANCY TOP, NO. 4


This is a very simple but effective top. With wool your stockings are
to be knitted, cast on 78 stitches.

Rib, that is k 2, p 1 alternately for five rounds.

_With red wool._--Make 1, by throwing wool over the needle, and knit
2 together. Repeat this throughout this round and three more rounds.

_Dark wool._--5 rounds of make 1 and knit 2 together.

_Red wool._--9 rounds of same.

_Dark wool._--5 rounds of same.

_Red wool._--4 rounds of same.

_Dark wool._--Knit 1 round plain.

Rib, that is k 2, p 1 alternately until your top measures 6 inches
from casting on.

Rest of stocking knit according to directions. (See receipts Nos. 1 or
2.)




STOCKING TOPS IN FINGERING WOOL. NO. 5


If checks and plaids are knitted in Alloa yarn, carrying on wool at
the back, they are so thick and clumsy no one likes them. I therefore
give directions for patterns to be knitted in 3-ply Fingering wool and
_larger_ needles. After you have knitted the top, you continue the
rest of leg with Alloa yarn and the smaller needles. Be careful to
match exactly colour of Fingering and Alloa.


No. 1

_Required._--4 needles No. 10. Small quantity, say 1/2 cut, of
Fingering wool, same colour as Alloa the stocking is to be knitted
with, and 1/2 cut of crimson Fingering.

Cast on 80 stitches, 30 on two, 20 on 3rd needle, with darker
Fingering.

1st round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

2nd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

3rd round.--Same as 1st.

4th round.--Same as 2nd.

In next round you work with both colours, carrying them on at the
back. You must be particular not to pull or drag them too tightly.
(Read carefully the "General Directions.")

[Illustration]

1st _pattern_ round.--Crimson wool k 1, *, dark wool k 6, crimson k 2,
repeat from *, end with crimson k 1.

2nd round.--Crimson k 2, *, dark k 4, crimson k 4, repeat from *, end
with crimson k 2.

3rd round.--Crimson k 3, *, dark k 2, crimson k 6, repeat from *, end
crimson k 3.

4th round.--Crimson k 2, *, dark k 4, crimson k 4, repeat from *, end
crimson k 2.

5th round.--Crimson k 1, *, dark k 6, crimson k 2, repeat from *, end
crimson k 1.

6th round.--Dark k 3, *, crimson k 2, dark k 6, repeat from *, end
dark k 3.

7th round.--Dark k 2, *, crimson k 4, dark k 4, repeat from *, end
with k 2.

8th round.--Dark k 1, *, crimson k 6, dark k 2, repeat from *, end
with k 1.

9th round.--Dark k 2, *, crimson k 4, dark k 4, repeat from *, end
dark k 2.

10th round.--Dark k 3, *, crimson k 2, dark k 6, repeat from *, end
dark k 3.

Repeat these 10 rounds _three_ times _more_. Break off crimson wool.

41st round.--Knit all.

42nd round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

43rd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat 42nd and 43rd rounds until your stocking top measures, from
casting on, _six_ inches.

The rest of stocking is knitted in Alloa yarn with needles No. 12. You
can knit it either as pattern No. 1 or 2. See "Stocking Leg." Having
80 stitches on your needle, you must, in commencing the ribbing,
narrow off the extra stitches.




[Illustration]

ZIGZAG TOP IN FINGERING, No. 6


_Required._--4 needles No. 10. 3-ply Fingering wool in two colours 1/2
cut of each.

With dark wool cast on 80 stitches, 30 on two, 20 on third needle.

1st round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

2nd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat these two rounds.

1st pattern round.--The colours are used alternately. Red k 5, dark k
5, repeat to end of round.

2nd round.--Red k 4, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end with red
k 1.

3rd round.--Red k 3, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 2.

4th round.--Red k 2, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 3.

5th round.--Red k 1, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 4.

6th round.--Dark k 5, red k 5, repeat.

7th round.--Red k 1, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 4.

8th round.--Red k 2, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 3.

9th round.--Red k 3, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 2.

10th round.--Red k 4, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k
1.

Repeat these ten rounds _three_ times more.

41st round.--Knit all.

42nd round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

43rd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat 42nd and 43rd rounds until your stocking measures, from casting
on, _six_ inches.

The rest of the stocking is knitted in Alloa wool with needles No. 12,
as in previous directions.




DIAMOND PATTERN TOP


_Required._--4 needles No. 10, 3-ply Fingering wool in two colours,
1/2 cut of each.

With dark wool cast on 84 stitches, 28 on each needle.

1st round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

2nd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat these two rounds _twice_ more.

_Light wool._--Knit 1st round plain.

2nd round.--K 1 in light wool, k 1 in dark wool, repeat in two colours
rest of round.

[Illustration]

3rd round.--K 1st stitch dark wool, 2nd light, repeat in two colours
alternately.

4th round.--Knit in light colour.

5th, 6th and 7th rounds.--Knit in dark colour.

You now begin the pattern. It is knitted plain in alternate colours,
carrying on wool at the back. [L for light wool, D for dark.]

1st round.--Light k 1, dark k 6, repeat.

2nd round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 4, light k 3, dark k 4, repeat from
*, end with light k 1.

3rd round.--Dark k 1, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light
k 2, dark k 2, light k 2.

4th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2,
light k 2, dark k 3, repeat from *, end with dark k 1.

5th round.--Light k 1, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 1, dark
k 2, light k 2, dark k 2.

6th round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 3, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 3, repeat from *, end with light k 1.

7th round.--Light k 3, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 5, repeat from *, end light k 2.

8th round.--Dark k 1, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2, light
k 3, repeat.

9th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 1, dark k 2,
light k 3, dark k 3, repeat from *, end dark k 1.

10th round.--Dark k 3, *, light k 3, dark k 1, light k 1, dark k 1,
light k 3, dark k 5, repeat from *, end dark k 2.

11th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 1, dark k 2,
light k 3, dark k 3, repeat from *, end dark k 1.

12th round.--Dark k 1, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2, light
k 3, repeat.

13th round.--Light k 3, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 5, repeat from *, end light k 2.

14th round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 3, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 3, repeat from *, end light k 1.

15th round.--Light k 1, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 1, dark
k 2, light k 2, dark k 2, repeat.

16th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2,
light k 2, dark k 3, repeat from *, end dark k 1.

17th round.--Dark k 1, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light
k 2, dark k 2, light k 2, repeat.

18th round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 4, light k 3, repeat from *, end
light k 1, repeat.

19th round.--Light k 1, dark k 6, repeat. This round finishes the
diamond.

Knit 3 rounds with dark wool.

Knit 1 round with light wool.

5th round.--K 1 with dark wool, k 1 with light alternately.

6th round.--K 1 with light wool, k 1 with dark alternately.

7th round.--Knit with light wool, which you afterwards break off.

8th round.--Knit with dark wool.

9th round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

10th round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat 9th and 10th rounds until your top measures, from casting on,
_six_ inches.

Knit the rest of your stocking in Alloa yarn with needles No. 12.
Don't forget in the 1st round to take two stitches together at
intervals, to make the number right for whichever stocking leg you are
going to knit.

The Scotch custom of having wooden legs to dry the stockings on when
they are washed, prevents their running up, and keeps them a very good
shape.




BY SAME AUTHOR.


   WINTER COMFORTS, AND HOW TO KNIT THEM. Post free, 1_s._ 1_d._

   CHILDREN'S COMFORTS, AND HOW I KNIT THEM. Post free, 1_s._ 6_d._

   HOW TO KNIT THE RICHMOND GLOVE. Post free, 6-1/2_d._

   HOW TO KNIT SOCKS. By E. RYDER. Post free, 1_s._ 1_d._

   HOW TO KNIT STOCKINGS. By E. RYDER. Post free, 1_s._ 1_d._

   HOW TO KNIT SPUN SILK SOCKS AND STOCKINGS. By E. RYDER. Post
   free, 1_s._ 1_d._

     These Knitting Cards can be procured from

     MR. COOKES,

     _Stationer_,

     RICHMOND, YORKSHIRE.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cycling and Shooting Knickerbocker
Stockings, by H. P. Ryder

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS ***

***** This file should be named 37456.txt or 37456.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/4/5/37456/

Produced by David Edwards, Melissa McDaniel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
