The Project Gutenberg EBook of Blackie & Sons Catalogue - 1891, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Blackie & Sons Catalogue - 1891
       Books for Young People

Author: Various

Release Date: September 17, 2011 [EBook #37460]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKIE & SONS CATALOGUE - 1891 ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






BLACKIE & SON'S

BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.


BY G. A. HENTY.


St. Bartholomew's Eve: A Tale of the Huguenot Wars. By G. A. HENTY.
With 12 page Illustrations by H. J. DRAPER, and a Map. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    The title of this story takes you at once to its subject. The
    hero, Philip Fletcher, is a right true English lad, but he has a
    French connection on the mother's side. This kinship induces him
    to cross the Channel in order to take a share in that splendid
    struggle for freedom known as the Huguenot wars. Naturally he
    sides with the Protestants, distinguishes himself in various
    battles, and receives rapid promotion for the zeal and daring with
    which he carries out several secret missions. At length, however,
    he is entrapped in Paris, with other prominent Huguenots, on that
    terrible St. Bartholomew's Eve, when the tocsin gave the signal
    at midnight for the massacre to begin. It is an enthralling
    narrative, and the chapter which deals with the escape of the hero
    out of that monstrous city is one of the most thrilling in a story
    which is full of interest.

Through the Sikh War: A Tale of the Conquest of the Punjaub. By G. A.
HENTY. With 12 page Illustrations by HAL HURST, and a Map. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    This story gives a vivid picture of the pluck and obstinacy with
    which the British maintained their ascendency in India. Percy
    Groves, a spirited English lad, leaves school to join his uncle in
    the Punjaub, where he is governor of a district under the native
    Sikh prince, Runjeet Singh. The natives are in a state of revolt,
    and Percy takes an active part in all the troubles which precede
    the Sikh war. His uncle's fortress is beleaguered, and he assists
    in repelling the attack. Then when the authorities at Lahore
    proclaim war Percy joins the British force as a volunteer, and
    takes a distinguished share in the famous battles of Moodkee,
    Sobraon, and Chillianwalla. Apart from its high interest as a
    record of personal daring, this story shows in dashing style how
    Englishmen have made an Empire.

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY G. A. HENTY.

"Mr. Henty is one of the best of story-tellers for young people."
--_Spectator._


Beric the Briton: A Story of the Roman Invasion. By G. A. HENTY. With
12 page Illustrations by W. PARKINSON. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Beric the Briton is the boy's book of the year."--_Observer._

    "We are not aware that any one has given us quite so vigorous a
    picture of Britain in the days of the Roman conquest. Mr. Henty
    has done his utmost to make an impressive picture of the haughty
    Roman character, with its indomitable courage, sternness, and
    discipline. _Beric_ is good all through."--_Spectator._

In Greek Waters: A Story of the Grecian War of Independence (1821-1827).
By G. A. HENTY. With 12 page Illustrations by W. S. STACEY, and a Map.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, Olivine edges, 6_s._

    "There are adventures of all kinds for the hero and his friends,
    whose pluck and ingenuity in extricating themselves from awkward
    fixes are always equal to the occasion. It is an excellent story,
    and if the proportion of history is smaller than usual, the whole
    result leaves nothing to be desired."--_Journal of
    Education._

Redskin and Cow-boy: A Tale of the Western Plains. By G. A. HENTY.
With 12 page Illustrations by ALFRED PEARSE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

    "It has a good plot; it abounds in action; the scenes are equally
    spirited and realistic, and we can only say we have read it with
    much pleasure from first to last. The pictures of life on a cattle
    ranche are most graphically painted, as are the manners of the
    reckless but jovial cow-boys."--_Times._

The Dash for Khartoum: A Tale of the Nile Expedition. By G. A. HENTY.
With 10 page Illustrations by J. SCHOeNBERG and J. NASH, and 4 Plans.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "The Dash for Khartoum is your ideal boys' book."--_Tablet._

    "It is literally true that the narrative never flags a moment; for
    the incidents which fall to be recorded after the dash for
    Khartoum has been made and failed are quite as interesting as
    those which precede it."--_Academy._

By England's Aid: The Freeing of the Netherlands (1585-1604). By G. A.
HENTY. With 10 page Illustrations by ALFRED PEARSE, and 4 Maps. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Boys know and love Mr. Henty's books of adventure, and will
    welcome his tale of the Freeing of the Netherlands."--_Athenaeum._

    "The story is told with great animation, and the historical
    material is most effectively combined with a most excellent
    plot."--_Saturday Review._

By Right Of Conquest: Or, With Cortez in Mexico. By G. A. HENTY. With
10 page Illustrations by W. S. STACEY, and 2 Maps. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Mr. Henty's skill has never been more convincingly displayed than
    in this admirable and ingenious story."--_Saturday Review._

    "_By Right of Conquest_ is the nearest approach to a
    perfectly successful historical tale that Mr. Henty has yet
    published."--_Academy._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY G. A. HENTY.

"Surely Mr. Henty should understand boys' tastes better than any man
living."--_The Times._


With Lee in Virginia: A Story of the American Civil War. By G. A.
HENTY. With 10 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE, and 6 Maps. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "The story is a capital one and full of variety, and presents us
    with many picturesque scenes of Southern life. Young Wingfield,
    who is conscientious, spirited, and 'hard as nails,' would have
    been a man after the very heart of Stonewall
    Jackson."--_Times._

By Pike and Dyke: A Tale of the Rise of the Dutch Republic. By G. A.
HENTY. With 10 page Illustrations by MAYNARD BROWN, and 4 Maps. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "The mission of Ned to deliver letters from William the Silent to
    his adherents at Brussels, the fight of the _Good Venture_
    with the Spanish man-of-war, the battle on the ice at Amsterdam,
    the siege of Haarlem, are all told with a vividness and skill,
    which are worthy of Mr. Henty at his best."--_Academy._

With Clive in India: Or, The Beginnings of an Empire. By G. A. HENTY.
With 12 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Among writers of stories of adventure for boys Mr. Henty stands
    in the very first rank. Those who know something about India will
    be the most ready to thank Mr. Henty for giving them this
    instructive volume to place in the hands of their
    children."--_Academy._

The Lion of St. Mark: A Tale of Venice in the Fourteenth Century. By
G. A. HENTY. With 10 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Every boy should read _The Lion of St. Mark._ Mr. Henty has
    never produced any story more delightful, more wholesome, or more
    vivacious. From first to last it will be read with keen
    enjoyment."--_The Saturday Review._

Under Drake's Flag: A Tale of the Spanish Main. By G. A. HENTY.
Illustrated by 12 page Pictures by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "There is not a dull chapter, nor, indeed, a dull page in the
    book; but the author has so carefully worked up his subject that
    the exciting deeds of his heroes are never incongruous or
    absurd."--_Observer._

Bonnie Prince Charlie: A Tale of Fontenoy and Culloden. By G. A.
HENTY. With 12 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Ronald, the hero, is very like the hero of _Quentin Durward._ The
    lad's journey across France with his faithful attendant Malcolm,
    and his hairbreadth escapes from the machinations of his father's
    enemies, make up as good a narrative of the kind as we have ever
    read. For freshness of treatment and variety of incident, Mr.
    Henty has here surpassed himself."--_Spectator._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY G. A. HENTY.

"Among writers of stories of adventure for boys Mr. Henty stands in
the very first rank."--_Academy._


For the Temple: A Tale of the Fall of Jerusalem. By G. A. HENTY. With
10 page Illustrations by S. J. SOLOMON, and a Coloured Map. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Mr. Henty's graphic prose pictures of the hopeless Jewish
    resistance to Roman sway adds another leaf to his record of the
    famous wars of the world. The book is one of Mr. Henty's cleverest
    efforts."--_Graphic._

True to the Old Flag: A Tale of the American War of Independence. By
G. A. HENTY. With 12 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Does justice to the pluck and determination of the British
    soldiers. The son of an American loyalist, who remains true to our
    flag, falls among the hostile redskins in that very Huron country
    which has been endeared to us by the exploits of Hawkeye and
    Chingachgook."--_The Times._

The Lion Of the North: A Tale of Gustavus Adolphus and the Wars of
Religion. By G. A. HENTY. With 12 page Pictures by J. SCHOeNBERG. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "A praiseworthy attempt to interest British youth in the great
    deeds of the Scotch Brigade in the wars of Gustavus Adolphus.
    Mackay, Hepburn, and Munro live again in Mr. Henty's pages, as
    those deserve to live whose disciplined bands formed really the
    germ of the modern British army."--_Athenaeum._

The Young Carthaginian: a Story of the Times of Hannibal. By G. A.
HENTY. With 12 page Illustrations by C. J. STANILAND, R.I. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "The effect of an interesting story, well constructed and vividly
    told, is enhanced by the picturesque quality of the scenic
    background. From first to last nothing stays the interest of the
    narrative. It bears us along as on a stream, whose current varies
    in direction, but never loses its force."--_Saturday Review._

With Wolfe in Canada: Or, The Winning of a Continent. By G. A. HENTY.
With 12 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

    "A model of what a boys' story-book should be. Mr. Henty has a
    great power of infusing into the dead facts of history new life,
    and as no pains are spared by him to ensure accuracy in historic
    details, his books supply useful aids to study as well as
    amusement."--_School Guardian._

In Freedom's Cause: A Story of Wallace and Bruce. By G. A. HENTY. With
12 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Mr. Henty has broken new ground as an historical novelist. His
    tale of the days of Wallace and Bruce is full of stirring action,
    and will commend itself to boys."--_Athenaeum._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY G. A. HENTY.

"Mr. Henty is one of our most successful writers of historical
tales."--_Scotsman._


Through the Fray: A Story of the Luddite Riots. By G. A. HENTY. With
12 page Illustrations by H. M. PAGET. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Mr. Henty inspires a love and admiration for straightforwardness,
    truth, and courage. This is one of the best of the many good books
    Mr. Henty has produced, and deserves to be classed with his
    _Facing Death_."--_Standard._

Captain Bayley's Heir: A Tale of the Gold Fields of California. By G.
A. HENTY. With 12 page Illustrations by H. M. PAGET. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "A Westminster boy who makes his way in the world by hard work,
    good temper, and unfailing courage. The descriptions given of life
    are just what a healthy intelligent lad should delight
    in."--_St. James's Gazette._

A Jacobite Exile: Being the Adventures of a Young Englishman in the
Service of Charles XII. of Sweden. By G. A. HENTY. With 8 page
Illustrations by PAUL HARDY, and a Map. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    In this story Sir Marmaduke Carstairs, who is a Jacobite, is
    denounced as a plotter against the life of King William, and
    although innocent of the charge, he has to flee from England. His
    son Charlie, who goes with him to Sweden, is the hero of the tale.
    This youth joins the foreign legion under Charles XII. of Sweden,
    and takes a distinguished part in several famous campaigns against
    the Russians and the Poles. Besides his stirring career as a
    soldier, the narrative is full of the hero's personal adventures
    in Poland, Sweden, Russia, and England. The narrative swings along
    at a breathless pace, and holds the reader entranced to the end.

Condemned as a Nihilist: A Story of Escape from Siberia. By G. A.
HENTY. With 8 page Illustrations by WALTER PAGET. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "The best of this year's Henty. His narrative is more interesting
    than many of the tales with which the public is familiar, of
    escape from Siberia. Despite their superior claim to authenticity
    these tales are without doubt no less fictitious than Mr. Henty's,
    and he beats them hollow in the matter of sensations. The escape
    of the hero and his faithful Tartar from the Samoyedes is quite
    the high-water mark of this author's achievement."--_National
    Observer._

Orange and Green: A Tale of the Boyne and Limerick. By G. A. HENTY.
With 8 full-page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "An extremely spirited story, based on the struggle in Ireland,
    rendered memorable by the defence of 'Derry and the siege of
    Limerick."--_Sat. Review._

    "The narrative is free from the vice of prejudice, and ripples
    with life as vivacious as if what is being described were really
    passing before the eye.... Should be in the hands of every young
    student of Irish history."--_Belfast News._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY G. A. HENTY.

"Mr. Henty is the king of story-tellers for boys."--_Sword and
Trowel._


One Of the 28th: A Tale of Waterloo. By G. A. HENTY. With 8 page
Illustrations by W. H. OVEREND, and 2 Maps. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "Written with Homeric vigour and heroic inspiration. It is
    graphic, picturesque, and dramatically effective ... shows us Mr.
    Henty at his best and brightest. The adventures will hold a boy of
    a winter's night enthralled as he rushes through them with
    breathless interest 'from cover to cover.'"--_Observer._

The Cat Of Bubastes: A Story of Ancient Egypt. By G. A. HENTY. With 8
page Illustrations by J. R. WEGUELIN. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "The story, from the critical moment of the killing of the sacred
    cat to the perilous exodus into Asia with which it closes, is very
    skilfully constructed and full of exciting adventures. It is
    admirably illustrated."--_Saturday Review._

Maori and Settler: A Story of the New Zealand War. By G. A. HENTY.
With 8 page Illustrations by ALFRED PEARSE, and a Map. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "It is a book which all young people, but especially boys, will
    read with avidity."--_Athenaeum._

    "A first-rate book for boys, brimful of adventure, of humorous and
    interesting conversation, and of vivid pictures of colonial
    life."--_Schoolmaster._

St. George for England: A Tale of Cressy and Poitiers. By G. A. HENTY.
With 8 full-page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "Mr. Henty's historical novels for boys bid fair to supplement, on
    their behalf, the historical labours of Sir Walter Scott in the
    land of fiction."--_Standard._

    "A story of very great interest for boys. In his own forcible
    style the author has endeavoured to show that determination and
    enthusiasm can accomplish marvellous results; and that courage is
    generally accompanied by magnanimity and gentleness."--_Pall
    Mall Gazette._

The Bravest of the Brave: With Peterborough in Spain. By G. A. HENTY.
With 8 full-page Pictures by H. M. PAGET. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "Mr. Henty never loses sight of the moral purpose of his work--to
    enforce the doctrine of courage and truth, mercy and loving
    kindness, as indispensable to the making of an English gentleman.
    British lads will read _The Bravest of the Brave_ with
    pleasure and profit; of that we are quite sure."--_Daily
    Telegraph._

For Name and Fame: Or, Through Afghan Passes. By G. A. HENTY. With 8
full-page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "The best feature of the book, apart from its scenes of adventure,
    is its honest effort to do justice to the patriotism of the Afghan
    people."--_Daily News._

    "Not only a rousing story, replete with all the varied forms of
    excitement of a campaign, but, what is still more useful, an
    account of a territory and its inhabitants which must for a long
    time possess a supreme interest for Englishmen, as being the key
    to our Indian Empire."--_Glasgow Herald._

Held Fast for England: A Tale of the Siege of Gibraltar. By G. A.
HENTY. With 8 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "Among them we would place first in interest and wholesome
    educational value the story of the siege of Gibraltar.... There is
    no cessation of exciting incident throughout the
    story."--_Athenaeum._

In the Reign of Terror: The Adventures of a Westminster Boy. By G. A.
HENTY. With 8 full-page Illustrations by J. SCHOeNBERG. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "Harry Sandwith, the Westminster boy, may fairly be said to beat
    Mr. Henty's record. His adventures will delight boys by the
    audacity and peril they depict. The story is one of Mr. Henty's
    best."--_Saturday Review._

By Sheer Pluck: A Tale of the Ashanti War. By G. A. HENTY. With 8
full-page Pictures by Gordon Browne. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 5_s._

    "_By Sheer Pluck_ will be eagerly read."--_Athenaeum._

    "Morally, the book is everything that could be desired, setting
    before the boys a bright and bracing ideal of the English
    gentleman."--_Christian Leader._

The Dragon and the Raven: Or, The Days of King Alfred. By G. A. HENTY.
With 8 page Illustrations by C. J. STANILAND, R.I. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "A story that may justly be styled remarkable. Boys, in reading
    it, will be surprised to find how Alfred persevered, through years
    of bloodshed and times of peace, to rescue his people from the
    thraldom of the Danes. We hope the book will soon be widely known
    in all our schools."--_Schoolmaster._

A Final Reckoning: A Tale of Bush Life in Australia. By G. A. HENTY.
With 8 page Illustrations by W. B. WOLLEN. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "All boys will read this story with eager and unflagging interest.
    The episodes are in Mr. Henty's very best vein--graphic, exciting,
    realistic; and, as in all Mr. Henty's books, the tendency is to
    the formation of an honourable, manly, and even heroic
    character."--_Birmingham Post._

Facing Death: Or, The Hero of the Vaughan Pit. A Tale of the Coal
Mines. By G. A. HENTY. With 8 page Pictures by GORDON BROWNE. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "If any father, godfather, clergyman, or schoolmaster is on the
    look-out for a good book to give as a present to a boy who is
    worth his salt, this is the book we would
    recommend."--_Standard._

A Chapter of Adventures: Or, Through the Bombardment of Alexandria. By
G. A. HENTY. With 6 page Illustrations by W. H. OVEREND. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Jack Robson and his two companions have their fill of excitement,
    and their chapter of adventures is so brisk and entertaining we
    could have wished it longer than it is."--_Saturday Review._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY GEORGE MACDONALD.


A Rough Shaking. By GEORGE MACDONALD. With 12 page Illustrations by W.
PARKINSON. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "One of Mr. MacDonald's wonderful and charming
    stories."--_Athenaeum._

    "One of the very best books for boys that has been written. It is
    full of material peculiarly well adapted for the young, containing
    in a marked degree, the elements of all that is necessary to make
    up a perfect boys' book."--_Teachers' Aid._

At the Back of the North Wind. By GEORGE MAC DONALD. With 75
Illustrations by ARTHUR HUGHES. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 5_s._

    "In _At the Back of the North Wind_ we stand with one foot in
    fairyland and one on common earth. The story is thoroughly
    original, full of fancy and pathos, and underlaid with earnest but
    not too obtrusive teaching."--_The Times._

Ranald Bannerman's Boyhood. By GEORGE MACDONALD. With 36 Illustrations
by ARTHUR HUGHES. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "The sympathy with boy-nature in _Ranald Bannerman's Boyhood_
    is perfect. It is a beautiful picture of childhood, teaching by
    its impressions and suggestions all noble things."--_British
    Quarterly Review._

The Princess and the Goblin. By GEORGE MACDONALD. With 32 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Little of what is written for children has the lightness of touch
    and play of fancy which are characteristic of George MacDonald's
    fairy tales. Mr. Arthur Hughes's illustrations are all that
    illustrations should be."--_Manchester Guardian._

The Princess and Curdie. By GEORGE MACDONALD. With 8 page Illustrations.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "There is the finest and rarest genius in this brilliant story.
    Upgrown people would do wisely occasionally to lay aside their
    newspapers and magazines to spend an hour with Curdie and the
    Princess."--_Sheffield Independent._

                 *       *       *       *       *

The Clever Miss Follett. By J. K. H. DENNY. With 12 page Illustrations
by GERTRUDE D. HAMMOND. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    This is the story of a great fortune, and its attendant train of
    misfortunes. The Folletts are a middle-class family who suddenly
    find themselves in the possession of immense wealth, and the
    interest is obtained by showing what effect this change has upon
    their various characters. With fine subtlety the author depicts
    the schemes, duplicities, worries, and disappointments which
    follow the Folletts in their efforts to scramble into society and
    make aristocratic marriages. Then, in the midst of their plans,
    the wealth is taken from them, and the friendships which they have
    made are shown in their true character. Altogether it is a bright,
    clever, entertaining tale, with a rare distinction in its minute
    portrayal of diverse character.

                 *       *       *       *       *

NEW EDITION OF THE UNIVERSE.


The Universe: Or The Infinitely Great and the Infinitely Little. A
Sketch of Contrasts in Creation, and Marvels revealed and explained by
Natural Science. By F. A. POUCHET, M.D. With 272 Engravings on wood,
of which 55 are full-page size, and a Coloured Frontispiece. Eleventh
Edition, medium 8vo, cloth elegant, gilt edges, 7_s._ 6_d._; also
morocco antique, 16_s._

    "We can honestly commend Professor Pouchet's book, which is
    admirably, as it is copiously illustrated."--_The Times._

    "Scarcely any book in French or in English is so likely to
    stimulate in the young an interest in the physical
    phenomena."--_Fortnightly Review._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY ROBERT LEIGHTON.


The Wreck of "The Golden Fleece:" The story of a North Sea Fisher-boy.
By ROBERT LEIGHTON. With 8 page Illustrations by FRANK BRANGWYN. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    In this story the interest is mainly secured by a description of
    life on the wild North Sea,--the hero being a parson's son who is
    apprenticed on board a Lowestoft fishing lugger. The lad has to
    suffer many buffets from his shipmates, while the storms and
    dangers which he braved on board the "North Star" are set forth
    with minute knowledge and intense power. The wreck of "The Golden
    Fleece" forms the climax to a thrilling series of desperate
    mischances. From this point the narrative deals with a mysterious
    highway robbery and murder; the trial of the accused fisherman;
    his escape, and the mad chase after the criminal out upon the high
    seas. Altogether, this is a wholesome tale with plenty of
    sea-water in it, and a fine run of breezy adventure.

The Pilots of Pomona: A Story of the Orkney Islands. By ROBERT
LEIGHTON. With 8 page Illustrations by JOHN LEIGHTON, and a Map. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "A story which is quite as good in its way as _Treasure
    Island_, and is full of adventure of a stirring yet most
    natural kind. Although it is primarily a boys' book, it is a real
    godsend to the elderly reader who likes something fresh--something
    touched with the romance and magic of youth."--_Glasgow Evening
    Times._

    "His pictures of Orcadian life and nature are
    charming."--_Saturday Review._

The Thirsty Sword: A Story of the Norse Invasion of Scotland
(1262-63). By ROBERT LEIGHTON. With 8 page Illustrations by ALFRED
PEARSE, and a Map. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "This is one of the most fascinating stories for boys that it has
    ever been our pleasure to read. From first to last the interest
    never flags. Boys will worship Kenric, who is a hero in every
    sense of the word."--_Schoolmaster._

    "It gives a lively idea of the wild life of the Western Islands in
    those rough days, reminding one not seldom of Sir Walter Scott's
    _Lord of the Isles_. It is full of incident and sensational
    adventure."--_The Guardian._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.

"Mr. Fenn stands in the foremost rank of writers in this
department."--_Daily News._


Quicksilver: Or, A Boy with no Skid to his Wheel. By GEORGE MANVILLE
FENN. With 10 page Illustrations by FRANK DADD. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "_Quicksilver_ is little short of an inspiration. In it that
    prince of story-writers for boys--George Manville Fenn--has
    surpassed himself. It is an ideal book for a boy's
    library."--_Practical Teacher._

    "The story is capitally told, it abounds in graphic and
    well-described scenes, and it has an excellent and manly tone
    throughout."--_The Guardian._

Dick O' the Fens: A Romance of the Great East Swamp. By G. MANVILLE
FENN. With 12 page Illustrations by FRANK DADD. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "We conscientiously believe that boys will find it capital
    reading. It is full of incident and mystery, and the mystery is
    kept up to the last moment. It is rich in effective local
    colouring; and it has a historical interest."--_Times._

    "Deserves to be heartily and unreservedly praised as regards plot,
    incidents, and spirit. It is its author's masterpiece as
    yet."--_Spectator._

Devon Boys: A Tale of the North Shore. By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 12
page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 6_s._

    "An admirable story, as remarkable for the individuality of its
    young heroes as for the excellent descriptions of coast scenery
    and life in North Devon. It is one of the best books we have seen
    this season."--_Athenaeum._

The Golden Magnet: A Tale of the Land of the Incas. By G. MANVILLE
FENN. Illustrated by 12 page Pictures by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "There could be no more welcome present for a boy. There is not a
    dull page in the book, and many will be read with breathless
    interest. 'The Golden Magnet' is, of course, the same one that
    attracted Raleigh and the heroes of _Westward
    Ho!_"--_Journal of Education._

In the King's Name: Or, The Cruise of the Kestrel. By G. MANVILLE
FENN. Illustrated by 12 page Pictures by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "A capital boys' story, full of incident and adventure, and told
    in the lively style in which Mr. Fenn is such an
    adept."--_Globe._

    "The best of all Mr. Fenn's productions in this field. It has the
    great quality of always 'moving on,' adventure following adventure
    in constant succession."--_Daily News._

Nat the Naturalist: A Boy's Adventures in the Eastern Seas. By G.
MANVILLE FENN. With 8 page Pictures. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 5_s._

    "This sort of book encourages independence of character, develops
    resource, and teaches a boy to keep his eyes open."--_Saturday
    Review._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.

"No one can find his way to the hearts of lads more readily than Mr.
Fenn."--_Nottingham Guardian._


Bunyip Land: The Story of a Wild Journey in New Guinea. By G. MANVILLE
FENN. With 6 page Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 4_s._

    "Mr. Fenn deserves the thanks of everybody for _Bunyip Land_,
    and we may venture to promise that a quiet week may be reckoned on
    whilst the youngsters have such fascinating literature provided
    for their evenings' amusement."--_Spectator._

Brownsmith's Boy: A Romance in a Garden. By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 6
page Illustrations. _New Edition._ Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._
6_d._

    "Mr. Fenn's books are among the best, if not altogether the best,
    of the stories for boys. Mr. Fenn is at his best in
    _Brownsmith's Boy_."--_Pictorial World._

    * * See also under heading of Blackie's 3/ Series for other
     *  Books by G. MANVILLE FENN.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Grettir the Outlaw: A Story of Iceland. By S. BARING-GOULD. With 10
page Illustrations by M. ZENO DIEMER, and a Coloured Map. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Is the boys' book of its year. That is, of course, as much as to
    say that it will do for men grown as well as juniors. It is told
    in simple, straightforward English, as all stories should be, and
    it has a freshness, a freedom, a sense of sun and wind and the
    open air, which make it irresistible."--_National Observer._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Two Thousand Years Ago: Or, The Adventures of a Roman Boy. By
Professor A. J. CHURCH. With 12 page Illustrations by ADRIEN MARIE.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6_s._

    "Adventures well worth the telling. The book is extremely
    entertaining as well as useful, and there is a wonderful freshness
    in the Roman scenes and characters."--_The Times._

                 *       *       *       *       *

The Seven Wise Scholars. By ASCOTT R. HOPE. With nearly 100
Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Cloth elegant, 5_s._

    "As full of fun as a volume of _Punch_; with illustrations, more
    laughter-provoking than most we have seen since Leech
    died."--_Sheffield Independent._

Stories of Old Renown: Tales of Knights and Heroes. By ASCOTT R. HOPE.
With 100 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
3_s._ 6_d._

    "A really fascinating book worthy of its telling title. There is,
    we venture to say, not a dull page in the book, not a story which
    will not bear a second reading."--_Guardian._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY G. NORWAY.


A True Cornish Maid. By G. NORWAY. With 6 page Illustrations by J.
FINNEMORE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    This is a story of the Cornish coast at a time when the press-gang
    brought terror into all its seaports, and smuggling was an
    everyday practice. The heroine of the tale is sister to a young
    fellow who gets into trouble in landing a contraband cargo, and
    shooting the officer in charge of the press-gang. In this
    extremity she stands by her brother bravely, and by means of her
    daring scheme he manages to escape. There is abundance of stirring
    incident in this tale; the characters are all natural, and the
    tone is altogether breezy and wholesome.

Hussein the Hostage: Or, A Boy's Adventures in Persia. By G. NORWAY.
With 8 page Illustrations by JOHN SCHOeNBERG. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "_Hussein the Hostage_ is full of originality and vigour. The
    characters are lifelike, there is plenty of stirring incident, the
    interest is sustained throughout, and every boy will enjoy
    following the fortunes of the hero."--_Journal of Education._

The Loss of John Humble: What Led to It, and what Came of It. By G.
NORWAY. With 8 page Illustrations by JOHN SCHOeNBERG. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "This story will place the author at once in the front rank. It is
    full of life and adventure. He is equally at home in his
    descriptions of life in Sweden and in the more stirring passages
    of wreck and disaster, and the interest of the story is sustained
    without a break from first to last."--_Standard._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD.


The Pirate Island: A Story of the South Pacific. By HARRY COLLINGWOOD.
With 8 page Pictures by C. J. STANILAND and J. E. WELLS. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "A capital story of the sea; indeed in our opinion the author is
    superior in some respects as a marine novelist to the better known
    Mr. Clark Russell."--_The Times._

The Congo Rovers: A Story of the Slave Squadron. By HARRY COLLINGWOOD.
With 8 page Illustrations by J. SCHOeNBERG. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "No better sea story has lately been written than the _Congo
    Rovers_. It is as original as any boy could
    desire."--_Morning Post._

The Log Of the "Flying Fish:" A Story of Aerial and Submarine Peril
and Adventure. By HARRY COLLINGWOOD. With 6 page Illustrations by
GORDON BROWNE. _New and cheaper Edition_. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
3_s._ 6_d._

    "The _Flying Fish_ actually surpasses all Jules Verne's
    creations; with incredible speed she flies through the air, skims
    over the surface of the water, and darts along the ocean bed. We
    strongly recommend our school-boy friends to possess themselves of
    her log."--_Athenaeum._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY DR. GORDON STABLES.


Westward With Columbus. By GORDON STABLES, M.D., C.M. With 8 page
Illustrations by ALFRED PEARSE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 5_s._

    The hero of this story is Columbus himself; and a very
    picturesque, noble, and enchanting hero he makes. His career is
    traced from boyhood onwards, but the narrative deals chiefly with
    the great naval venture which Columbus conducted across the
    Atlantic, and which resulted in the discovery of the American
    continent. There were many dangers which threatened to wreck this
    momentous enterprise, but these were all overcome by this
    indomitable man, and his efforts were at last crowned with
    success. It is a splendid story, possessing all the value of
    truth, with all the charm of the most daring romance.

'Twixt School and College: A Tale of Self-reliance. By GORDON STABLES,
C.M., M.D., R.N. With 8 page Illustrations by W. PARKINSON. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "One of the best of a prolific writer's books for boys, being full
    of practical instructions as to keeping pets, from white mice
    upwards, and inculcates in a way which a little recalls Miss
    Edgeworth's 'Frank' the virtue of self-reliance, though the local
    colouring of the home of the Aberdeenshire boy is a good deal more
    picturesque."--_Athenaeum._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY FRANCES ARMSTRONG.


A Fair Claimant: Being a Story for Girls. By FRANCES ARMSTRONG. With 8
page Illustrations by GERTRUDE D. HAMMOND. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    The heroine of this story is found, when a child, in the attic of
    a lodging-house in Chelsea. Her mother has unaccountably
    disappeared, and her parentage remains a mystery. She is adopted
    by a wealthy lady, and resides abroad until the death of her
    benefactress. Thereafter, Olive Bethune comes to England as a
    governess, and it is then that she begins to learn her own strange
    history. It is a tale of surprising vicissitude, which is slowly
    unravelled with happy skill, but in the end all the wrongs are
    pleasantly righted. The interest of this narrative never for a
    moment flags, because the character of the heroine is as
    fascinating as the mystery of her birth.

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY ANNE BEALE.


The Heiress of Courtleroy. By ANNE BEALE. with 8 page Illustrations by
T. C. H. CASTLE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "We can speak highly of the grace with which Miss Beale relates
    how the young 'Heiress of Courtleroy' had such good influence over
    her uncle as to win him from his intensely selfish
    ways."--_Guardian._

    "In Le Roy we have perhaps the most striking and original creation
    that Miss Beale has made. He interests us to the
    last."--_Spectator._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY KIRK MUNROE.


The White Conquerors of Mexico: A Tale of Toltec and Aztec. By KIRK
MUNROE. With 8 page Illustrations by W. S. STACEY. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    This story deals with the Conquest of Mexico by Cortes and his
    Spaniards. They are the daring white conquerors who pushed their
    way through countless difficulties into the great Aztec kingdom,
    and established their power in the wondrous city where Montezuma
    reigned in barbaric splendour. This episode is one of the most
    romantic in all history, and the author of this narrative has made
    it newly entrancing by the many cunning effects which he has added
    with consummate dexterity. It were simply vain to single out any
    particular adventure in a narrative which teems with happenings of
    the weirdest kind.

                 *       *       *       *       *

With the Sea Kings: A Story of the Days of Lord Nelson. By F. H.
WINDER. With 6 page Illustrations by W. S. STACEY. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 4_s._

    Philip Trevellon was an English lad who thought to become a Lord
    High Admiral like his hero, Horatio Nelson. By way of achieving
    this purpose he ran away from home and joined a privateer. After
    taking part in the capture of a French frigate, he was captured by
    Corsairs and sold into slavery. He escaped, and his subsequent
    bravery in a sea fight brought him an interview with Lord Nelson,
    and promotion. Having been appointed to the _Victory_ he took
    part in the battle of Trafalgar. This is a real saltwater story,
    set forth in a hearty, handsome, old-fashioned style.

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY F. FRANKFORT MOORE.


Highways and High Seas: Cyril Harley's Adventures on both. By F.
FRANKFORT MOORE. With 8 page Illustrations by ALFRED PEARSE. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5_s._

    "This is one of the best stories Mr. Moore has written, perhaps
    the very best. The exciting adventures among highwaymen and
    privateers are sure to attract boys."--_Spectator._

Under Hatches: Or, Ned Woodthorpe's Adventures. By F. FRANKFORT MOORE.
With 8 page Illustrations by A. FORESTIER. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 5_s._

    "The story as a story is one that will just suit boys all the
    world over. The characters are well drawn and consistent; Patsy,
    the Irish steward, will be found especially
    amusing."--_Schoolmaster._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Giannetta: A Girl's Story of Herself. By ROSA MULHOLLAND. With 8 page
Illustrations by LOCKHART BOGLE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 5_s._

    "Giannetta is a true heroine--warm-hearted, self-sacrificing, and,
    as all good women nowadays are, largely touched with the
    enthusiasm of humanity. One of the most attractive gift-books of
    the season."--_The Academy._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY J. M. CALLWELL.


A Champion Of the Faith: A Tale of Prince Hal and the Lollards. By J.
M. CALLWELL. With 6 page Illustrations by HERBERT J. DRAPER. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, 4_s._

    The earlier part of this story deals with the merry escapades of
    Prince Hal and his favourite, Sir John Oldcastle. Then the
    narrative deepens in its interest when the Prince ascends the
    throne as Henry V., while his old comrade becomes a Lollard and a
    champion of the new faith. As such, Sir John Oldcastle endures
    many hardships, and escapes from the Tower, but finally he is
    captured by treachery and burnt at the stake. This historical tale
    is full of the most interesting episodes, while at the same time
    its tone is pure and ennobling.

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY ALICE CORKRAN.


Meg's Friend. By ALICE CORKRAN. With 6 page Illustrations by ROBERT
FOWLER. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "One of Miss Corkran's charming books for girls, narrated in that
    simple and picturesque style which marks the authoress as one of
    the first amongst writers for young people."--_The
    Spectator._

Margery Merton's Girlhood. By ALICE CORKRAN. with 6 page Pictures by
GORDON BROWNE. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Another book for girls we can warmly commend. There is a
    delightful piquancy in the experiences and trials of a young
    English girl who studies painting in Paris."--_Saturday
    Review._

Down the Snow Stairs: Or, From Good-night to Good-morning. By ALICE
CORKRAN. With 60 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, olivine edges, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "A fascinating wonder-book for children."--_Athenoeum._

    "A gem of the first water, bearing upon every page the mark of
    genius. It is indeed a Little Pilgrim's Progress."--_Christian
    Leader._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Gold, Gold, in Cariboo: A Story of Adventure in British Columbia. By
CLIVE PHILLIPPS-WOLLEY. With 6 page Illustrations by G. C. HINDLEY.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Ned Corbett, a young Englishman, and his companion set out with a
    pack-train in order to obtain gold on the upper reaches of the
    Frazer River. Many difficulties lie in their path, but chiefly
    they are the victims of an unscrupulous Yankee. After innumerable
    adventures, and a life-and-death struggle with the Arctic weather
    of that wild region, they find the secret gold-mines for which
    they have toilsomely searched. This story is so real, and vivid,
    and enthralling that no boy would skip a single page.

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY SARAH DOUDNEY.


Under False Colours: A Story from Two Girls' Lives. By SARAH DOUDNEY.
With 6 page Illustrations by G. G. KILBURNE. _New Edition._ Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, 4_s._

    "Sarah Doudney has no superior as a writer of high-toned
    stories--pure in style, original in conception, and with skilfully
    wrought-out plots; but we have seen nothing from her pen equal in
    dramatic energy to this book."--_Christian Leader._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY ANNIE E. ARMSTRONG.


Three Bright Girls: A Story of Chance and Mischance. By ANNIE E.
ARMSTRONG. With 6 page Illustrations by W. PARKINSON. Crown 8vo, cloth
elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Among many good stories for girls this is undoubtedly one of the
    very best. The three girls whose portraits are so admirably
    painted are girls of earnest, practical, and business-like mood.
    Ever bright and cheerful, they influence other lives, and at last
    they come out of their trials and difficulties with honour to
    themselves and benefits to all about them."--_Teachers' Aid._

A Very Odd Girl: or, Life at the Gabled Farm. By ANNIE E. ARMSTRONG.
With 6 page Illustrations by S. T. DADD. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
3_s._ 6_d._

    "The book is one we can heartily recommend, for it is not only
    bright and interesting, but also pure and healthy in tone and
    teaching."--_The Lady._

    "The doings of the heroine at the Gabled Farm are amusing in the
    extreme, and her escapades are always bringing her into trouble.
    Vera is a fine character, however, and our girls will all be the
    better for making her acquaintance."--_Teachers' Aid._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY EDGAR PICKERING.


An Old-Time Yarn: Wherein is set forth divers desperate mischances
which befell Anthony Ingram and his shipmates in the West Indies and
Mexico with Hawkins and Drake. By EDGAR PICKERING. Illustrated with 6
page Pictures drawn by ALFRED PEARSE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._
6_d._

    "And a very good yarn it is, with not a dull page from first to
    last. There is a flavour of _Westward Ho!_ in this attractive
    book."--_Educational Review._

    "An excellent story of adventure. Especially good is the
    description of Mexico and of the dungeons of the Inquisition,
    while Don Diego Polo is a delightful mixture of bravery and
    humour, and his rescue of the unfortunate prisoners is told with
    great spirit. The book is thoroughly to be
    recommended."--_Guardian._

Silas Verney: A Tale of the Time of Charles II. By EDGAR PICKERING.
With 6 page Illustrations by ALFRED PEARSE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
3_s._ 6_d._

    "Wonderful as the adventures of Silas are, it must be admitted
    that they are very naturally worked out and very plausibly
    presented. Altogether this is an excellent story for
    boys."--_Saturday Review._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY C. J. HYNE.


The Captured Cruiser: or, Two Years from Land. By C. J. HYNE. With 6
page Illustrations by FRANK BRANGWYN. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._
6_d._

    "It is altogether a capital story, well illustrated."--_Saturday
    Review._

    "The two lads and the two skippers are admirably drawn. Mr. Hyne
    has now secured a position in the first rank of writers of fiction
    for boys."--_Spectator._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Afloat at Last: A Sailor Boy's Log of his Life at Sea. By JOHN C.
HUTCHESON. With 6 page Illustrations by W. H. OVEREND. Crown 8vo,
cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "As healthy and breezy a book as one could wish to put into the
    hands of a boy."--_Academy._

    "A tale of seafaring life told with fire and enthusiasm, full of
    spirited incident and well-drawn character."--_Observer._

Picked Up at Sea: Or, The Gold Miners of Minturne Creek. By J. C.
HUTCHESON. With 6 page Pictures. Cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "The author's success with this book is so marked that it may well
    encourage him to further efforts. The description of mining life
    in the Far West is true and accurate."--_Standard._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Sir Walter's Ward: A Tale of the Crusades. By WILLIAM EVERARD. With 6
page Illustrations by WALTER PAGET. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._
6_d._

    "This book will prove a very acceptable present either to boys or
    girls. Both alike will take an interest in the career of Dodo, in
    spite of his unheroic name, and follow him through his numerous
    and exciting adventures."--_Academy._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Brother and Sister: Or, The Trials of the Moore Family. By ELIZABETH
J. LYSAGHT. With 6 page Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._
6_d._

    "A pretty story, and well told. The plot is cleverly constructed,
    and the moral is excellent."--_Athenaeum._

                 *       *       *       *       *

The Search for the Talisman: A Story of Labrador. By HENRY FRITH. With
6 page Illustrations by J. SCHOeNBERG. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._
6_d._

    "Mr. Frith's volume will be among those most read and highest
    valued. The adventures among seals, whales, and icebergs in
    Labrador will delight many a young reader."--_Pall Mall
    Gazette._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Reefer and Rifleman: A Tale of the Two Services. By J. PERCY-GROVES,
late 27th Inniskillings. With 6 page Illustrations by JOHN SCHOeNBERG.
Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "A good, old-fashioned, amphibious story of our fighting with the
    Frenchmen in the beginning of our century, with a fair sprinkling
    of fun and frolic."--_Times._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY CAROLINE AUSTIN.


Cousin Geoffrey and I. By CAROLINE AUSTIN. With 6 page Illustrations
by W. PARKINSON. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Miss Austin's story is bright, clever, and well
    developed."--_Saturday Review._

    "A powerfully written and realistic story of girl life.... The
    tone of the book is pure and good."--_Practical Teacher._

Hugh Herbert's Inheritance. By CAROLINE AUSTIN. With 6 page
Illustrations by C. T. GARLAND. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Will please by its simplicity, its tenderness, and its healthy
    interesting motive. It is admirably written."--_Scotsman._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Storied Holidays: A Cycle of Red-letter Days. By E. S. BROOKS. With 12
page Illustrations by HOWARD PYLE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._
6_d._

    "It is a downright good book for a senior boy, and is eminently
    readable from first to last."--_Schoolmaster._

Chivalric Days: Stories of Courtesy and Courage in the Olden Times. By
E. S. BROOKS. With 20 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE and other
Artists. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "We have seldom come across a prettier collection of tales. These
    charming stories of boys and girls of olden days are no mere
    fictitious or imaginary sketches, but are real and actual records
    of their sayings and doings."--_Literary World._

Historic Boys: Their Endeavours, their Achievements, and their Times.
By E. S. BROOKS. With 12 page Illustrations by R. B. BIRCH and JOHN
SCHOeNBERG. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "A wholesome book, manly in tone, its character sketches enlivened
    by brisk dialogue and high-class illustrations; altogether one
    that should incite boys to further acquaintance with those rulers
    of men whose careers are narrated. We advise teachers to put it on
    their list of prizes."--_Knowledge._

Dr. Jolliffe's Boys: A Tale of Weston School. By LEWIS HOUGH. With 6
page Pictures. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Young people who appreciate _Tom Brown's School-days_ will
    find this story a worthy companion to that fascinating book. There
    is the same manliness of tone, truthfulness of outline, avoidance
    of exaggeration and caricature, and healthy morality as
    characterized the masterpiece of Mr. Hughes."--_Newcastle
    Journal._

                 *       *       *       *       *

The Bubbling Teapot. A Wonder Story. By Mrs. L. W. CHAMPNEY. With 12
page Pictures by WALTER SATTERLEE. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Very literally a 'wonder story,' and a wild and fanciful one.
    Nevertheless it is made realistic enough, and there is a good deal
    of information to be gained from it. The steam from the magic
    teapot bubbles up into a girl, and the little girl, when the fancy
    takes her, can cry herself back into a teapot. Transformed and
    enchanted she makes the tour of the globe."--_The Times._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY JENNETT HUMPHREYS.


Laugh and Learn: The Easiest Book of Nursery Lessons and Nursery
Games. By JENNETT HUMPHREYS. Profusely Illustrated. Square 8vo, cloth
extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "_Laugh and Learn_ instructs and amuses; it is the very book
    for a wet day in the nursery, for besides solid instruction,
    admirably given, it contains numberless games and contrivances,
    with useful and amusing illustrations. The musical drill is
    remarkably good."--_Athenaeum._

    "One of the best books of the kind imaginable, full of practical
    teaching in word and picture, and helping the little ones
    pleasantly along a right royal road to learning."--_Graphic._

    "Every mother of children should have _Laugh and Learn_, and
    go through with them the excellent course it
    contains."--_Journal of Education._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BY MARY C. ROWSELL.


Thorndyke Manor: A Tale of Jacobite Times. By MARY C. ROWSELL. With 6
page Illustrations by L. LESLIE BROOKE. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
3_s._ 6_d._

    "It is a good story, with plenty of 'go' in it."--_Times._

    "Miss Rowsell has never written a more attractive book than
    _Thorndyke Manor_."--_Belfast News-Letter._

Traitor Or Patriot? A Tale of the Rye-House Plot. By MARY C. ROWSELL.
With 6 page Pictures by C. O. MURRAY and C. J. STANILAND, R.I. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Here the Rye-House Plot serves as the groundwork for a romantic
    love episode, whose true characters are lifelike beings, not dry
    sticks as in many historical tales."--_Graphic._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Dora: Or, A Girl without a Home. By Mrs. R. H. READ. With 6 page
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "It is no slight thing, in an age of rubbish, to get a story so
    pure and healthy as this."--_The Academy._

                 *       *       *       *       *

Life's Daily Ministry: A Story of Everyday Service for Others. By Mrs.
E. R. PITMAN. With 4 page Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._
6_d._

    "Shows exquisite touches of a master hand. She depicts in graphic
    outline the characteristics of the beautiful and the good in
    life."--_Christian Union._

My Governess Life: Or, Earning my Living. By Mrs. E. R. PITMAN. With 4
page Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._

    "Full of sound teaching and bright examples of character."--_S.S.
    Chronicle._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BLACKIE'S NEW THREE-SHILLING SERIES.

Beautifully Illustrated and Handsomely Bound.

_NEW VOLUMES._


Menhardoc: A Story of Cornish Nets and Mines. By G. MANVILLE FENN.
With 6 page Illustrations by C. J. STANILAND, R.I. _New Edition._
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._

    "They are real living boys, with their virtues and faults. The
    Cornish fishermen are drawn from life, they are racy of the soil,
    salt with the sea-water, and they stand out from the pages in
    their jerseys and sea-boots all sprinkled with silvery pilchard
    scales."--_Spectator._

Yussuf the Guide: Or, The Mountain Bandits. A Story of Strange
Adventure in Asia Minor. By G. MANVILLE FENN. With 6 page
Illustrations by J. SCHOeNBERG. _New Edition._ Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
3_s._

    "This story is told with such real freshness and vigour that the
    reader feels he is actually one of the party, sharing in the fun
    and facing the dangers with them."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

Robinson Crusoe. With 100 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. _New
Edition._ Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._

    "One of the best issues, if not absolutely the best, of Defoe's
    work which has ever appeared."--_The Standard._

Gulliver's Travels. With 100 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE. _New
Edition._ Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._

    "Mr. Gordon Browne is, to my thinking, incomparably the most
    artistic, spirited, and brilliant of our illustrators of books for
    boys, and one of the most humorous also, as his illustrations of
    'Gulliver' amply testify."--_Truth._

Patience Wins: or, War in the Works. By GEORGE MANVILLE FENN. With 6
page Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._

    "Mr. Fenn has never hit upon a happier plan than in writing this
    story of Yorkshire factory life. The whole book is all aglow with
    life, the scenes varying continually with kaleidoscopic
    rapidity."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

Mother Carey's Chicken: Her Voyage to the Unknown Isle. By G. MANVILLE
FENN. With 6 page Illustrations by A. FORESTIER. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 3_s._

    "Undoubtedly one of the best Mr. Fenn has written. The incidents
    are of thrilling interest, while the characters are drawn with a
    care and completeness rarely found in a boys' book. The
    illustrations are exceptionally good."--_Literary World._

The Missing Merchantman. By HARRY COLLINGWOOD. With 6 page
Illustrations by W. H. OVEREND. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3_s._

    "One of the author's best sea stories. The hero is as heroic as
    any boy could desire, and the ending is extremely
    happy."--_British Weekly._

The Rover's Secret: A Tale of the Pirate Cays and Lagoons of Cuba. By
HARRY COLLINGWOOD. With 6 page Illustrations by W. C. SYMONS. Crown
8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._

    "_The Rover's Secret_ is by far the best sea story we have
    read for years, and is certain to give unalloyed pleasure to boys.
    The illustrations are fresh and vigorous."--_Saturday
    Review._

The Wigwam and the War-path: Stories of the Red Indians. By ASCOTT R.
HOPE. With 6 page Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant, 3_s._

    "Is notably good. It gives a very vivid picture of life among the
    Indians, which will delight the heart of many a
    schoolboy."--_Spectator._

Perseverance Island: or, The Robinson Crusoe of the 19th Century. By
DOUGLAS FRAZAR. With 6 page Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
3_s._

    "This is an interesting story, written with studied simplicity of
    style, much in Defoe's vein of apparent sincerity and scrupulous
    veracity; while for practical instruction it is even better than
    _Robinson Crusoe_."--_Illustrated London News._

Girl Neighbours: or, The Old Fashion and the New. By SARAH TYTLER.
With 6 page Illustrations by C. T. GARLAND. Crown 8vo, cloth elegant,
3_s._

    "One of the most effective and quietly humorous of Miss Sarah
    Tytler's stories. _Girl Neighbours_ is very healthy, very
    agreeable, and very well written."--_The Spectator._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BLACKIE'S HALF-CROWN SERIES.

Illustrated by eminent Artists. In crown 8vo, cloth elegant.


Nicola: The Career of a Girl Musician. By M. CORBET-SEYMOUR.
Illustrated by GERTRUDE D. HAMMOND.

    This is an interesting study of a girl's character who has
    ambitions, and a rare gift for music. Nicola is also self-willed,
    and selfishly sets aside all claims, both of family and friends,
    in her desire to become famous. Ultimately she learns, after
    bitter experience, that even the lowly duties of life bring their
    own exceeding pleasure.

A Little Handful. By HARRIET J. SCRIPPS. Illustrated by L. LESLIE
BROOKE.

    In this story you have the amusing escapades of an American boy at
    an English watering-place. No doubt Willie is "a little handful"
    to his friends, but notwithstanding all his freaks, he is a
    clever, entertaining, intelligent youngster, who wins our love
    without an effort.

A Golden Age: A Story of Four Merry Children. By ISMAY THORN.
Illustrated by GORDON BROWNE. _New Edition._

    The four children whose everyday experiences are here given are
    singularly happy in their choice of pastimes. Their adventures
    have all the virtues of the ordinary and the probable, and to
    these they add the merit of being set forth in a delightful style.

A Rough Road: or, How the Boy Made a Man of Himself. By Mrs. G.
LINNAEUS BANKS. Illustrated by ALFRED PEARSE.

    "Mrs. Linnaeus Banks has not written a better book than _A Rough
    Road_."--_Spectator._

    "Told with much simple force and that charm which belongs to one
    who has known herself what a rough road is, and how to traverse
    it."--_Winter's Weekly._

The Two Dorothys: A Tale for Girls. By Mrs. HERBERT MARTIN.
Illustrated by GORDON BROWNE.

    "A book that will not only interest and please all girls, but will
    also, from its pure but unostentatious teaching, stimulate and
    encourage to better and higher things, youthful hopes, dreams, and
    ambitions."--_The Lady._

Penelope and the Others: A Story of Five Country Children. By AMY
WALTON. Illustrated by L. LESLIE BROOKE.

    "This is a charming book for children. Miss Walton proves herself
    a perfect adept in understanding of school-room joys and sorrows,
    and her name ought to become a household word amongst our boys and
    girls."--_Christian Leader._

A Cruise in Cloudland. By HENRY FRITH.

    "A thoroughly interesting story, especially the part dealing with
    the siege of Plevna. There is an excellent sketch of General
    Skobeloff."--_St. James's Gazette._

Marian and Dorothy. By ANNIE E. ARMSTRONG.

    "This is distinctively a book for girls. It contains a bright
    wholesome story, with the useful morals of industry and
    forgiveness of injuries. The book is decidedly to be
    commended."--_Academy._

Stimson's Reef: A Tale of Adventure. By C. J. HYNE.

    "Few stories come within hailing distance of _Stimson's Reef_
    in the matter of startling incidents and hairbreadth 'scapes.' In
    these respects it may almost vie with Mr. R. L. Stevenson's
    matchless _Treasure Island_."--_Guardian._

Gladys Anstruther. By LOUISA THOMPSON.

    "It is a clever book, and some of the passages in the narrative
    are novel and striking in the highest
    degree."--_Schoolmistress._

The Secret of the Old House. By EVELYN EVERETT-GREEN.

    "Tim, the little Jacobite who asks his grandmother if she can
    remember Charles I., is a charming creation. So original a child
    as Tim must win the hearts of all who read the pleasant
    tale."--_Academy._

Hal Hungerford. By J. R. HUTCHINSON, B.A.

    "There is no question whatever as to the spirited manner in which
    the story is told; the death of the mate of the smuggler by the
    teeth of the dog is especially effective. Altogether, Hal
    Hungerford is a distinct literary success."--_Spectator._

The Golden Weathercock. By JULIA GODDARD.

    "A cleverly conceived quaint story, in which the golden cock on
    the church spire is the recipient of enchanting stories of
    enchanted people and places. Full of pretty and ingenious ideas,
    prettily and ingeniously written."--_Saturday Review._

White Lilac: Or, The Queen of the May. By AMY WALTON.

    "Every here and there we are reminded of Mrs. Tulliver and Sister
    Pullet in the quaint dialogue of the story.... Every rural parish
    ought to add _White Lilac_ to its library."--_Academy._

Miriam's Ambition. By EVELYN EVERETT-GREEN.

    "Miss Green's children are real British boys and girls, not small
    men and women. Babs is a charming little one."--_Liverpool
    Mercury._

The Brig "Audacious." By ALAN COLE.

    "Bright and vivacious in style, and fresh and wholesome as a
    breath of sea air in tone."--_Court Journal._

The Saucy May. By HENRY FRITH.

    "Mr. Frith gives a new picture of life on the ocean wave which
    will be acceptable to all young people."--_Sheffield
    Independent._

Jasper's Conquest. By ELIZABETH J. LYSAGHT.

    "One of the best boys' books of the season. It is full of stirring
    adventure and startling episodes, and yet conveys a splendid moral
    throughout."--_Schoolmaster._

Little Lady Clare. By EVELYN EVERETT-GREEN.

    "Certainly one of the prettiest, reminding us in its quaintness
    and tender pathos of Mrs. Ewing's delightful tales. This is quite
    one of the best stories Miss Green's clever pen has yet given
    us."--_Literary World._

The Eversley Secrets. By EVELYN EVERETT-GREEN.

    "A clever and well-told story. Roy Eversley is a very touching
    picture of high principle and unshrinking self-devotion in a good
    purpose."--_Guardian._

The Hermit Hunter of the Wilds. By G. STABLES, R.N.

    "Pirates and pumas, mutiny and merriment, a castaway and a cat,
    furnish the materials for a tale that will gladden the heart of
    many a bright boy."--_Methodist Recorder._

Sturdy and Strong. By G. A. HENTY.

    "The history of a hero of everyday life, whose love of truth,
    clothing of modesty, and innate pluck carry him, naturally, from
    poverty to affluence. He stands as a good instance of chivalry in
    domestic life."--_The Empire._

Gutta Percha Willie, The Working Genius. By GEORGE MACDONALD.

    "Had we space we would fain quote page after page. All we have
    room to say is, get it for your boys and girls to read for
    themselves."--_Practical Teacher._

The War of the Axe: Or, Adventures in South Africa. By J.
PERCY-GROVES.

    "The story of their final escape from the Caffres is a marvellous
    bit of writing.... The story is well and brilliantly
    told."--_Literary World._

The Lads of Little Clayton. By R. STEAD.

    "A capital book for boys. They will learn from its pages what true
    boy courage is. They will learn further to avoid all that is petty
    and mean if they read the tales aright. They may be read to a
    class with great profit."--_Schoolmaster._

Ten Boys who lived on the Road from Long Ago to Now. By JANE ANDREWS.
With 20 Illustrations.

    "The idea of this book is a very happy one, and is admirably
    carried out. We have followed the whole course of the work with
    exquisite pleasure. Teachers should find it particularly
    interesting and suggestive."--_Practical Teacher._

A Waif of the Sea: Or, The Lost Found. By KATE WOOD.

    "Written with tenderness and grace, the story will appeal to
    mothers who have felt the pain of being parted from their
    children, as powerfully as to the hearts and sympathies of younger
    readers."--_Morning Advertiser._

Winnie's Secret: A Story of Faith and Patience. By KATE WOOD.

    "One of the best story-books we have read. Girls will be charmed
    with the tale, and delighted that everything turns out so
    well."--_Schoolmaster._

Miss Willowburn's Offer. By SARAH DOUDNEY.

    "Patience Willowburn is one of Miss Doudney's best creations, and
    is the one personality in the story which can be said to give it
    the character of a book not for young ladies but for
    girls."--_Spectator._

A Garland for Girls. By LOUISA M. ALCOTT.

    "The _Garland_ will delight our girls, and show them how to
    make their lives fragrant with good deeds."--_British
    Weekly._

    "These little tales are the beau ideal of girls'
    stories."--_Christian World._

Hetty Gray: Or, Nobody's Bairn. By ROSA MULHOLLAND.

    "A charming story for young folks. Hetty is a delightful
    creature--piquant, tender, and true--and her varying fortunes are
    perfectly realistic."--_World._

Brothers in Arms: A Story of the Crusades. By F. BAYFORD HARRISON.

    "Full of striking incident, is very fairly illustrated, and may
    safely be chosen as sure to prove interesting to young people of
    both sexes."--_Guardian._

The Ball of Fortune: Or, Ned Somerset's Inheritance. By CHARLES
PEARCE.

    "A capital story for boys. It is simply and brightly written.
    There is plenty of incident, and the interest is sustained
    throughout."--_Journal of Education._

Miss Fenwick's Failures: Or, "Peggy Pepper-Pot." By ESME STUART.

    "Esme Stuart may be commended for producing a girl true to real
    life, who will put no nonsense into young heads."--_Graphic._

Gytha's Message: A Tale of Saxon England. By EMMA LESLIE.

    "This is a charmingly told story. It is the sort of book that all
    girls and some boys like, and can only get good from."--_Journal
    of Education._

Jack o' Lanthorn: A Tale of Adventure. By HENRY FRITH.

    "The narrative is crushed full of stirring incident, and is sure
    to be a prime favourite with our boys, who will be assisted by it
    in mastering a sufficiently exciting chapter in the history of
    England."--_Christian Leader._

The Family Failing. By Darley Dale.

    "At once an amusing and an interesting story, and a capital lesson
    on the value of contentedness to young and old
    alike."--_Aberdeen Journal._

My Mistress the Queen: A Tale of the 17th Century. By M. A. PAULL.

    "The style is pure and graceful, the presentation of manners and
    character has been well studied, and the story is full of
    interest."--_Scotsman._

The Stories of Wasa and Menzikoff: The Deliverer of Sweden, and the
Favourite of Czar Peter.

    "Both are stories worth telling more than once, and it is a happy
    thought to have put them side by side."--_Spectator._

Stories of the Sea in Former Days.

    "Next to an original sea-tale of sustained interest come
    well-sketched collections of maritime peril and suffering which
    awaken the sympathies by the realism of fact. Stories of the Sea
    are a very good specimen of the kind."--_The Times._

Tales of Captivity and Exile.

    "It would be difficult to place in the hands of young people a
    book which combines interest and instruction in a higher
    degree."--_Manchester Courier._

Famous Discoveries by Sea and Land.

    "Such a volume may providentially stir up some youths by the
    divine fire kindled by these 'great of old' to lay open other
    lands."--_Perth Advertiser._

Stirring Events of History.

    "The volume will fairly hold its place among those which make the
    smaller ways of history pleasant and
    attractive."--_Guardian._

Adventures in Field, Flood, and Forest.

    "The editor has beyond all question succeeded admirably. The
    present book cannot fail to be read with interest and
    advantage."--_Academy._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BLACKIE'S TWO-SHILLING SERIES.

Illustrated by eminent Artists. In crown 8vo, cloth elegant.

_NEW VOLUMES._


Queen of the Daffodils: A Story of High School Life. By LESLIE LAING.
Illustrated by W. PARKINSON.

Raff's Ranche: A Story of Adventure among Cowboys and Indians. By F.
M. HOLMES. Illustrated by PAUL HARDY.

An Unexpected Hero. By ELIZ. J. LYSAGHT.

    "Among the very best of the series is, _An Unexpected Hero_.
    There is abundance of pleasant incident and skilful character
    delineation."--_Freeman's Jour._

The Bushranger's Secret. By Mrs. HENRY CLARKE, M.A.

    "One of the best stories we have had of the Australian bush, with
    a good plot, an action always good, and rising into dramatic
    intensity at times."--_Spectator._

The White Squall. By JOHN C. HUTCHESON.

    "This is a capital story. The descriptions of scenery and places,
    and especially of the changes of calm and tempest, are lifelike
    and vivid."--_Standard._

The Wreck Of the "Nancy Bell." By J. C. HUTCHESON.

    "The narrative is full of excitement and interest; it cannot fail
    to develop resource, and encourage independence and manliness of
    character."--_Academy._

The Lonely Pyramid. By J. H. YOXALL.

    "It is full of wild surprises and marvels. The Pyramid alone is a
    fascinating invention, and the 'lost oasis of the vision on the
    sand' is even more delightful."--_Saturday Review._

Bab: or, The Triumph of Unselfishness. By ISMAY THORN.

    "_Bab_ is a capital story for children, who will be much
    amused by the picture on the cover of the worthy doll
    Jocasta."--_Athenaeum._

Climbing the Hill, and other Stories. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

    "Miss Annie Swan's children _are_ children, and not old
    people masquerading in children's attire. This volume of tales is
    made up of just the kind of incidents of which children love to
    read."--_Christian Leader._

Brave and True, and other Stories. By GREGSON GOW.

    "This is one of those very few volumes which are adapted for
    reading aloud to children in the nursery."--_Spectator._

The Light Princess. By GEORGE MACDONALD.

    "Graceful, fantastic, delicately didactic in its playfulness, this
    volume is likely to give as much pleasure to the elder folk as to
    the younger."--_Daily News._

Nutbrown Roger and I. By J. H. YOXALL.

    "The pictures of manners is perfect, the excitement, of the
    healthiest kind, goes on increasing to the last. It is one of the
    very best and most delightful story-books of the
    season."--_Tablet._

Warner's Chase: Or, The Gentle Heart. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

    "In Milly Warren, the heroine, who softens the hard heart of her
    rich uncle, and thus unwittingly restores the family fortunes, we
    have a fine ideal of real womanly goodness."--_Schoolmaster._

Sam Silvan's Sacrifice. By JESSE COLMAN.

    "There is a spirit of gentleness, kindliness, and tenderness
    manifest in every page of this volume, which will make it an
    influence for good."--_Christian Union._

Insect Ways on Summer Days in Garden, Forest, Field, and Stream. By
JENNETT HUMPHREYS. With 70 Illustrations.

    "This book will prove not only instructive but delightful to every
    child whose mind is beginning to inquire and reflect upon the
    wonders of nature. It is capitally illustrated and very tastefully
    bound."--_Academy._

Susan. By AMY WALTON.

    "A clever little story, written with some humour. The authoress
    shows a great deal of insight into children's feelings and
    motives."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

A Pair of Clogs. By AMY WALTON.

    "Decidedly interesting, and unusually true to nature. For children
    between nine and fourteen this book can be thoroughly
    commended."--_Academy._

The Hawthorns. By AMY WALTON.

    "A remarkably vivid and clever study of child-life. At this
    species of work Amy Walton has no superior."--_Christian
    Leader._

Dorothy's Dilemma. By CAROLINE AUSTIN.

    "An exceptionally well-told story, and will be warmly welcomed by
    children. The little heroine, Dorothy, is a charming
    creation."--_Court Journal._

Marie's Home. By CAROLINE AUSTIN.

    "An exquisitely told story. The heroine is as fine a type of
    girlhood as one could wish to set before our little British
    damsels of to-day."--_Christian Leader._

A Warrior King. By J. EVELYN.

    "The friendship formed between the African Prince and Adrian
    Englefield will remind the reader of the old story of the
    'wonderful love' which existed long ago when Jonathan and David
    made a covenant."--_Dundee Advertiser._

Aboard the "Atalanta." By HENRY FRITH.

    "The story is very interesting and the descriptions most graphic.
    We doubt if any boy after reading it would be tempted to the great
    mistake of running away from school under almost any pretext
    whatever."--_Practical Teacher._

The Penang Pirate. By JOHN C. HUTCHESON.

    "A book which boys will thoroughly enjoy: rattling, adventurous,
    and romantic, and the stories are thoroughly healthy in
    tone."--_Aberdeen Journal._

Teddy: The Story of a "Little Pickle." By JOHN C. HUTCHESON.

    "He is an amusing little fellow with a rich fund of animal
    spirits, and when at length he goes to sea with Uncle Jack he
    speedily sobers down under the discipline of life."--_Saturday
    Review._

A Rash Promise. By CECILIA SELBY LOWNDES.

    "A carefully told story; and Meg Clifford is a delightful and
    natural little girl."--_Spectator._

Linda and the Boys. By CECILIA SELBY LOWNDES.

    "The book is essentially a child's book, and will be heartily
    appreciated by the young folk."--_The Academy._

Swiss Stories for Children. From the German of MADAM JOHANNA SPYRI. By
LUCY WHEELOCK.

    "Charming stories. They are rich in local colouring, and, what is
    better, in genuine pathos."--_The Times._

The Squire's Grandson: A Devonshire Story. By J. M. CALLWELL.

    "The lessons of courage, filial affection, and devotion to duty on
    the part of the young hero cannot fail to favourably impress all
    young readers."--_Schoolmaster._

Magna Charta Stories. Edited by ARTHUR GILMAN, A.M.

    "A book of special excellence, which ought to be in the hands of
    all boys."--_Educational News._

The Wing's of Courage; AND THE CLOUD-SPINNER. Translated from the
French of GEORGE SAND, by Mrs. CORKRAN.

    "Mrs. Corkran has earned our gratitude by translating into
    readable English these two charming little
    stories."--_Athenaeum._

Chirp and Chatter: Or, LESSONS FROM FIELD AND TREE. By ALICE BANKS.
With 54 Illustrations by GORDON BROWNE.

    "We see the humbling influence of love on the haughty
    harvest-mouse, we are touched by the sensibility of the
    tender-hearted ant, and may profit by the moral of 'the
    disobedient maggot.' The drawings are spirited and funny."--_The
    Times._

Four Little Mischiefs. By ROSA MULHOLLAND.

    "Graphically written, and abounds in touches of genuine humour and
    innocent fun."--_Freeman._ "A charming bright story about
    real children."--_Watchman._

New Light through Old Windows. By GREGSON GOW.

    "The most delightfully-written little stories one can easily find
    in the literature of the season. Well constructed and brightly
    told."--_Glasgow Herald._

Little Tottie, and Two Other Stories. By THOMAS ARCHER.

    "We can warmly commend all three stories; the book is a most
    alluring prize for the younger ones."--_Schoolmaster._

Naughty Miss Bunny. By CLARA MULHOLLAND.

    "This naughty child is positively delightful. Papas should not
    omit _Naughty Miss Bunny_ from their list of juvenile
    presents."--_Land and Water._

Adventures of Mrs. Wishing-to-be. By ALICE CORKRAN.

    "Simply a charming book for little girls."--_Saturday
    Review._

    "Just in the style and spirit to win the hearts of
    children."--_Daily News._

The Joyous Story Of Toto. By LAURA E. RICHARDS.

    "A very delightful book for children, which deserves to find a
    place in every nursery."--_Lady's Pictorial._

Our Dolly: Her Words and Ways. By MRS. R. H. READ. 2_s._

Fairy Fancy: What she Heard and Saw. By MRS. READ. 2_s._

                 *       *       *       *       *

BLACKIE'S EIGHTEENPENNY SERIES.

With Illustrations. In crown 8vo, cloth elegant.

_NEW VOLUMES._


A Soldier's Son: The Story of a Boy who Succeeded. By ANNETTE LYSTER.

Mischief and Merry-making. By ISABELLA PEARSON.

Town Mice in the Country: A Story of Holiday Adventure. By M. E.
FRANCIS.

Phil and his Father. By ISMAY THORN.

Prim's Story. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

Littlebourne Lock. By F. BAYFORD HARRISON.

Wild Meg and Wee Dickie. By MARY E. ROPES.

Grannie. By ELIZABETH J. LYSAGHT.

The Seed She Sowed. By EMMA LESLIE.

Unlucky: A Fragment of a Girl's Life. By CAROLINE AUSTIN.

Everybody's Business: or a Friend in Need. By ISMAY THORN.

Tales of Daring and Danger. By G. A. HENTY.

The Seven Golden Keys. By JAMES E. ARNOLD.

The Story of a Queen. By MARY C. ROWSELL.

Edwy: Or, Was he a Coward? By ANNETTE LYSTER.

The Battlefield Treasure. By F. BAYFORD HARRISON.

Joan's Adventures at the North Pole. By ALICE CORKRAN.

Filled with Gold. By J. PERRETT.

Our General: A Story for Girls. By ELIZABETH J. LYSAGHT.

Aunt Hesba's Charge. By ELIZABETH J. LYSAGHT.

By Order of Queen Maude: A Story of Home Life. By LOUISA CROW.

The Late Miss Hollingford. By ROSA MULHOLLAND.

Our Frank. By AMY WALTON.

A Terrible Coward. By G. MANVILLE FENN.

Yarns on the Beach. By G. A. HENTY.

Tom Finch's Monkey. By J. C. HUTCHESON.

Miss Grantley's Girls, and the Stories she told them. By THOS. ARCHER.

The Pedlar and his Dog. By MARY C. ROWSELL.

Down and Up Again. By GREGSON GOW.

Madge's Mistake. By ANNIE E. ARMSTRONG.

The Troubles and Triumphs of Little Tim. By GREGSON GOW.

The Happy Lad. A Story of Peasant Life in Norway. By B. BJOeRNSON.

Into the Haven. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

A Box of Stories. Packed for Young Folk by HORACE HAPPYMAN.

The Patriot Martyr: Narratives of Female Heroism.

                 *       *       *       *       *

THE SHILLING SERIES OF JUVENILES.

Square 16mo, Illustrated, and neatly bound in cloth extra.

_NEW VOLUMES._


Brave Dorette. By JULIA GODDARD.

Piecrust Promises. By W. L. ROOPER.

Summer Fun and Frolic. By ISABELLA PEARSON.

Little Aunt Dorothy. By JENNIE CHAPPELL.

The Lost Dog, and other Stories. By ASCOTT R. HOPE.

The Rambles of Three Children. By GERALDINE MOCKLER.

A Council of Courtiers. By CORA LANGTON.

A Parliament of Pickles. By CORA LANGTON.

Sharp Tommy. By E. J. LYSAGHT.

Adventures of Nell, Eddie, and Toby. By GERALDINE MOCKLER.

Freda's Folly. By M. S. HAYCRAFT.

Philip Danford: A Story of School Life. By JULIA GODDARD.

The Youngest Princess. By JENNIE CHAPPELL.

Arthur's Temptation. By EMMA LESLIE.

A Change for the Worse. By M. HARRIET M. CAPES.

Our Two Starlings. By C. REDFORD.

Mr. Lipscombe's Apples. By JULIA GODDARD.

Gladys. By E. O'BYRNE.

A Gypsy against Her Will. By EMMA LESLIE.

The Castle on the Shore. By ISABEL HORNIBROOK.

An Emigrant Boy's Story. By ASCOTT R. HOPE.

Jock and his Friend. By CORA LANGTON.

John a'Dale. By MARY C. ROWSELL.

In the Summer Holidays. By JENNETT HUMPHREYS.

How the Strike Began. By EMMA LESLIE.

Tales from the Russian of Madame Kubalensky. By G. JENNER.

Cinderella's Cousin. By PENELOPE.

Their New Home. By A. S. FENN.

Janie's Holiday. By C. REDFORD.

A Boy Musician: or, The Young Days of Mozart.

Hatto's Tower. By M. C. ROWSELL.

Fairy Lovebairn's Favourites.

Alf Jetsam. By Mrs. GEO. CUPPLES.

The Redfords. By Mrs. G. CUPPLES.

Missy. By F. BAYFORD HARRISON.

Hidden Seed. By EMMA LESLIE.

Ursula's Aunt. By ANNIE S. FENN.

Jack's Two Sovereigns. By ANNIE S. FENN.

A Little Adventurer. By G. GOW.

Olive Mount. By ANNIE S. FENN.

Three Little Ones. By C. LANGTON.

Tom Watkin's Mistake. By EMMA LESLIE.

Two Little Brothers. By M. HARRIET M. CAPES.

The New Boy at Merriton. By JULIA GODDARD.

The Children of Haycombe. By ANNIE S. FENN.

The Cruise of the "Petrel." By F. M. HOLMES.

The Wise Princess. By M. HARRIET M. CAPES.

The Blind Boy of Dresden and his Sister.

Jon of Iceland.

Stories from Shakespeare.

Every Man in his Place.

Fireside Fairies and Flower Fancies.

To the Sea in Ships.

Jack's Victory: Stories about Dogs.

The Story of a King.

Prince Alexis: or, Old Russia.

Little Daniel: A Story of the Rhine.

Sasha the Serf: Stories of Russia.

True Stories of Foreign History.

                 *       *       *       *       *

THE NINEPENNY SERIES OF BOOKS FOR CHILDREN.

F'cap 8vo, Illustrated, and neatly bound in cloth extra.

_NEW VOLUMES._


A Little English Gentleman. By JANE DEAKIN.

The Doctor's Lass. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

Spark and I. A Story told by a Cat. By ANNIE ARMSTRONG.

What Hilda Saw. By PENELOPE LESLIE.

Little Miss Masterful. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

A Sprig of Honeysuckle: A Story of Epping Forest. By GEORGINA M.
SQUIRE.

An Australian Childhood. By ELLEN CAMPBELL.

Kitty Carroll. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

A Joke for a Picnic. By W. L. ROOPER.

Cross Purposes, and The Shadows. By GEORGE MACDONALD.

Patty's Ideas, and What Came of Them. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

Daphne: A Story of Self-conquest. By E. O'BYRNE.

Lily and Rose in One. By CECILIA S. LOWNDES.

Crowded Out: or, The Story of Lil's Patience. By M. B. MANWELL.

Tom in a Tangle. By T. SPARROW.

Things will Take a Turn. By BEATRICE HARRADEN.

Max or Baby. By ISMAY THORN.

The Lost Thimble. By Mrs. MUSGRAVE.

Jack-a-Dandy. By E. J. LYSAGHT.

A Day of Adventures. By CHARLOTTE WYATT.

The Golden Plums. By FRANCIS CLARE.

The Queen of Squats. By ISABEL HORNIBROOK.

Shucks. By EMMA LESLIE.

Sylvia Brooke. By M. HARRIET M. CAPES.

The Little Cousin. By A. S. FENN.

In Cloudland. By Mrs. MUSGRAVE.

Jack and the Gypsies. By KATE WOOD.

Hans the Painter. By MARY C. ROWSELL.

Little Troublesome. By ISABEL HORNIBROOK.

My Lady May: and One Other Story. By HARRIET BOULTWOOD.

A Little Hero. By Mrs. MUSGRAVE.

Prince Jon's Pilgrimage. By JESSIE FLEMING.

Harold's Ambition: or, A Dream of Fame. By JENNIE PERRETT.

Sepperl the Drummer Boy. By MARY C. ROWSELL.

Aboard the Mersey. By Mrs. GEORGE CUPPLES.

A Blind Pupil. By ANNIE S. FENN.

Lost and Found. By Mrs. CARL ROTHER.

Fisherman Grim. By MARY C. ROWSELL.

                 *       *       *       *       *

SOMETHING FOR THE VERY LITTLE ONES.

Fully Illustrated. 64 pp., cloth. Six-pence each.


Tales Easy and Small for the Youngest of All. By J. HUMPHREYS.

Old Dick Grey and Aunt Kate's Way. By J. HUMPHREYS.

Maud's Doll and Her Walk. By J. HUMPHREYS.

In Holiday Time. By J. HUMPHREYS.

Whisk and Buzz. By Mrs. A. H. GARLICK.

Little Tales for Little Folk.

    By Miss W. L. ROOPER. Well Illustrated; cloth cover;
    price 2_d._ each.

      FRED'S RUN.
      NORA'S DARK LOOK.
      ELLA'S FALL.
      PATTY'S WALK.
      HONEST DOLLY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

THE SIXPENNY SERIES FOR CHILDREN.

Neatly bound in cloth extra. Each contains 64 pages and an
Illustration.

_NEW VOLUMES._


Mrs. Holland's Peaches. By PENELOPE LESLIE.

Marjory's White Rat. By PENELOPE LESLIE.

Grandmother's Forget-me-nots. By AIMEE DAWSON.

From over the Sea. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

The Kitchen Cat. By AMY WALTON.

The Royal Eagle. By LOUISA THOMPSON.

Two Little Mice. By Mrs. GARLICK.

A Little Man of War. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

Lady Daisy. By CAROLINE STEWART.

Dew. By H. MARY WILSON.

Chris's Old Violin. By J. LOCKHART.

Mischievous Jack. By A. CORKRAN.

The Twins. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

Pet's Project. By CORA LANGTON.

The Chosen Treat. By C. WYATT.

Little Neighbours. By A. S. FENN.

Jim: A Story of Child Life. By CHRISTIAN BURKE.

Little Curiosity. By J. M. CALLWELL.

Sara the Wool-gatherer. By W. L. ROOPER.

Fairy Stories: told by PENELOPE.

A New Year's Tale. By M. A. CURRIE.

Little Mop. By Mrs. CHARLES BRAY.

The Tree Cake, and other Stories. By W. L. ROOPER.

Nurse Peggy, and Little Dog Trip.

Fanny's King. By DARLEY DALE.

Wild Marsh Marigolds. By D. DALE.

Kitty's Cousin. By HANNAH B. MACKENZIE.

Cleared at Last. By JULIA GODDARD.

Little Dolly Forbes. By ANNIE S. FENN.

A Year with Nellie. By A. S. FENN.

The Little Brown Bird.

The Maid of Domremy, and other Tales.

Little Eric: a Story of Honesty.

Uncle Ben the Whaler.

The Palace of Luxury.

The Charcoal Burner.

Willy Black: A Story of Doing Right.

The Horse and his Ways.

The Shoemaker's Present.

Lights to Walk by.

The Little Merchant.

Nicholina: A Story about an Iceberg.

                 *       *       *       *       *

A SERIES OF FOURPENNY REWARD BOOKS.

Each 64 pages, 18mo, Illustrated, in Picture Boards.


A Start in Life. By J. LOCKHART.

Happy Childhood. By AIMEE DE VENOIX DAWSON.

Dorothy's Clock. By Do.

Toddy. By L. E. TIDDEMAN.

Stories about my Dolls. By FELICIA MELANCTHON.

Stories about my Cat Timothy.

Delia's Boots. By W. L. ROOPER.

Lost on the Rocks. By R. SCOTTER.

A Kitten's Adventures. By CAROLINE STEWART.

Climbing the Hill. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

A Year at Coverley. By ANNIE S. SWAN.

Phil Foster. By J. LOCKHART.

Papa's Birthday. By W. L. ROOPER.

The Charm Fairy. By PENELOPE.

Little Tales for Little Children. By M. A. CURRIE.

Worthy of Trust. By H. B. MACKENZIE.

Brave and True. By GREGSON GOW.

Johnnie Tupper's Temptation. Do.

Maudie and Bertie.

The Children and the Water-Lily. By JULIA GODDARD.

Poor Tom Olliver. By Do.

Fritz's Experiment. By LETITIA M'LINTOCK.

Lucy's Christmas-Box.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  BLACKIE & SON, LIMITED,
  LONDON, GLASGOW, EDINBURGH, AND DUBLIN.






End of Project Gutenberg's Blackie & Sons Catalogue - 1891, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKIE & SONS CATALOGUE - 1891 ***

***** This file should be named 37460.txt or 37460.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/4/6/37460/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
