The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 88, July
5, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 88, July 5, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Geneologists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: September 27, 2011 [EBook #37548]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, VOL. IV ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





[Transcriber's note: Characters with macrons have been marked in
brackets with an equal sign, as [=e] for a letter e with a macron on
top. Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts. Original
spelling varieties have not been standardized. A list of volumes and
pages in "Notes and Queries" has been added at the end.]




NOTES and QUERIES: VOLUME FOURTH. JULY-DECEMBER 1851.




NOTES and QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--No. 88. SATURDAY, JULY 5. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition, 4_d._




CONTENTS.


                                                                Page

      Our Fourth Volume                                            1

      NOTES:--

      The Duke of Monmouth's Pocket-books, by Sir F. Madden        1

      Folk Lore:--Stanton Drew and its Tradition, by David
      Stevens                                                      3

      Minor Notes:--The Hon. Spencer Perceval--An
      Adventurer in 1632--Almanacs                                 4

      QUERIES:--

      Ghost Stories, by the Rev. Dr. Maitland                      5

      A Book of Enzinas, or Dryander, wanted, by Benjamin
      B. Wiffen                                                    5

      Salting the Bodies of the Dead, by W. B. MacCabe             6

      Minor Queries:--The Star in the East--Meaning of
      Sinage: Distord: Slander--Miss--Jacques Mabiotte--Registry
      of British Subjects abroad--Shawls--Figures
      of Saints--Conceyted Letters, who wrote?--Acta
      Sanctorum--Pope's "honest Factor"--Meaning
      of "Nervous"--Doomsday Book of Scotland                      6

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--Dr. Sacheverell--Princess
      Wilbrahama--Early Visitations                                8

      REPLIES:--

      Written Sermons, by J. Bruce, &c.                            8

      Lord Mayor not a Privy Councillor                            9

      Dr. Elrington's Edition of Ussher's Works, by the Rev.
      Dr. Todd                                                    10

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Mind your P's and Q's--Serius
      Seriadesque--Catharine Barton--Alterius Orbis Papa--Charles
      Dodd--"Prenzie"--"In Print"--Introduction of Reptiles into
      Ireland--Ancient Wood Engraving of the Picture of
      Cebes--"The Groves of Blarney"--Tennyson's Lord of
      Burleigh--Bicetre--On a Passage in Dryden--Derivation
      of Yankee--Ferrante Pallavicino                             11

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                      13

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                14

      Notices to Correspondents                                   14

      Advertisements                                              15




OUR FOURTH VOLUME.


We cannot permit the present Number, which commences the Fourth Volume
of "NOTES AND QUERIES," to come into the hands of our Readers without
some few words of acknowledgment and thanks to those Friends, Readers,
and Correspondents, whose kind encouragement and assistance have raised
our paper to its present high position;--

                  "and thanks to men
      Of noble mind, is honorable meed."

To those thanks we will add our promise, that no effort shall be wanting
to carry on this paper in the same spirit in which it was commenced, and
to add, if possible, to its utility and interest. And by way of setting
an example to our correspondents--

                              "every word to spare
      That wants of force, or light, or weight or care"--

we will, with these thanks and this promise, bid our friends fall to on
the Banquet of Pleasant Inventions spread out for them in the following
pages.




Notes.


THE DUKE OF MONMOUTH'S POCKET-BOOKS.

In "NOTES AND QUERIES" (Vol. i., p. 198.) is inserted from Chambers'
_Edinburgh Journal_ an account of a manuscript volume said to have been
found on the person of the Duke of Monmouth at the time of his arrest;
which was exhibited by Dr. Anster at a meeting of the Royal Irish
Academy, November 30, 1849, accompanied by some remarks, which appeared
in the _Proceedings_ of the Academy, vol. iv. p. 411., and which furnish
the substance of the article in Chambers above mentioned. In a
subsequent number of the "NOTES AND QUERIES" (Vol. i., p. 397.), the
authenticity of the volume is somewhat called in question by MR. C.
ROSS, on account of certain historical entries not appearing in it,
which are printed by Welwood in his _Memoirs_[1], and stated to have
been copied by him from "a little pocket-book" which was taken with
Monmouth, and afterwards delivered to the King. Dr. Anster replied to
this in the _Dublin University Magazine_ for June, 1850 (vol. xxxv. p.
673.), and showed by references to the _Harleian Miscellany_ (vol. vi.
p. 322., ed. 1810), and Sir John Reresby's _Memoirs_ (p. 121. 4to.,
1734), that more than one book was found on the Duke of Monmouth's
person when captured. In the former of these authorities, entitled _An
Account of the Manner of taking the late Duke of Monmouth: by his
Majesty's command_, printed in 1685, and perhaps compiled from
information given by the king himself, the following statement is
made:--

  "The papers and books that were found on him are since delivered
  to his Majesty. One of the books was a manuscript of spells,
  charms, and conjurations, songs, receipts, and prayers, _all
  written with the said late Duke's own hand_. Two others were
  manuscripts of fortification and the military art. And a fourth
  book, fairly written, wherein are computes of the yearly expense
  of his Majesty's navy and land forces."

  [Footnote 1: Query, what is the date of the _first_ edition of
  Welwood's work? The earliest in the Museum library is the _third_
  edition, printed in 1700.]

It is remarkable that the "pocket-book" mentioned by Welwood is not here
specified, but it is possible that the entries quoted by him may have
been written on the pages of one of the other books. Two of the above
only are noticed by Mr. Macaulay, namely, "a small treatise on
fortification," and "an album filled with songs, receipts, prayers, and
charms"; and there can be no reasonable doubt that the latter, which is
mentioned by the author of the tract in the _Harleian Miscellany_, as
well as by Reresby and Barillon, is the identical manuscript which forms
the subject of Dr. Anster's remarks.

Within a few weeks this singular volume has been added by purchase to
the National Collection of Manuscripts in the British Museum, previous
to which I ascertained, by a careful comparison of its pages with
several undoubted letters of the Duke of Monmouth (an advantage Dr.
Anster did not possess), that the whole of the volume (or nearly so) is
certainly in the Duke's handwriting. This evidence might of itself be
deemed sufficient; but some lines written on the fly-leaf of the volume
(which are passed over by Dr. Anster as of no moment) confirm the fact
beyond all cavil, since, on seeing them, I immediately recognised them
as the autograph of King James himself. They are as follows:

  "This book was found in the Duke of Monmouth's pocket when he was
  taken, and is most of his owne handwriting."

Although the contents of this volume have been already described in
general terms by Dr. Anster, yet it may not perhaps be uninteresting to
give a more detailed list of what is written in it:--

  1. Receipts "for the stone"; "to know the sum of numbers before
  they be writ doun"; "pour nettoyer l'ovrages de cuyvre argente;"
  "for to make Bouts and Choos [Boots and Shoes] hold out water;"
  and "to keep the goms well."--pp. 1-4. 8.

  2. Magical receipts and charms in French, written partly in an
  abbreviated form, accompanied by cabalistic figures. Two of these
  are to deliver a person out of prison, and are no doubt the same
  which Sir John Reresby refers to.--pp. 5. 7. 9. 11-17.

  3. "The forme of a bill of Excheng," drawn on David Nairne of
  London, from Antwerp, May 16, 1684, for 200_l._ sterling.--p. 6.

  4. Astrological rules in French for finding out anything required;
  together with a planetary wheel, dated 1680, to show life or death
  in case of illness, also happiness and adversity.--pp. 19-25.

  5. Directions "pour savoire si une person sera fidelle ou non,"
  &c. At the bottom is a cypher, in which _a_ stands for 10, _b_ for
  52, &c., p. 27. All this is entered again at pp. 45. 47.

  6. "The way from London to East Tilbery," dated December 1,
  1684.--p. 29.

  7. Prayers for the morning and evening, pp. 31-43.

  8. List of the Christian names of women and men.--pp. 44. 46. 48.

  9. Arithmetical table of the number 7, multiplied from 1 to
  37.--pp. 49. 51.

  10. Receipts "to take away a corne;" "a soveraign water of Dr.
  Stephens;" "to make the face fair;" "to make golden letters
  without gold;" "to kip iron from rusting;" "to write letters of
  secrets;" "to make hair grow;" "to make hair grow black, though of
  any colour;" and several more.--pp. 52-61.

  11. Casualties that happened in the reigns of the English
  sovereigns, from William I. to Queen Mary inclusive; consisting
  chiefly of remarkable accidents, and reputed prodigies.--pp.
  62-78.

  12. "Socrates, Platon, Aristote et Ciceron ont fait ces trente
  Comandemens pour leurs disciples."--pp. 78, 79.

  13. "A receipt for the Farcy."--p. 81.

  14. A poem intitled "The Twin Flame, _sent mee by M P_"--pp.
  83-91.

The words in Italics have been scribbled over with the pen for the
purpose of concealment. The verses commence:

      "Fantastick wanton god, what dost thou mean,
      To breake my rest, make mee grow pale and lean."

  15. Receipts for secret writing, to take impressions of prints
  upon glass, to boil plate, &c.--pp. 93-98.

  16. Several songs in English and French, pp. 99-107.

Among them are the verses printed in "NOTES AND QUERIES," Vol. i., p.
199., beginning "With joie we do leave thee," accompanied by the musical
notes; and also a song commencing "All ye gods that ar above," with the
musical notes. It is most probable that these songs are copied from
printed sources; but as they have been conjectured to be compositions by
Monmouth himself, the following short specimen may not be unacceptable,
copied _literatim_.

      "O how blest, and how inocent,
      and happy is a country life,
      free from tumult and discontent;
      heer is no flatterys nor strife,
      for t'was the first and happiest life,
      when first man did injoie him selfe.

      This is a better fate than kings,
      hence jentle peace and love doth flow,
      for fancy is the rate of things;
      I'am pleased, because I think it so,
      for a hart that is nobly true,
      all the world's arts can n'er subdue."

This poem immediately follows the one in which Toddington in
Bedfordshire (which the Duke spells, probably as then pronounced,
_Tedington_) is referred to.

  17. Prayers after the confession of sins, and the sense of pardon
  obtained.--pp. 108-125.

These prayers breathe a spirit of the most humble and ardent piety; and
if composed by the Duke himself, exhibit the weakness of his character
in a more favourable light than the remainder of the volume. One
paragraph is striking:--

  "Mercy, mercy, good Lord! I aske not of thee any longer the things
  of this world; neither power, nor honours, nor riches, nor
  pleasures. No, my God, dispose of them to whom thou pleasest, so
  that thou givest me mercy."

  18. "The Batteryes that can be made at Flushing to keep ships from
  coming in."--pp. 127, 128.

  19. "Traite de la guere ou Politique militaire."--pp. 130-132.

  20. "The Rode that is to be taken from Bruxels to Diren, the Pri.
  of Orange's house."--p. 133.

  21. "The Road from Bruxells to Sousdyck, the Prince of Orange his
  hous."--p. 134.

  22. "The way that I tooke from Diren, when I went for England,
  Nov. the 10. 84."--p. 135.

  23. "The way that I took when I came from England, December the
  10th. 84."--p. 137.

  24. "The way that I took the first day of Jan. n. st. [1684-5]
  from Bruxells to the Hague."--p. 139.

  25. Similar memoranda from 11th to 14th March, 1685, between
  Antwerp and Dort.--p. 141.

  26. The addresses of various persons in Holland, London, Paris,
  and elsewhere, to whom letters were to be written, 1685.--pp. 142.
  147-155.

  27. "The footway from Trogou to Amsterdam."--p. 143.

  28. An obscure memorandum, as follows:--"1683. Munday the 5th of
  November. H. W. had T.--The 9th of November, Poupe.--The 16th of
  November, Poupe."--p. 156.

  29. Value of duckatons, pistols, and gilders.--_Ib._

  30. Note of the route from London to Tedington.--p. 157.

Although this volume is not of the same historical value as the _Diary_
mentioned by Welwood, yet it is a curious and interesting relic of the
unfortunate man who possessed it, and whose want of education,
superstition, and frivolity are so prominently displayed in its pages.
As to its recent history, Dr. Anster states that it was purchased at a
book-stall in Paris, in 1827, by an Irish divinity student; the same,
probably, who has written his name at p. 90.: "John Barrette, Irish
College, Paris, Dec. 31, 1837."--The same person has made a memorandum
in pencil, at p. 1., which has subsequently been partially rubbed out,
and, as far as now legible, is as follows:--

  "This Book was found in ... of the English College in Paris, among
  other MSS. deposited there by James II."

An earlier hand has scribbled a list of the contents at the
commencement, with the signature "S. Rutter." If King James deposited
this volume in the College at Paris, in all probability the others found
on the person of the Duke of Monmouth accompanied it, and may one day or
other turn up as unexpectedly as the present book has done.

    F. MADDEN.

  British Museum, June 27.


FOLK LORE.

_Stanton Drew and its Tradition._--At the little village of Stanton
Drew, in the county of Somerset, east of the road between Bristol and
Wells, stands a well-known Druidical monument, which, in the opinion of
Dr. Stukeley, was more ancient than that at Abury. It consists
(according to a recent writer) of four groups of stones, forming (or,
rather, having formed when complete) two circles; and two other figures,
one an ellipse. Although the largest stones are much inferior in their
dimensions to those at Stonehenge and Abury, they are by no means
contemptible; some of them being nine feet in height and twenty-two feet
in girth. There is a curious tradition very prevalent amongst the
country people, respecting the origin of these remains, which they
designate the "Evil Wedding," for the following good and substantial
reasons:--Many hundred years ago (on a Saturday evening), a newly
married couple, with their relatives and friends, met on the spot now
covered by these ruins, to celebrate their nuptials. Here they feasted
and danced right merrily, until the clock tolled the hour of midnight,
when the piper (a pious man) refused to play any longer: this was much
against the wish of the guests, and so exasperated the bride (who was
fond of dancing), that she swore with an oath, she would not be baulked
in her enjoyment by a beggarly piper, but would find a substitute, if
she went to h-ll to fetch one. She had scarcely uttered the words, when
a venerable old man, with a long beard, made his appearance, and having
listened to their request, proffered his services, which were right
gladly accepted. The old gentleman (who was no other than the Arch-fiend
himself) having taken the seat vacated by the godly piper, commenced
playing a slow and solemn air, which on the guests remonstrating he
changed into one more lively and rapid. The company now began to dance,
but soon found themselves impelled round the performer so rapidly and
mysteriously, that they would all fain have rested. But when they
essayed to retire, they found, to their consternation, that they were
moving faster and faster round their diabolical musician, who had now
resumed his original shape. Their cries for mercy were unheeded, until
the first glimmering of day warned the fiend that he must depart. With
such rapidity had they moved, that the gay and sportive assembly were
now reduced to a ghastly troop of skeletons. "I leave you," said the
fiend, "a monument of my power and your wickedness to the end of time:"
which saying, he vanished. The villagers, on rising in the morning,
found the meadow strewn with large pieces of stone, and the pious piper
lying under a hedge, half dead with fright, he having been a witness to
the whole transaction.

    DAVID STEVENS.

  Godalming, May 10. 1851.


Minor Notes.

_The Hon. Spencer Perceval._--Being on a tour through the West of
England some years ago, I found myself one morning rapidly advancing up
the river Tamar, in the gig of "the Captain of the Ordinary" at
Plymouth. We were bound for the noble ruins of Trematon Castle, in the
area of which a good modern house has been erected, and in one of the
towers is arranged a very pleasing collection of antiquities.

As we proceeded up the river, the gallant captain related the following
anecdote in reference to the then proprietor of Trematon:--

  It is well known that in the afternoon of the 12th May, 1812, the
  Hon. Spencer Perceval, the then prime minister, fell by the hand
  of Bellingham in the lobby of the House of Commons; the cause
  assigned by the murderer being the neglect of, or refusal to
  discharge a supposed claim he had upon the government.

On the same night the gentleman above alluded to, and residing at
Trematon, had the tragic scene so minutely and painfully depicted in his
sleep, that he could not resist the desire of sending the particulars to
a friend in town, which he did by the _up mail_, which departed a few
hours after he had risen on the following morning.

He informed his friend that his topographical knowledge of London was
very meagre; and that as to the House of Commons (the old one), he had
seen only the exterior: he went on to state, that, dreaming he was in
town, he had a desire to hear the debates in Parliament, and for this
purpose enquired his way to the lobby of the House, the architectural
peculiarities of which he minutely described; he gave an exact
description of the few officials and others in the room, and especially
of a tall, thin man, who seemed to watch the opening of the door as any
one entered with wild and restless gaze: at length Mr. Perceval arrived,
whose person (although unknown to him) and dress he described, as also
the manner in which the horrid deed was done: he further communicated
the words uttered by the victim to the effect "the villain has
murdered--;" how the wounded man was treated, and the person of the
medical man who was on the instant called in.

These, with other particulars, which have escaped my memory, were thus
recorded, and the first newspaper he received confirmed the accuracy of
this extraordinary dream.

    M. W. B.

_An Adventurer in 1632._--I transcribe from a manuscript letter now
before me, dated "Tuesday, Whitsun-week, 1632," the following passage.
Can you or any of your correspondents give me (or tell me where I am
likely to find) any further information of the adventurer there named?

  "Heer is much Speach of the Brauery of a Porter yt hath taken a
  Braue House, and hath his Coach & 4 Horses. Ye Lord Mayor examined
  him how he gott yt Wealth: he answered nothing. Then ye Lords of
  ye Council gott out of him, that he being the Pope's Brother Borne
  in Essex, Goodman Linges Sonnes, was maintained by him, and
  tempted much to have come over to him: these 2 Brothers beings
  Ship Boyes to a French pirate, the porter gott meanes to come
  againe into England, but ye other being a Witty Boy was sould to a
  Coortier in Paris, who trauelling to Florence, thear bestowed his
  Boy of a Great Man, who when he dyed tooke such affection to this
  Boy, yt changeing his name to his owne left his estate to him: and
  so in time grew a Florentine, a Cardinall, & now Pope, ye greatest
  linguist for the Latine yt ever was."

    C. DE D.

  [Maffeo Barberini (Urban VIII.) was the Roman pontiff between 1623
  and 1644, and is said to have been born at Florence in 1568, of a
  noble family. He was a good classical scholar, and no mean Latin
  poet. One charge brought against him was his weak partiality
  towards his nephews, who abused his old age and credulity. It is
  probable some of our correspondents can throw some light on this
  mysterious document.]

_Almanacs._--A friend of mine, in taking down his old rectory house last
year, found under one of the floors a book almanac, of which the
following is the title given:

  "A Prognossicacion and an Almanac fastened together, declaring the
  Dispocission of the People, and also of the Wether, with certaine
  Electyons and Tymes chosen both for Phisicke and Surgerye, and for
  the Husbandman. And also for Hawekying, Huntying, Fyshing, and
  Foulyinge, according to the Science of Astronomy, made for the
  yeare of our Lord God M. D. L. calculed for the Merydyan of Yorke,
  and practiced by Anthony Askam."

At the end of the Almanac:

  "Imprynted at London, in Flete Strete, at the Signe of the
  George, next to Saynt Dunstone's Churche, by Wyllyam Powell, cum
  priuilegio ad imprimendum solum."

Then follows the "Prognossicacion," the title-page to which is as
follows:

  "A Prognossicacion for the yere of our Lord M.CCCCCL., calculed
  upon the Meridiane of the Towne of Anwarpe and the Country
  thereabout, by Master Peter of Moorbecke, Doctoure in Physicke of
  ye same Towne, whereunto is added the Judgment of M. Cornelius
  Schute, Doctor in Physicke of the Towne of Bruges in Flanders,
  upon and concerning the Disposicion, Estate, and Condicion of
  certaine Prynces, Contreys, and Regions for thys present yere,
  gathered oute of hys Prognostication for the same yere. Translated
  out of Dutch into Englyshe by William Harrys."

At the end--

  "Imprynted at London by John Daye, dwellynge over Aldersgate and
  Wylliam Seres, dwellyng in Peter Colledge. These Bokes are to be
  sold at the Newe Shop by the lytle Conduyte in Chepesyde."

The print is old English. Mr. Francis Moore and the Almanacs have
figured in your recent Numbers, and I have thought that a brief notice
of an almanac three hundred years old might not be unacceptable to your
"NOTES AND QUERIES" friends.

    D.

  Exeter, June 18. 1851.




Queries.


GHOST STORIES.

From some recent experiments of the Baron von Reichenbach, it seems
probable that wherever chemical action is going on light is evolved,
though it is only by persons possessing peculiar (though not very rare)
powers of sight, and by them only under peculiar circumstances, that it
can be seen. It occurred to him that such persons might perhaps see
light over graves in which dead bodies were undergoing decomposition. He
says:

  "The desire to inflict a mortal wound on the monster,
  superstition, which, from a similar origin, a few centuries ago,
  inflicted on European society so vast an amount of misery; and by
  whose influence, not hundreds, but thousands of innocent persons
  died in tortures on the rack and at the stake;--this desire made
  me wish to make the experiment, if possible, of bringing a highly
  sensitive person, by night, to a churchyard."--Sec. 158. Gregory's
  Translation, p. 126.

The experiment succeeded. Light "was chiefly seen over all new graves;
while there was no appearance of it over very old ones." The fact was
confirmed in subsequent experiments by five other sensitive persons, and
I have no design of questioning it. My doubt is only how far we can
consider the knowledge of it as giving a "mortal wound" to superstition.
"Thousands of ghost stories," the Baron tells us, "will now receive a
natural explanation, and will thus cease to be marvellous;" and he
afterwards says, "Thus I have, I trust, succeeded in tearing down one of
the densest veils of darkened ignorance and human error." I repeat that
I do not question the fact; my Query is, where to find the "thousands of
ghost stories" which are explained by it; and as I suspect that you have
some correspondents capable of giving information on such subjects, I
shall feel much obliged if they will tell me.

    S. R. MAITLAND.

  Gloucester.


A BOOK WANTED OF ENZINAS.--FRANCISCO DE ENZINAS, OR DRYANDER, TRANSLATOR
OF THE SPANISH NEW TESTAMENT, 1543.

Can any obliging reader of the "NOTES AND QUERIES" inform me of the
existence, in any of our public libraries, or for sale, of the following
book: _Dryandri (Franciscus) Flandriae propriae incarcerationis et
liberationis Historia_: Antwerpiae(?) 1545. Sm. 8vo.? Fox, the
martyrologist, writing of Dryander, says:

  "I read the book in the shop of John Oporine, printer, of Basil."

I have a French translation of it, and a Spanish version is sanctioned
by Pellicea (after Gerdes), under this title: _Breve Descripcion del
Pais Baxo, y razon de la Religion en Espana_, en 8vo.; but in such a
manner as leaves it questionable. If a Spanish version is known, I
should esteem it a favour to be informed where it can now be found.

Enzinas passed part of the years 1542-3 with Melancthon at Wittemberg.
Having completed his New Testament, he returned early in the latter year
to Antwerp to get it printed. After much reflection and advice with his
friends, he made an agreement with Stephen Mierdmann of Antwerp, in the
following manner:

  "I determined," says he, "to do my duty in the affair, at all
  events; which was, to undertake the publication, and to leave the
  consequences, and the course of the inspired Word, to the
  providence of God, to whom it of right belonged. I therefore spoke
  with a ----, and asked him whether he was willing to print my
  book. He answered, Yes, very gladly; partly because I desire to do
  some good for the commonweal more than for my own particular
  interest, caring little for gain or for the slander of opponents;
  and partly, also, said he, because it is a book that has long been
  desired. Then I asked him whether it was needful to have a
  _license_ or _permission_, and whether he could not print it
  without these: for, said I, it would ill beseem the Word of God,
  from which kings and rulers derive the authority for the exercise
  of their power, that it should be subject to the permission or
  prohibition of any human feeling or fancy. To this he answered,
  that no law of the Emperor had ever forbidden the printing of the
  Holy Scriptures; and this was well known, for in Antwerp the New
  Testament had already been printed in almost every language of
  Europe but the Spanish, and that neither himself nor any other
  printer had ever previously asked permission. From his experience,
  he had no doubt that, provided it was faithfully translated, the
  New Testament might be freely printed without leave or license.
  Then, said I, get ready your presses and everything needful for
  the work. I will answer for the interpretation of the text, and
  you shall take the risk of printing. And more, in order that you
  shall not suffer by loss or fine from our Spaniards, I will take
  the expense of the impression on myself. So I delivered to him the
  copy, and begged him to dispatch the business as soon as possible.

  "Nothing relating to it was done in secret; everybody knew that
  the New Testament was being printed in Spanish. Many praised the
  project; many waited for it with eagerness; my rooms were never
  closed, every one who wished came in and out: and yet I doubt not
  that some who came and beforehand praised my book, when they were
  behind my back, and with their own parties, sung another song;
  well perceiving that the reading of the Scriptures by the people
  is not very likely to profit their avaricious stomachs. I care
  little, however, for such opinions and selfish passions, confiding
  in God alone, who directed and would protect an undertaking
  devoted solely to His own glory."

It were too long for the "NOTES AND QUERIES" to tell how he was induced
to cancel the first leaf of his New Testament after it was printed,
because it had one word which savoured of Lutheranism; of his presenting
the finished volume to the Emperor Charles V. at Brussels; how he
received him, and what he said of his being entrapped by his confessor,
and cast into prison for fifteen months, escaping and being let down by
a rope over the city wall, until he found repose and security again at
Wittemberg with Melancthon.

Few of the early translations of the New Testament into the vulgar
languages of Europe are so little known as the Spanish of Francisco de
Enzinas, or Dryander; and yet, perhaps, of no one of them are there such
minute particulars of the printing and publication to be found upon
record as that published by him in 1543, and of his imprisonment in
consequence of it.

    BENJAMIN B. WIFFEN.

  Mount Pleasant, near Woburn.


SALTING THE BODIES OF THE DEAD.

Every reader of Ariosto, of Boiardo, or of Berri, is acquainted with the
character of Turpin, as an historian. John Turpin's _History of the Life
of Charles the Great and Roland_ has long since been regarded as a
collection of fables; as a romance written under a feigned name. Its
real character is, however, best described by Ferrario, when he says
that it is not to be considered as "the mere invention of any one
impostor, but rather as a compilation of ancient tales and ballads that
had been circulating amongst the people from the ninth century."
(_Storia ed Analisi degli Antichi Romanzi di Cavalleria_, vol. i. pp.
21, 22.) In such a work we must not calculate upon meeting with facts,
but we may hope to be able to obtain an insight into ancient practices,
and an acquaintance with ancient customs. It is for this reason I would
desire to draw the attention of the reader to a curious mode of
preserving the bodies of the dead, stated by Turpin. He says that the
Christians, being without a sufficient supply of aromatic drugs
wherewith to embalm the dead, disembowelled them, and filled them up
with salt. The passage thus stands in the original:

  "Tunc defunctorum corpora amici eorum diversis aromatibus
  condiverunt; alii myrrha, alii balsamo, alii _sale_ diligentes
  perfuderunt: _multi corpora per ventrem findebant et stercora
  ejiciebant, et sale, alia aromata non habentes, condiebant._"--C.
  27.

Does any other author but Turpin mention this mode of "salting," or
rather of "pickling" the dead? This is the Query which I put, in the
expectation of having it answered in the affirmative, as I am quite
certain I have met with another author--although I cannot cite his
name--who mentions the body of a Duke of Gloucester being thus preserved
with salt; but unfortunately I have not taken a note of the author, and
can only thus vaguely refer to the fact.

    W. B. MACCABE.


Minor Queries.

_The Star in the East_ (St. Matt. ii. 2.).--I have been told that in the
year of the Nativity three of the planets were in conjunction. Some one
of your astronomical correspondents may probably be able to furnish
information on this subject: it is full of sacred interest and wonder.

    J. W. H.

_Meaning of Sinage: Distord: Slander._--In a translation of Luther's
_Revelation of Antichrist_ by the Protestant martyr Frith, the word
_sinage_ occurs in a list of ecclesiastical payments, which the popish
prelates were wont to exact from the parochial clergy.

If any of your correspondents can say what _sinage_ means, he may oblige
me still further by explaining the word _distord_, in the same page;
where it is said "they stir princes and officers to distord against
them," viz., against such as resist the claims of churchmen.

Is there any authority for supposing that _sclawnder_, ordinarily
_slander_, may sometimes mean injury, without reference to character? It
is certain that the parallel term _calumnia_ was so used in monkish
Latin.

    H. W.

_Miss._--It is generally, I believe, understood that, prior to the time
of Charles II., married women were called _Mistress_, and unmarried had
_Mistress_ prefixed to their Christian name; and that the equivocal
position of many in that reign, gave rise to the peculiar designation of
_Miss_ or "Mis." Can any of your readers show an earlier use of the
term than the following, from _Epigrams of all Sorts_, by Richard
Flecknoe, published 1669?

      "To Mis. Davis on her excellent Dancing.
      Dear Mis., delight of all the nobler sort,
      Pride of the stage and darling of the court."

Again, was the term, when used with especial reference to these ladies,
always spelt with one _s_, as _Mis_?

    M. S.

_Jacques Mabiotte._--I read, that certain members of the continental
masonic lodges interpret the Hiram, whose death the freemasons affect to
deplore, as meaning Molai, Grand Master of the Templars; but that others
understand the said Hiram to mean Jacques Mabiotte. Now, I should think
the person whom secret associations can be even imagined, ever so
falsely, to keep in continual remembrance, and who is thus placed in
competition with the Grand Master of the Temple, should at least enjoy
that moderate share of celebrity that will enable some of your
correspondents to inform me who he was, and what were the circumstances
of his death. I have not myself been able to find him.

    A. N.

_Registry of British Subjects abroad._--There is a notion that all
British subjects born in foreign parts are considered as born within the
diocese of London. What is the origin of this notion? I have heard it
said that it is founded on some order made by King George I., on the
occasion of his journeys to Hanover. But it must be of older date.

Can any of your readers throw any light upon this? and greatly oblige,

    J. B.

  [A notice was published in the _London Gazette_ in March, 1816,
  stating that the Bishop of London's registrar would register all
  marriages of British subjects solemnised in foreign countries; and
  also the births and deaths of British subjects which occurred
  abroad. Has that notice any reference to the notion?]

_Shawls._--When were shawls first introduced into this country from the
East? and whence has the name arisen? for I see no trace of it in our
English dictionaries. Is it from its Persian name, "do-shalla?" I should
also much wish to know when plaids and tartans were first mentioned as
part of the national dress of Scotland.

    A JUROR.

"_Racked by pain, by shame confounded._"--From whence are the following
lines taken?

      "Racked by pain, by shame confounded;
      Goaded to the desperate deed."

    Y. G. F.

  Oxford, June 17. 1850.

_Figures of Saints._--During some slight repairs in my parish church,
vestiges of mural paintings were discovered above and on each side of
the chancel arch. I caused the plaster and whitewash to be removed, and
discovered two colossal angelic figures, but in a very imperfect state.
Each have nimbi of a blue colour, surmounted by crosses, with globular
extremities.

The S. figure holds an enormous spear. The N. one is so much defaced
that nothing could be traced but the outline of the figure, and what
appears a gigantic serpent, or perhaps a scroll of a blue colour behind
it. The clerk reports that traces of an anchor could be seen ten years
ago; but on his statement I cannot place much reliance. I should be
obliged for any information respecting the subject. Above the centre of
the arch I could only see a profusion of fragments of wings surrounded
by a glory.

    E. S. TAYLOR.

  Martham, Norfolk, June 7.

_Conceyted Letters, who wrote?_--

  "Conceyted Letters, newly laid open: or a most excellent bundle of
  new wit, wherein is knit up together all the perfection or art of
  episteling, by which the most ignorant may with much modestie
  talke and argue with the best learned." London: B. Alsop, 1618.

Who is the author of this little work? Lowndes gives it as an anonymous
production, but it is sometimes ascribed to Nicolas Breton. The initials
I. M. affixed to the preface, would rather denote Jervase Markham as the
author.

    [Greek: D].

_Acta Sanctorum._--Is any endeavour being made for the completion of
that vast work, the _Acta Sanctorum_, the last volume of which I believe
was published at Brussels in 1845?

    P. S. E.

_Pope's "honest Factor."_--I shall be obliged if any of your readers can
inform me who was the "honest factor" referred to in Pope's "Sir Balaam"
in the lines:

      "Asleep and naked, as an Indian lay,
      An honest factor stole a gem away:
      He pledg'd it to the knight," &c.

I have seen it noticed in the biography of an individual who held some
official post in India, but have forgotten the name.

    J. SWANN.

  Norwich, May, 1851.

_Meaning of "Nervous."_--Will any of your correspondents kindly oblige
me, by stating what is the actual meaning of the word _nervous_? On
reference to Johnson, I find it expressed as follows:--

  "Nervy, sinewy, _vigorous_; also having _diseased_ or _weak_
  nerves."

Now, by this definition, I am led to believe that the word has two
meanings, directly opposed to each other. Is this so?

    K. BANNEL.

  Liverpool.

_Doomsday Book of Scotland._--In vol. xx. of Sir John Sinclair's
_Statistical Account of Scotland_, 1798, the following extract of a
letter appears from John Pinkerton, Esq., the antiquarian writer, dated
the 23rd February, 1794:

  "In looking over the _Survey of Scotland_ accomplished by your
  exertions, it occurred to me that I could furnish an article,
  worthy to appear in an Appendix to one of the volumes of the
  _Statistical Account_. I need not inform you, that in the third
  volume of Prynne's _Records_ there is a large but undigested list
  of all those in Scotland who paid homage to Edward I. in 1291 and
  1296, forming a kind of Doomsday Book of the country at that
  period. Four years ago, I, with some labour, reduced the numerous
  names and designations into alphabetical order, and the list being
  now adapted to general use, and containing the names and
  designations of the chief landholders, citizens, and clergy of the
  time, it may be regarded as of no small importance to our ancient
  statistics, topography, and genealogy. If your opinion coincides,
  I shall with pleasure present it to you for the purpose, and
  correct the press."

Now the article so kindly proffered by Mr. Pinkerton did not appear in
the _Statistical Account of Scotland_, or in any of Mr. Pinkerton's
subsequent publications, that I am aware of. I should feel obliged if
any correspondent could inform me if it was ever published.

    ABERDONIENSIS.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Dr. Sacheverell._--Was Dr. Sacheverell's speech on his trial (supposed
to have been the work of Francis Atterbury, Bishop of Rochester) ever
published? If so, when, and by whom?

    COLLY WOBBLES.

  [A printed copy of Dr. Sacheverell's speech is now on our table,
  but without any publisher's name. The following is a copy of the
  title: "The Speech of Henry Sacheverell, D.D., upon his
  Impeachment at the Bar of the House of Lords, in Westminster Hall,
  March 7. 1709-10. London, Printed in the year 1710." On the back
  of the title-page appears the following advertisement: "Just
  published, Collections of Passages referred to by Dr. Henry
  Sacheverell in his Answer to the Articles of his Impeachment,
  under four Heads. I. Testimonies concerning the doctrine of
  Non-resistance to the Supreme Powers. II. Blasphemous,
  irreligious, and heretical Positions, lately published. III. The
  Church and Clergy abused. IV. The Queen, State, and Ministry
  reflected upon."]

_Princess Wilbrahama._--Advertisement of a pamphlet appearing in 1767:

  "A plain Narrative of Facts relating to the Person who lately
  passed under the assumed name of the Princess Wilbrahama, lately
  detected at the Devizes: containing her whole History, from her
  first Elopement with the Hon. Mrs. Sc***ts, till her Discovery and
  Commitment to Devizes Bridewell; together with the very
  extraordinary Circumstances attending that Discovery, and the
  Report of a Jury of Matrons summoned on that Occasion, &c. London:
  printed for the Author."

I shall be very thankful for any elucidation of the above case. It
appears to have been sufficiently popular to warrant the publisher in
engaging, as he says, "the best artists" to illustrate it with a series
of caricatures. I have never been able to meet with a copy in any public
library.

    J. WAYLEN.

  [The notorious impostor noticed in the communication of our
  correspondent, performed her surprising feats of hazardous
  versatility between the years 1765 and 1768. On different
  occasions she assumed the names of Wilson, alias Boxall, alias
  Mollineaux, alias Irving, alias Baroness Wilmington, alias Lady
  Viscountess Wilbrihammon, alias Countess of Normandy. In 1766 her
  ladyship, "with gentle mien and accent bland," received for her
  dextrous lubricities something like a whipping at Coventry. In
  1767 she was adjudged a vagabond at Devizes, and in the following
  year sentenced to transportation at the Westminster assizes.
  Alderman Hewitt of Coventry, in 1778, published some memorabilia
  of her ladyship in a pamphlet entitled, _Memoirs of the celebrated
  Lady Viscountess Wilbrihammon, the greatest Impostress of the
  present age_. The alderman does not notice the tract mentioned by
  our correspondent, so that it still remains a query whether it was
  ever issued, although it may have been advertised.]

_Early Visitations._--In Noble's _College of Arms_, it is stated, p.
25., that--

  "Henry VI. sent persons through many of the counties of England to
  collect the names of the gentry of each; these lists have reached
  our time. It is observable, that many are mentioned in them who
  had adopted the meanest trades, yet were still accounted gentry."

Where are these lists to be found?

    H. WITHAM.

  [Noble's statements upon such points are extremely loose. We know
  not of any such lists, but would refer to Grimaldi's _Origines
  Genealogicae_, under "Rolls and Visitations," where, in all
  probability, something may be found in reference to the subject,
  if there ever were any such lists.]




Replies.


WRITTEN SERMONS.

(Vol. iii., pp. 478, 526.)

Perhaps the publication of the following document may lead to a solution
of the question sent by M.C.L. (Vol. iii., p. 478.). It is a copy of a
letter from the Duke of Monmouth, as Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, intimating to the clergy the displeasure of Charles II. at
their use of periwigs, and their practice of reading sermons. His
Majesty, it will be found, thought both customs equally important and
equally unbecoming. Of the latter, it is stated that it "took beginning
with the disorders of the late times, and that the way of preaching
without book was most agreeable to the use of the foreign churches, to
the custom of the University heretofore, and to the nature and
intendment of that holy exercise." It will surprise many of your readers
to find that the reading of sermons was considered to be a mere
puritanical innovation.

  "_The Duke of Monmouth, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge,
  to the Vice-Chancellor and University._

  "Mr. Vice-Chancellor and Gentlemen,

  "His Majesty having taken notice of the liberty which several
  persons in holy orders have taken to wear their hair and periwigs
  of an unusual and unbecoming length, hath commanded me to let you
  know, that he is much displeased therewith, and strictly injoins
  that all such persons as profess or intend the study of divinity,
  do for the future wear their hair in a manner more suitable to the
  gravity and sobriety of their profession, and that distinction
  which was always maintained between the habit of men devoted to
  the ministry and other persons.

  "And whereas, his Majesty is informed that the practice of reading
  sermons is generally taken up by the preachers before the
  University, and there for some time continued, even before
  himself, his Majesty hath commanded me to signify to you his
  pleasure, that the said practice, which took beginning with the
  disorders of the late times, be wholly laid aside; and that the
  foresaid preachers deliver their sermons, both in Latin and
  English, by memory, or without book, as being a way of preaching
  which his Majesty judges most agreeable to the use of the foreign
  churches, and to the custom of the University heretofore, and to
  the nature and intendment of that holy exercise.

  "And that his Majesty's commands in the premisses may be duly
  regarded and observed, his Majesty's farther pleasure is, that the
  names of all such ecclesiastical persons as shall wear their hair
  as heretofore in an unfitting imitation of the fashion of laymen,
  or that shall continue in the present slothfull way of preaching,
  be from time to time signified unto me by the Vice-Chancellor for
  the time being, upon pain of his Majesty's displeasure.

  "Having in obedience to his Majesty's will signified thus much
  unto you, I shall not doubt of that your ready compliance; and the
  rather because his Majesty intends to send the same injunctions
  very speedily to the University of Oxford, whom I am assured you
  will equal in all other excellencies, and so in obedience to the
  king; especially when his commands are so much to the honour and
  esteem of that renowned University, whose welfare is so heartily
  desired, and shall ever be endeavoured by, Mr. Vice-Chancellor,

      "Your loving friend and Chancellor,

      "MONMOUTH."

I believe this letter, or something like it, was published by Peck in
his _Desiderata Curiosa_, and also by Mr. Roberts in his _Life of
Monmouth_. The transcript I send you was made from a copy in the
handwriting of Dr. Birch in the _Additional MS._ 4162., fo. 230.

    JOHN BRUCE.

The following passage occurs in Rutt's _Diary of Thomas Burton_, 4
vols.: Colburn, 1828. I have not the work at hand, but from a MS.
extract from the same, believe it may be found as a note by the editor
in vol. i. p. 359.

  "Burnet was always an extempore preacher. He says that reading is
  peculiar to this nation, and cannot be induced in any other. The
  only discourse he ever wrote beforehand was a thanksgiving sermon
  before the queen in 1705. He never before was at a pause in
  preaching. It is contrary to a university statute, obsolete,
  though unrepealed."

    C. H. P.

  Brighton, June 27.


LORD MAYOR NOT A PRIVY COUNCILLOR.

(Vol. iii., p. 496.)

This Query, and your answer, involve one or two important questions,
which are worth a fuller solution than you have given.

The Lord Mayor is no more a Privy Councillor than he is Archbishop of
Canterbury. The title of "Right Honourable," which has given rise to
that vulgar error, is in itself a mere courtesy appended to the title of
"Lord;" which is also, popularly, though not _legally_, given him: for
in all _his own_ acts, he is designated officially as "Mayor" only. The
courtesy-title of _Lord_ he shares with the Mayors of Dublin and York,
the Lord-Advocate of Scotland, the younger sons of Dukes and Marquises,
&c. &c., and all such _Lords_ are styled by courtesy "Right Honourable;"
and this style of _Right Honourable_ is also given to Privy Councillors
in virtue of their proper official title of "Lords of Her Majesty's Most
Honourable Privy Council." So, the "Right Honourable the Lords of the
Treasury and Admiralty." So much for the title. The fact stated in the
Editor's answer, of the admission of the Lord Mayor _to the Council
Chamber_ after some clamour, on the accession of William IV., is a
mistake arising out of the following circumstances. On the demise of the
crown, a London Gazette Extraordinary is immediately published, with a
proclamation announcing the death of one sovereign and the accession of
the other. This proclamation styles itself to be that of the--

"Peers Spiritual and Temporal of the Realm, _assisted_ by those of the
late Privy Council, with numbers of _others_, Gentlemen of Quality, with
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London."

The proclamation is that of the _Peers_ alone, but _assisted_ by the
_others_. The cause of this form is, that the demise of the crown
dissolves the Privy Council, and used (till modern times) to dissolve
parliaments, and abrogate the commissions of the Judges, and all other
public officers; so that the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were the only
subsisting authority. Hence _they_, of necessity, undertook the duty of
proclaiming the new king, but they fortified themselves "_with the
assistance of_ the principal gentlemen of quality, and of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens." This paper is first signed by the Peers,
and then by all who happen to be present, promiscuously. At the
accession of William IV., there were about 180 names, of which "J.
Crowder, Mayor," stands the 106th. At the accession of Queen Victoria,
there were about 160 names, of which "Thomas Kelly, Mayor," is the
111th. And in both cases we find the names of the Aldermen, Sheriffs,
Town Clerk, City Remembrancer, and several others,--private citizens,
and many altogether private persons, who happened to come to the palace
at that time.

It is obvious that all this has nothing to do with the Privy Council,
for, in fact, at that moment, no Privy Council exists. But while these
things are going on in an outward room of the palace, where everybody is
admitted, the new sovereign commands the attendance of the late Privy
Council in the council chamber, where the old Privy Councillors are
generally (I suppose always) re-sworn of the new council; and _then_ and
_there_ are prepared and promulgated several acts of the new sovereign,
to which are prefixed the names of the Privy Councillors present. Now,
to this _council_ chamber the Lord Mayor is no more admitted than the
Town Clerk would be, and to these acts of the council _his name has
never appeared_.

All these facts appear in the _London Gazettes_ for the 27th June, 1830,
and the 30th June, 1837; and similar proceedings took place in Dublin;
though since the Union the practice is at least superfluous.

This establishes the _rationale_ of the case, but there is a precedent
that concludes it:--

  "On the 27th May, 1768, Mr. Thomas Harley, then Lord Mayor of
  London, was sworn of his Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council!"

--an honour never since conferred on any Mayor or Alderman, and which
could not have been conferred on him if he had already been of that
body.

    C.


DR. ELRINGTON'S EDITIONS OF USSHER'S WORKS.

(Vol. iii., p. 496.)

In reply to your correspondent C. PAINE, JUN. I beg to say that this
University has recently requested me to undertake the completion of
Ussher's works. Dr. Elrington has left about half the fourteenth volume
printed off: but I have found considerable difficulty in ascertaining
what he intended to print, or what ought to be printed, in the remaining
half. The printed portion contains the archbishop's Theological
Lectures, in reply to Bellarmine, never before published.[2] I have
found amongst Dr. Elrington's papers a volume of sermons (a MS. of the
latter half of the seventeenth century), which are attributed, in the
MS. itself, to Ussher; but the authenticity of these sermons is, it
appears to me, very doubtful. I therefore hesitate to print them.

  [Footnote 2: Elrington's Life of _Ussher_, p. 26.]

I am anxious to find a treatise on the Seventy Weeks, by Ussher, which I
have some reason to think once existed in MS. This tract, with another
on the question of the Millennium, from Rev. xx. 4., formed the
exercises which he performed for the degree of D.D., at the commencement
of the University in 1612: and I remember Dr. Elrington telling me (if I
did not mistake his meaning), that he intended to print them in the
fourteenth volume. My difficulty is, that I cannot find them amongst
Ussher's MSS., and I do not know where they are to be had. Some
imperfect fragments on the Seventy Weeks are preserved in MS. in Trinity
College Library, in Ussher's autograph; but they are far too crude and
unfinished for publication.

The _Bibliotheca Theologica_, a work on the same plan as Cave's
_Scriptores Ecclesiastici_, exists in MS. in the Bodleian Library, and a
copy from the Bodleian MS. is in Dublin. This work has not been included
in Dr. Elrington's edition; and I remember his discussing the subject
with me, and deciding not to print it. His reasons were these:--1. It is
an unfinished work, which the archbishop did not live to complete. 2. It
is full of errors, which our present increased materials and knowledge
of the subject would easily enable us to correct; but the correction of
them would swell the work to a considerable extent. 3. The work was
used, and is frequently quoted by Cave, who seems to have published the
most valuable parts of it. Its publication, therefore, would not add
anything to our knowledge, whilst it would probably detract, however
unfairly, from the archbishop's reputation: for the public seldom make
allowances for an unfinished work. 4. It would probably make _three_, if
not _four_ volumes; and Dr. Elrington did not think its publication of
sufficient importance to warrant so great an addition to the cost and
bulk of the Works.

The _System of Theology_ having been disclaimed by Ussher himself
(although it is quoted as his by the Committee of the Privy Council in
their decision of the "Gorham Case"), has not been included by Dr.
Elrington in the collection of Ussher's works.

I shall be much obliged to MR. PAYNE, or to any other of your
correspondents, if he will give me any information respecting the
treatises on the Seventy Weeks and on the Millennium, or any other
advice which may assist me in the completion of the fourteenth volume.

I may add, that it is my intention, with the able assistance of my
learned friend Dr. Reeves, of Ballymena, to print a complete index to
Ussher's Works, which will be compiled by Dr. Reeves, and is now in
active preparation. The references to the more important works, such as
the _Primordia_, and _Annals_, will be so contrived as to be applicable
to the old editions, as well as to Dr. Elrington's edition. This Index
will form the seventeenth volume of the Works.

    JAMES H. TODD.


  Trinity Coll., Dublin, June 21. 1851.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Mind your P's and Q's_ (Vol. iii., pp. 328. 357. 463. 523.).--I have
always thought that the phrase "Mind your P's and Q's" was derived from
the school-room or the printing-office. The forms of the small "p" and
"q" in the Roman type, have always been puzzling to the child and the
printer's apprentice. In the one, the down-ward stroke is on the left of
the oval; in the other, on the right. Now, when the types are reversed,
as they are when in the process of distribution they are returned by the
compositor to his case, the mind of the young printer is puzzled to
distinguish the "p" from the "q." In sorting _pie_, or a mixed heap of
letters, where the "p" and the "q" are not in connexion with any other
letters forming a word, I think it would be almost impossible for an
inexperienced person to say which is which upon the instant. "Mind your
_p_'s and _q_'s"--I write it thus, and not "Mind your P's and Q's"--has
a higher philosophy than mind your _toupees_ and your _queues_, which
are things essentially different, and impossible to be mistaken. It
means, have regard to small differences; do not be deceived by apparent
resemblances; learn to discriminate between things essentially distinct,
but which look the same; be observant; be cautious.

    CHARLES KNIGHT.

_Serius Seriadesque_ (Vol. iii., p. 494.).--Il Serio, a tributary to the
Adda, which falls into the Po. Il Serio is, like the Po, remarkable for
the quantity of foam floating upon it, and also for disappearing under
ground, through part of its course.

    DE CAMERA.

_Catharine Barton_ (Vol. iii., pp. 328. 434.).--A correspondent has
asked what was the maiden name of this lady, the widow, as he calls her,
of Colonel Barton. I have a note of Charles Montagu, writing of her as
"the beautiful, witty, and accomplished Catharine Barton," and have
marked her as the daughter of Major Barton, but cannot find my
authority. What follows is hardly likely to be of use to your
correspondent, though it may, possibly, suggest to him a channel of
inquiry. The Rev. Alexander Chalmers married Catharine Ekins, a niece of
Mr. Conduitt, to whose daughter he was guardian after her father's
death. Mrs. Chalmers had a brother who was rector or vicar of Barton,
Northamptonshire. Alexander Chalmers was rector of St. Katharine
Coleman, London, and of Burstow, Surrey; clerk of St. Andrew's, Holborn;
chaplain to the forces at Gibraltar and Port Mahon: he died in 1745, and
was buried in St. Katharine's: his wife was of the family of Ekins, of
Rushden, in Northamptonshire. On August 12, 1743, Alexander Chalmers
writes, "This will be delivered you by my cousin Lieut. Mathew Barton,"
probably his wife's cousin: in another letter he speaks of Miss Conduitt
as his wife's cousin. Mr. Conduitt died 23rd of May, 1737, and his
widow's "unexpected death" seems to be alluded to in a letter in 1740.

    DE CAMERA.

_Alterius Orbis Papa_ (Vol. iii., p. 497.).--This was not, as A.B.'s
informant thinks, a title of honour bestowed by any Supreme Pontiff upon
any Archbishop of Canterbury, but a mere verbal compliment passed by
Pope Urban II. upon St. Anselm, when the latter went to consult the
former at Rome. The words are those of Gervase, the monk of Canterbury,
who tells us:

  "Tantam ejus gratiam habuit, ut eum (Anselmum) alterius orbis
  papam vocaret (Urbanus papa)."--Ed. _Twysden_, ii. 1327.

Eadmer, who was with the archbishop when he went to Italy, gives the
following as the Pope's expressions:

  "Cumque illum, utpote hominem cunctis liberalium artium
  disciplinis innutritum, pro magistro teneamus et quasi comparem,
  velut alterius orbis Apostolicum et Patriarcham jure venerandum
  censeamus."--_AA. SS. Aprilis_, t. ii. 886.

    D. ROCK.

You have not told us the origin of this title. I have just been reminded
of the omission by the dedication of _Ludovici Cappelli Commentarii_,
Amstel., 1689, which is--

  "Wilhelmo Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi ... alterius orbis, sed
  melioris, Papae."

    J. W. H.

_Charles Dodd_ (Vol. ii., p. 496.).--TYRO will find an account of this
writer in _Biographical Illustrations of Worcestershire_: by John
Chambers, Esq.: Worcester, 1820, 8vo., p. 591., from which we learn that
his true name was Hugh Toot_el_, a Lancashire man born in 1672, in the
neighbourhood of Preston. The name of Hugh Toot_le_ is recognised in the
prospectus or announcement of Mr. Tierney's new edition of Dodd's
_Church History of England_, of which the first and second volumes
appeared so long ago as 1839: but I regret to say that the work is yet
far from being completed.

    F. R. A.

"_Prenzie_" (Vol. iii., p. 522.).--We seem now to have got to the true
reading, "primzie." The termination _zie_ suits a Scotch word perhaps.
I only wish to mention, that the form "prin" is connected with the verb
"to preen," which we use of birds. Yet that again seems connected with
_prune_. Etymology is always in a circle.

    C. B.

"_In Print_" (Vol. iii., p. 500.).--In confirmation of the statement
made as to the expression "in print" meaning "with exactness," &c., I
perfectly remember an old Somersetshire servant of our's, who used to
say, when he saw me romping after I was dressed: "Take care, Sir, you'll
put your hair _out of print_."

    C. W. B.

_Introduction of Reptiles into Ireland_ (Vol. iii., p. 491.).--The
snakes introduced into the county of Down in 1831, alluded to by
EIRIONNACH, were the very harmless and easily tamed species, _Coluber
natrix_ of Linnaeus, _Natrix torquata_ of Ray. They were purchased in
Covent Garden Market; and, to the number of six, were turned out in the
garden of Rath Gael House. One was killed at Milecross, three miles
distant, about a week after its liberation; and three others were
shortly afterwards killed in the same neighbourhood. The fate of the
remaining two is unknown, but there can be little doubt that they were
also killed, as the country-people offered a considerable reward for
their destruction. The writer well remembers the consternation and
exceedingly angry feelings caused by this _novel importation_.

We may conclude, that though the snake is not indigenous to Ireland, yet
there is nothing in either the soil or climate to prevent its
naturalisation. It is highly probable that an insular position is
unfavourable to the spread of the serpent tribe. Other islands--New
Zealand, for instance--as well as Ireland, have no native _Ophidia_.

It is generally, but erroneously, believed that there are no toads in
Ireland. The Natter-jack (_Bufo calamita_), a closely allied species to
the common toad, is found about Killarney. Can any reader inform me if
there is any record of its introduction?

    W. PINKERTON.

_Ancient Wood Engraving of the Picture of Cebes_ (Vol. iii., pp. 277.
436.).--Your correspondent THE HERMIT OF HOLYPORT having been informed
respecting the _subject_ of his wood-cut, may yet be further satisfied
to know its date, and where it is to be found. It occurs in a Latin
version of the _Pinax_, with a commentary by Justus Velsius, printed in
4to., at Lyons? (Lugduni) in 1551. The title runs thus: _Justi Velseri
Hagani, in Cebetis Thebani Tabulam Commentariorum Libri Sex, Totius
Moralis Philosophiae Thesaurus._ The _Pinax_ commonly accompanies that
valuable little manual the _Enchiridion_ of Epictetus, of which that
excellent man John Evelyn, in a letter to Lord Cornbury, thus speaks:

  "Besides the Divine precepts, I could never receive anything from
  Philosophy that was able to add a graine to my courage upon the
  intellectual assaults like that _Enchiridion_ and little weapon of
  Epictetus: 'Nunquam te quicquam perdidisse dicito, sed
  reddidisse,' says he: 'Filius obijt? redditus est.' It is in his
  15th chapter. You cannot imagine what that little target will
  encounter. _I never go abroad without it in my pocket._ What an
  incomparable guard is that: [Greek: ta de ouk eph' hemin], cap.
  i., where he discourses of the things which _are_, and _are not_
  in our power. I know, my Lord, you employ your retirements nobly;
  weare this defensive for my sake,--I had almost said this
  _Christian Office_."

    S. W. SINGER.

"_The Groves of Blarney_" (Vol. iii., p. 495.).--In a little volume of
the _Songs of Ireland_, forming one of the series called Duffy's
_Library of Ireland_, Dublin, 1845, this song is given. In the
introductory notice it is said to be by Mr. R. A. Milliken, a native of
Cork. The passage referred to by your correspondent stands thus in this
version, which is said to be taken from Croker's _Popular Songs of
Ireland_:--

      "There's statues gracing
      This noble place in--
      All heathen gods,
      And nymphs so fair;
      Bold Neptune, Plutarch,
      And Nicodemus,
      All standing naked
      In the open air!"

Mr. Maloney, in his late account of the "palace made o' windows," has
evidently had these verses in his mind; and in his observations on the
"statues gracing _that_ noble place in," has adverted to their like
peculiar predicament with the characteristic modesty of his nation.

    S. H.

On this subject permit me to observe that a change has "come o'er the
spirit of its dream." A later poet, in celebrating the praises of the
lake as the only place unchanged, says:

      "Sweet Blarney Castle, that was _wanst_ so ancient,
        Is gone to ruin, och! and waste, and bare
      Neptune and Plutarch is by Mrs. Deane[3] sent
        To Ballintemple, to watch praties there."

  [Footnote 3: Now Lady Deane.]

    JUNIOR.

_Tennyson's Lord of Burleigh_ (Vol. iii., p. 493.).--The poem of "The
Lord of Burleigh" is founded upon a supposed romance connected with the
marriage of the late Marquis of Exeter with his second wife, Miss
Hoggins. This marriage has also formed the groundwork of a play entitled
_The Lord of Burghley_, published by Churton in 1845. The story of the
courtship and marriage perpetuated by this poem, may be found in the
_Illustrated London News_ of the 16th November, 1844, having been
copied into that paper from the _Guide to Burghley House_, pp. 36.,
published by Drakard in 1812.

A very slight tinge of romance attends the real facts of this union,
which took place when the late Marquis was Mr. Henry Cecil. The lady was
not of so lowly an origin as the fiction relates. Mr. Cecil did not
become the Lord of Burghley until the death of his uncle, the 9th Earl
of Exeter, two years after this marriage, up to which time he resided at
Bolas, Salop, the residence of his wife before her marriage, and there
the two eldest of their _four_ children were born. The Countess of
Exeter died greatly beloved and respected at the early age of
twenty-four, having been married nearly seven years.

    J. P. JUN.

_Bicetre_ (Vol. iii., p. 518.)--It was certainly anciently called
Vincestre. It is so in Monstrelet, whose history begins about 1400. One
of the treaties between the Burgundians and Orleanists was made there.
President Henault says (under Charles VI.) that this castle belonged to
John, Bishop of Winchester. If he is right in the Christian name, he
must mean _had_ belonged, not _appartenoit_, for the John Bishops that I
find in Britton's list are:

                            Elected.    Died.
      John of Oxon            1261      1267
      John de Pontessara      1282      1304
      John de Sandale         1316      1319
      John de Stratford       1323      1333

    C. B.

_On a Passage in Dryden_ (Vol. iii., p. 492.).--MR. BREEN appears to me
decidedly wrong in the view he takes of the passage he quotes from
Dryden. In the first place, he commits the mistake of assuming that
Dryden is expressing his own opinion, or speaking in his own person. The
fact is, however, that the speaker is Torresmond. Torresmond is "mad"
enough to love the queen; he has already spoken of the "madness of his
high attempt," he says he raves; and when the queen offers to give him
counsel for his cure, he says he wishes _not_ be cured:

                "There is a pleasure, _sure_,
      In being mad, which none but madmen know!"

This is inference, not assertion. Whether it be natural or not, I will
not say, but I can see no blunder.

    S. H.

_Derivation of Yankee_ (Vol. iii., p. 461.).--Washington Irving, in his
_Knickerbocker's History of New York_, gives the same derivation of
"Yankee" that is quoted from Dr. Turnbull and from Mr. Richmond.
Irving's authority is, I believe, earlier than both these. Is the
derivation his? and if his, is he in earnest in giving it? I ask this,
not because I have reason to doubt in this instance either his
seriousness or his philological accuracy, but by way of inserting a
caution on behalf of the unwary. I have read or heard of a learned
German who quoted that book as veritable history. The philology may be
as baseless as the narrative. It is a happy suggestion of a derivation
at all events, be it in jest or in earnest.

    E. J. S.

_Ferrante Pallavicino_ (Vol. iii., pp. 478. 523.).--Your correspondent
CHARLES O'SOULEY will find some account of Ferrante Pallavicino in
Chalmers, or any other biographical dictionary; and a very complete one
in the _Dictionnaire Historique_ of Prosper Marchand. The manuscript he
possesses has been printed more than once; it first appeared in the
_Opere Scelte di Ferrante Pallavicino_ printed at Geneva, but with the
imprint Villafranca, 1660, 12mo., of which there are several
reimpressions. It is there entitled _La Disgratia del Conte D'Olivares_,
and bears the fictitious subscription of "Madrid li 28 Gennaro, 1643,"
at the end. If the MS. was written at Genoa, it is most probably only a
transcript; for Pallavicino was resident at Venice when it appears to
have been written, and was soon after trepanned by a vile caitiff named
Charles de Bresche _alias_ De Morfu, a Frenchman employed by the Pope's
nuncio Vitellio, into the power of those whom his writings had incensed,
and was by them put to death at Avignon in 1644.

    S. W. SINGER.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

The reputation which Mr. Foss acquired as a diligent investigator of
legal antiquities, and an impartial biographer of those who have won for
themselves seats on the woolsack or the bench, by the publication of the
first two volumes of his _Judges of England, with Sketches of their
Lives, and Miscellaneous Notices connected with the Courts at
Westminster from the time of the Conquest_, will be more than confirmed
by the third and fourth volumes, which have just been issued. In these,
which are devoted to the Judges who flourished between the years 1272
and 1485--that is to say, from the reign of Edward I. to that of Richard
III. inclusive, Mr. Foss has added 473 to his former list of 580 Judges;
and when we say, that every biography shows with what diligence, and we
may add with what intelligence, Mr. Foss has waded through all available
sources of information, including particularly the voluminous
publications of the late Record Commission, we have done more than
sufficient to justify our opening statement, and to recommend his work
to the favourable notice of all lovers of historical truth. To the
general reader the surveys of the reigns, in which Mr. Foss points out
not only everything remarkable connected with the law, but the gradual
development of our legal system, will be by no means the least
attractive portion of his book; while his endeavours to trace the
successive institution of the several Inns of Court and Chancery, and
also of the three different Inns occupied by the Judges and Serjeants,
will be found of great interest to the topographical antiquary.

Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson will sell, on Friday and Saturday next, a
very rare, valuable, and interesting Series of Papal Coins, from Pope
Gregory II., anno 715, to Pius IX., anno 1846, the property of an
eminent amateur residing at Rome.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--_Shall we keep the Crystal Palace, and have Riding and
Walking in all Weathers among Flowers, Fountains, and Sculpture? by
Denarius._ As we believe most of the readers of this pamphlet will
answer in the affirmative, we would, with the writer, remind them to
"instruct their representatives to say '_Aye_,' when Mr. Speaker puts
the question in the Commons."--_Archaeologia Cambrensis._ New Series. No.
VII. A very excellent number of this valuable Record of the Antiquities
of Wales and its Marshes.--_Notae Ferales; a few Words on the Modern
System of Interment; its Evils and their Remedy, by Charon._ An
endeavour to bring the world to "discontinue the system of interment as
now practised, and restore that of _Urn Burial_."

CATALOGUES RECEIVED.--Joseph Lilly's (7. Pall Mall) Catalogue No. 3. of
very Cheap, Valuable, and Useful Books; W. S. Lincoln's (Cheltenham
House, Westminster Road) Catalogue No. 70. of English and Foreign
Second-hand Books; J. Petheram's (94. High Holborn) Catalogue Part
CXXIV., No. 5. for 1851 of Old and New Books; B. Quaritch's (16. Castle
Street, Leicester Square) Catalogue No. 31. of Books in European and
Oriental Languages and Dialects; W. Heath's (29 1/2. Lincoln's Inn Fields)
Catalogue No. 4 for 1851 of Valuable Second-hand Books; S. Alexander's
(207. Hoxton Old Town) Catalogue of Cheap Miscellaneous Books; C. J.
Stewart's (11. King William Street) Catalogue of Books in Ecclesiastical
and Monastic History and Biography, Antiquities, Councils, &c., with a
Classified Index.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES WANTED TO PURCHASE.

SIR THOS. ELYOT, THE GOVERNOUR. 1st Edit. 1531.

BASTWICK (DR. JOS.) SUPPLEMENTUM, &c., 1635.

PRYNNE, CERTAIN QUERIES TO THE BOWERS AT THE NAME OF JESUS. 1636.

---- A LOOKING GLASSE FOR ALL LORDLY PRELATES. 1636.

---- CERTAIN QUERIES PROPOUNDED TO BISHOPS, &c. 1636.

---- NEWS FROM IPSWICH. 1636 and 1641.

---- A QUENCH COALE. 1637.

---- ADDITIONS TO THE FIRST PART OF A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A. AND B. &c.
1636.

---- PLEASANT PURGE FOR A ROMAN CATHOLICK. 1642.

---- A GAG FOR LONG-HAIR'D RATTLE HEADS. 1646.

---- SIX PROPOSITIONS OF UNDOUBTED VERITY, &c. A single leaf. 1648.

---- THE QUAKERS UNMASKED, &c. 1655.

SATAN, a Poem, by R. Montgomery.

ARTHUR YOUNG'S TRAVELS IN FRANCE.

ARTHUR YOUNG'S TRAVELS IN ITALY.

BORLAND'S HISTORY OF THE COLONY OF DARIAN.

DR. ADAMS' SERMON ON THE OBLIGATION OF VIRTUE. Any edition.

ENGRAVED PORTRAITS OF BISHOP BUTLER.

MARLBOROUGH DISPATCHES. Volumes IV. and V.

ART JOURNAL, 1839 to 1844 inclusive. Also 1849.

BULWER'S NOVELS. 12mo. Published at 6_s._ per Vol. Pilgrims of the
Rhine, Alice, and Zanoni.

MITFORD'S HISTORY OF GREECE, continued by Davenport. 12mo. 8 Vols.
Published by Tegg and Son, 1835. Volume _Eight_ wanted.

STEPHANI THESAURUS. Valpy. Parts I. II. X. XI. and XXIX.

KIRBY'S BRIDGEWATER TREATISE. 2 Vols.

The _Second Vol._ of CHAMBERS' CYCLOPAEDIA OF ENGLISH LITERATURE.

AIKIN'S SELECT WORKS OF THE BRITISH POETS. 10 Vols. 24mo. Published by
Longmans and Co. 1821. Vols. I. V. and VIII. wanted.

MARKHAM'S HISTORY OF FRANCE. Vol. II. 1830.

MARKHAM'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. Vol. II. 1836. Sixth Edition.

JAMES'S NAVAL HISTORY. (6 Vols. 8vo.) 1822-4. Vol. VI.

HUME'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. (8 Vols. 1818.) Vol. IV.

RUSSELL'S EUROPE, FROM THE PEACE OF UTRECHT. 4to. 1824. Vol. II.

CLARE'S RURAL MUSE.

WATT'S BIBLIOTHECA BRITANNICA, Part V. 4to.

STRUTT'S MANNERS AND CUSTOMS. Vol. II. 4to.

OLD BAYLEY SESSIONS PAPERS, 1744 to 1774, or any portion thereof. 4to.

COLDEN'S HISTORY OF THE FIVE INDIAN NATIONS OF CANADA. Vol. I. 12mo.
Lond. 1755.

HEARNE (T.) LELAND'S ITINERARY. Vols. I. II. III. and VII.

HORACE-ORELLIUS. 2 Vols.

D'ARBLAY'S DIARY. Vol. III.

WAAGEN'S WORKS OF ART AND ARTISTS IN ENGLAND. 3 Vols. 8vo. 1838.

CHEVALIER RAMSAY, ESSAI DE POLITIQUE, ou l'on traite de la Necessite de
l'Origine, des Droits, des Bornes et des differentes Formes de la
Souverainete, selon les Principes de l'Auteur de Telemaque. 2 Vols.
12mo. La Haye, without date, but printed in 1719.

The same. Second Edition, under the title "Essai Philosophique sur le
Gouvernement Civil, selon les Principes de Fenelon," 12mo. Londres,
1721.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

THE INDEX AND TITLE-PAGE TO VOLUME THE THIRD _is at press, and will be
issued with our next Number_.

J. O. B. _The oft-quoted line_--

      "Tempora mutantur," &c.,

_is from a poem by Borbonius_. _See_ "NOTES AND QUERIES," Vol. i., pp.
234. 419.

A READER:--

      "_Fine_ by degrees, and beautifully less,"

(_not_ small, _as it is too frequently misquoted_), _is from Prior's_
Henry and Emma. _See our Third Vol._, p. 154.

JAMES C. _has misunderstood_ MR. PARSONS' _Query_, Vol. iii., p. 495.,
_which refers to_ book plates, _not plates or engravings in books_.

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Meaning of Hernshaw_--_Jonah and the
Whale_--_First Panorama_--_Dollar Mark_--_Equestrian Statues_--_Brother
Jonathan_--_Nao a Ship_--_Eisell_--_Suum cuique tribuere_--_Theory
of the Earth's Form_--_Alterius Orbis Papa_--_The Groves of
Blarney_--_Jusjurandum per canem_--_Organs in Churches_--_Tennyson's
Lord of Burleigh_--_Registry of Dissenters_--_Hugh Holland, and
his Works_--_Shakspeare's Small Latin_--_Apple Pie Order_--_Lord
Mayor a Privy Councillor_--_Gillingham_.

_The commencement of a New Volume with the present Number affords a
favourable opportunity to gentlemen resident in the country to commence
the work. The Subscription for the Stamped Edition of "NOTES AND
QUERIES" is ten shillings and twopence for six months, which may be paid
by Post-Office Order, drawn in favour of our Publisher_, MR. GEORGE
BELL, No. 186. Fleet Street.

CIRCULATION OF OUR PROSPECTUSES BY CORRESPONDENTS. _The suggestion of_
T. E. H., _that by way of hastening the period when we shall be
justified in permanently enlarging our Paper to 24 pages, we should
forward copies of our_ Prospectus _to correspondents who would kindly
enclose them to such friends as they think likely, from their love of
literature, to become subscribers to "NOTES AND QUERIES," has already
been acted upon by several friendly correspondents, to whom we are
greatly indebted. We shall be most happy to forward Prospectuses for
this purpose to any other of our friends able and willing thus to assist
towards increasing our circulation._

_VOLS. I. and II., each with very copious Index, may still be had, price
9s. 6d. each. Vol. III. will be ready in a few days._

NOTES AND QUERIES _may be procured, by order, of all Booksellers and
Newsvenders. It is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers ought not to experience any difficulty in procuring it
regularly. Many of the country Booksellers, &c., are, probably, not yet
aware of this arrangement, which will enable them to receive NOTES AND
QUERIES in their Saturday parcels._

_All communications for the Editor of NOTES AND QUERIES should be
addressed to the care of_ MR. BELL, No. 186. Fleet Street.

_Errata._--No. 84. p. 469., for "John Kento_r_" read "John Fento_n_."
No. 86, p. 504., for "_Or_dardus" read "Odardus;" p. 509. for "the _w_
is _sometimes sounded_ like _oo_," read "the _w_ is _sounded something_
like _oo_."




This Day is Published,

  THE QUARTERLY REVIEW, NO. CLXXVII.

  CONTENTS:

      I. GARDENING.
      II. SCOTLAND BEFORE THE REFORMATION.
      III. TRAVELLERS IN NORTH AMERICA--ANNEXATION--FREE
      TRADE--SLAVERY.
      IV. DUKES OF URBINO.
      V. WALPOLE AND MASON.
      VI. ORIGEN--THE EARLY PAPACY.
      VII. BADHAM'S EURIPIDES.
      VIII. RUBRIC _versus_ USAGE.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


FOR EVERY CHILD IN THE KINGDOM.

  On 1st July, 1851, Price 2_s._ 6_d._, an Enduring Record, full of
  Interesting Details--Vivid Descriptions--Moral Sentiments--and
  Beautiful Pictures, entitled

      LITTLE HENRY'S HOLIDAY
      AT
      THE GREAT EXHIBITION,

  By the Editor of "PLEASANT PAGES."

  PLEASANT PAGES.--DOUBLE NUMBERS are now publishing, containing a
  course of "OBJECT LESSONS" from the Great Exhibition.--Volume II.
  is just out. Third Edition of Volume I. is now ready.

  London: HOULSTON AND STONEMAN; and all Booksellers.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY, 3. Parliament Street,
London.

  VALUABLE NEW PRINCIPLE.

  Payment of premiums may be occasionally suspended without
  forfeiting the policy, on a new and valuable plan, adopted by this
  society only, as fully detailed in the prospectus.

  A. SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,

  Actuary and Secretary: Author of "Industrial Investment and
  Emigration; being a Second Edition of a Treatise on Benefit
  Building Societies, &c." Price 10_s._ 6_d._

  London: J. W. PARKER, West Strand.


TEN GUINEAS REWARD.

  RUTHVEN, EARL OF GOWRIE. Patrick Ruthven, son of William, Earl of
  Gowrie, married between the years 1615 and 1625, as generally
  stated. The above reward will be paid to any person who may find
  the place of marriage, and will produce a _certificate thereof_.

  THREE GUINEAS REWARD.

  On production of a Certificate of the Marriage of SIR ANTHONY VAN
  DYCK with MARIA RUTHVEN, which took place in 1640.

  THREE GUINEAS REWARD.

  For any evidence of the death or burial of PATRICK RUTHVEN, son of
  the before-mentioned Patrick, the brother of the said MARIA VAN
  DYCK, formerly Ruthven. He was living in 1656 (then administrator
  of his father's effects), and was dead probably before 1710.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Communications upon these points are to be transmitted to "The
  Editor of NOTES AND QUERIES."


NEW VOLUME OF DODSLEY'S AND RIVINGTON'S ANNUAL REGISTER.

  Now ready, in 8vo., price 18_s._

  THE ANNUAL REGISTER; or, a View of the History and Polities of the
  YEAR 1850.

  RIVINGTONS; LONGMAN and Co.; J. M. RICHARDSON; HAMILTON and Co.;
  SIMPKIN and Co.; J. RODWELL; HOULSTON and STONEMAN; G. LAWFORD;
  COWIE and Co.; CAPES and SON; SMITH, ELDER, and CO.; H.
  WASHBOURNE; H. G. BOHN; J. BUMPUS; WALLER and SON; J. THOMAS; L.
  BOOTH; W. J. CLEAVER; G. ROUTLEDGE; J. GREEN; G. WILLIS; and W.
  HEATH.


ARNOLD'S SCHOOL CLASSICS WITH ENGLISH NOTES.

  In 12mo., price 5_s._ 6_d._

  SELECTIONS FROM CICERO, PART III. containing the TUSCULAN
  Disputations. With ENGLISH NOTES, translated from the German of
  Tischer, by the REV. R. B. PAUL, M.A., and edited by the REV.
  THOMAS KERCHEVER ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and Late Fellow
  of Trinity College, Cambridge.

  Rivingtons, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place;

  Of whom may be had, by the same Editor,

  SELECTIONS FROM CICERO, WITH ENGLISH NOTES (from the best and most
  recent sources). Part I. containing ORATIONS: the Fourth against
  Verres; the Orations against Catiline; and that for the Poet
  Archias. 4_s._ Part II. containing EPISTLES: arranged in the order
  of time; with accounts of the Consuls, events of each year, &c.
  5_s._


Now ready, price 28_s._, cloth boards, Volumes III. and IV. of

  THE JUDGES OF ENGLAND. By Edward Foss, F.S.A. Comprehending the
  period from Edward I. to Richard III., 1272 to 1485.

  Lately published, price 28_s._

  VOLUMES I. and II. of the same Work; from the Conquest to the end
  of Henry III., 1066 to 1272.

  "A work in which a subject of great historical importance is
  treated with the care, diligence, and learning it deserves; in
  which Mr. Foss has brought to light many points previously
  unknown, corrected many errors, and shown such ample knowledge of
  his subject as to conduct it successfully through all the
  intricacies of a difficult investigation; and such taste and
  judgment as will enable him to quit, when occasion requires, the
  dry details of a professional inquiry, and to impart to his work
  as he proceeds, the grace and dignity of a philosophical
  history."--_Gent. Mag._

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.


LONDON HOMOEOPATHIC HOSPITAL, 32. Golden Square.

      Patroness.--H. R. H. the DUCHESS OF CAMBRIDGE.
      Vice-Patron.--His Grace the DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G.
      President--F.M. the MARQUIS OF ANGLESEY, K.G.., G.C.B.
      Vice-President.--His Grace the ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN.
      Treasurer.--John Dean Paul, Esq., 217. Strand.

  Open daily at 1 o'clock for the reception of out-patients without
  letters of recommendation. In-patients admitted every Tuesday, at
  3 o'clock.

  Subscriptions are earnestly solicited in aid of the funds of the
  Charity, and will be thankfully received by the Treasurer; the
  bankers, Messrs. Strahan and Co., Temple Bar; Messrs. Prescott and
  Co., Threadneedle Street; and by

      RALPH BUCHAN, Honorary Secretary.
      32. Golden Square.


Valuable Books and MSS., Charters, &c.

  PUTTICK AND SIMPSON, Auctioneers of Literary Property, will SELL,
  by AUCTION, at their Great Room, 191. Piccadilly, on MONDAY, July
  7, and Three following Days, a Collection of Valuable Books from
  the Library of a Clergyman, including some rare Works, and a good
  selection of modern and best Editions of the Works of Standard
  Authors, in good condition, many handsomely bound. Amongst the
  MSS. are, a very important and most interesting Volume of
  unpublished Works of Wicliffe and Hampole; the autograph and
  unpublished Diary of Arthur Annesley, Earl or Anglesey; numerous
  early Charters and Deeds from the Thirteenth to the Seventeenth
  Century, relating to BERKS, DERBYSHIRE, ESSEX, HEREFORDSHIRE,
  MIDDLESEX, NORFOLK, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, NOTTS, SHROPSHIRE,
  STAFFORDSHIRE (140 relate to this county), SUFFOLK, WILTS,
  YORKSHIRE, &c.: and having reference to the following Royal
  Personages and celebrated families, viz., HENRY III., EDWARD I.,
  RICHARD II. (about the Kentish Rebels), THOMAS PLANTAGENET, EARL
  OF LEICESTER, JOHN DUKE OF BRITANY, JAMES VI. of Scotland, MARY
  QUEEN OF SCOTS, Sir J. Bourchier, Sir W. Estefeld, Sir J. De
  Wyghall, Sir R. Bradshaigh, Sir J. Crumwell, Sir W. Aston, and
  many others. Catalogues will be sent on application.


NEW BOOKS AND NEW EDITIONS.

  History of Normandy and of England. By SIR FRANCIS PALGRAVE. Vol.
  I. Octavo. 21_s._

  Memoir of Edward Copleston, D. D., Bishop of Llandaff, with
  Selections from his Diary and Correspondence. By W. J. COPLESTON,
  M. A., Rector of Cromhall. 10_s._ 6_d._

  The Saint's Tragedy. By C. KINGSLEY, Rector of Eversley. With
  Preface, by PROFESSOR MAURICE. Cheaper Edition. 2_s._

  Yeast: a Problem. Reprinted, with Additions, from _Frazer's
  Magazine_. 9_s._

  Summer Time in the Country. By the REV. R. A. WILLMOTT. Second
  Edition. 5_s._

  Gazpacho; or, Summer Months in Spain. By WM. G. Clark, M. A.,
  Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Cheaper Edition. 5_s._

  Auvergne, Piedmont, and Savoy: a Summer Ramble. By CHARLES RICHARD
  WELD. 8_s._ 6_d._

  Young Italy. By A. BAILLIE COCHRANE, M.P. 10_s._ 6_d._

  College Life in the Time of James the First, as illustrated by an
  Unpublished Diary of Sir Symonds d'Ewes, Bart., M.P. Fellow
  Commoner of St. John's, Cambridge. 5_s._

  English Life, Social and Domestic, in the Middle of the Nineteenth
  Century. Second Edition, 44_s._ 6_d._

  Violenzia: a Tragedy. Small Octavo. 3_s._ 6_d._

  Justin Martyr, and other Poems. By R. CHENEVIX TRENCH. Third
  Edition. 6_s._

  Poems from Eastern Sources, Genoveva, and other Poems. By the same
  Author. Second Edition. 5_s._ 6_d._

  Schiller's Complete Poems, attempted in English. By EDGAR ALFRED
  BOWRING. 6_s._

  Ethel Lea: a Story. By ANNA KING, Author of "Hours of Childhood."
  2_s._ 6_d._

  Shipwrecks of the Royal Navy. Compiled from Official Documents. By
  W. O. S. GILLY. With a Preface by W. S. GILLY, D.D., Canon of
  Durham. Second Edition. 7_s._ 6_d._

  Correspondence of Sir Isaac Newton and Prof. Cotes and other
  unpublished Letters and Papers of Newton. Edited, with Synoptical
  View of Newton's Life, by J. EDLESTON, M.A., Fellow of Trinity
  College, Cambridge. With Portrait. 10_s._

  Student's Manual of Modern History. By W. COOKE TAYLOR, LL.D.
  Fifth Edition, with New Supplementary Chapter. 10_s._ 6_d._

  History of Mohammedanism. By the same Author. Cheaper Edition,
  4_s._

  Chemistry of the Crystal Palace: a Popular Account of the Chemical
  Properties of the Materials employed in its Construction. By T.
  GRIFFITHS. 5_5s._

  Chemistry of the four Ancient Elements. By the same Author. With
  numerous Illustrations. Second Edition. 4_s._ 6_d._

  German Mineral Waters, and their rational Employment for the Cure
  of certain Chronic Diseases. By S. SUTRO, M.D., Senior Physician
  of the German Hospital. 7_s._ 6_d._

  Harmony of Scripture and Geology; or, the Earth's Antiquity in
  Harmony with the Mosaic Record of Creation. By J. GRAY, M.A.,
  Rector of Dibden. Second Edition. 5_s._

  Familiar History of Birds. By E. STANLEY, D.D., Bishop of Norwich.
  Fifth Edition, with numerous Illustrations 5_s._

  Outlines of Physical Geography. By Miss R. M. ZORNLIN. 10_d._

  Recreations in Physical Geography; or, the Earth as It Is. By the
  same Author. Fourth Edition. 6_s._

  English Synonyms. Edited by R. WHATELEY, D.D., Archbishop of
  Dublin. 3_s._

  The Philosophy of Living. By HERBERT MAYO, M.D., formerly Surgeon
  to the Middlesex Hospital, Cheaper Edition, with Additions. 5_s._

  Commentary on the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans: with
  a New Translation and Notes. By W. WITHERS EWBANK, M.A., Incumbent
  of St. George's, Everton. Two Volumes. 5_s._ 6_d._ each.

  Guericke's Manual of the Antiquities of the Christian Church.
  Translated and Adapted to the Use of the English Church, by A. J.
  W. MORRISON, B.A. 5_s._ 6_d._

  Ullmann's Gregory of Nazianzum. A Contribution to the
  Ecclesiastical History of the Fourth Century. Translated by G. V.
  COX, M.A. 6_s._

  The Lord's Prayer. Nine Sermons. By F. D. MAURICE, M.A., Chaplain
  of Lincoln's Inn. Third Edition, in larger type. 2_s._ 6_d._

  St. Augustine's Exposition of the Sermon on the Mount. With an
  Essay on St. Augustine as an Interpreter of Scripture. By R.
  CHENEVIX TRENCH, B.D., Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Oxford.
  Second Edition. 7_s._

  The Essay separately, to complete the First Edition, 3_s._ 6_d._

  Canterbury Papers, containing the most recent Information relative
  to the Settlement of Canterbury, in New Zealand. Nos. I. to X.
  6_d._ each.

  Cautions for the Times, addressed to the Parishioners of a Parish
  in England, by their former Rector. In numbers, 2_d._ each.

  LONDON: JOHN W. PARKER & SON, WEST STRAND.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London. Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, July 5, 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-III]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June 7, 1851      | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]            | PG # 13536  |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850    | PG # 13571  |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851    | PG # 26770  |
      +-----------------------------------------------+-------------+

*/






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 88,
July 5, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, VOL. IV ***

***** This file should be named 37548.txt or 37548.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/5/4/37548/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
