The Project Gutenberg eBook, Great Inventions and Discoveries, by Willis
Duff Piercy


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Great Inventions and Discoveries


Author: Willis Duff Piercy



Release Date: September 30, 2011  [eBook #37574]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT INVENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES***


E-text prepared by Albert László and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (http://www.archive.org/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 37574-h.htm or 37574-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/37574/37574-h/37574-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/37574/37574-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/greatinventionsd00pier





[Illustration: THE FIRST SHEET FROM THE PRINTING PRESS]


Graded Supplementary Reading Series

GREAT INVENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES

by

WILLIS DUFF PIERCY







New York
Charles E. Merrill Company

Copyright, 1911
By Charles E. Merrill Co.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                          PAGE

   I. Introduction                                                  7

  II. The Printing Press                                           15

 III. The Steam Engine                                             30

  IV. Electricity: The Telegraph and the Telephone                 56

   V. Electricity: Lighting, Transportation, and Other Uses        78

  VI. The Discovery of America                                     92

 VII. Weapons and Gunpowder                                       108

VIII. Astronomical Discoveries and Inventions                     127

  IX. The Cotton-gin                                              138

   X. Anaesthetics                                                 147

  XI. Steel and Rubber                                            154

 XII. Stenography and the Typewriter                              164

XIII. The Friction Match                                          169

 XIV. Photography                                                 177

  XV. Clocks                                                      182

 XVI. Some Machines                                               188
      The Sewing Machine                                          188
      The Reaper                                                  192
      Spinning and Weaving Machines                               197

XVII. Aeronautics                                                 203




GREAT INVENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES




CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION


Tens of thousands of years ago, when the world was even then old,
primitive man came into existence. The first men lived in the branches
of trees or in their hollow trunks, and sometimes in caves. For food
they chased horses or caught fish from the streams along whose shores
they lived. If they had clothing, it was the skins of wild beasts. Life
was simple, slow, and crude. There were no cities, books, railroads,
clocks, newspapers, schools, churches, judges, teachers, automobiles,
or elections. Man lived with other animals and was little superior to
them. These primitive men are called cave-dwellers.

A resident of modern New York sits down to a breakfast gathered from
distant parts of the earth. He spreads out before him his daily
newspaper, which tells him what has happened during the last
twenty-four hours all over the world. Telegraph wires and ocean cables
have flashed these events across thousands of miles into the newspaper
offices and there great printing presses have recorded them upon paper.
After breakfast he gets into an electric street car or automobile and
is carried through miles of space in a very short time to a great steel
building hundreds of feet high. He steps into an electric elevator and
is whirled rapidly up to his office on the twentieth floor. The postman
brings a package of letters which fast-flying mail trains have brought
him during the night from far-away places. He reads them and then
speaks rapidly to a young woman who makes some crooked marks on paper.
After running her fingers rapidly over the keyboard of a little
machine, she hands him type-written replies to the letters he has
received. A boy brings him a little yellow envelope. In it he finds a
message from Seattle or London or Hong Kong or Buenos Ayres sent only a
few moments ago. He wishes to talk with a business associate in Boston
or St. Louis. Still sitting at his desk, he applies a small tube to his
ear and speaks to the man as distinctly and as instantaneously as if he
were in the next room. He finds it important to be in Chicago. After
luncheon, he boards a train equipped with the conveniences of his own
home, sleeps there comfortably, and flies through the thousand miles of
distance in time to have breakfast in Chicago the next morning.

What is the difference between the life of the cave-dweller and the
life of the modern New Yorker? We call it _civilization_. It is not at
one bound or at one thousand that we pass from the primitive cave to
New York City. Civilization is the accumulation of centuries of
achievement. It is builded, in the language of Isaiah, "line upon
line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little."

Different nations have accomplished different things and have scattered
the seeds of these accomplishments among other nations. Certain
individuals have seen farther in certain directions than their fellows
and have contributed to civilization the results of their vision.
Whoever has added to the safety, the happiness, the power, or the
convenience of society; whoever discovers a star or a microbe; whoever
paints a picture or plants a tree, builds a bridge or fights a
righteous battle; whoever makes two ears of corn grow where there grew
but one before; whoever lets the light shine in upon a darkened street
or a darkened spirit is an agent of civilization.

The history of civilization is largely a history of man's struggle
against the forces of nature and of his victory over them. Nature is
always saying to man, "Thou shalt not"; and man is always replying, "I
will." If diseases lurk in air and water, cures are ready in the mind
of man. Nature shoves men apart with lofty mountains; but man drives
his iron horse over the mountains or through them. Vast oceans roll and
mighty winds blow between continents; but steam laughs at stormy seas.
The moon's light is not sufficient for man's purposes and he makes a
brighter one. When winter blows his icy breath, man warms himself with
coal and fire. The South pours down upon him her scorching summer; but
he has learned how to freeze water into ice. Time and space conspire
together for human isolation; man conjures with electricity and with it
destroys both. The stars seek to hide their secrets behind immeasurable
distances; but an Italian gives man a glass that brings the heavens
closer before his vision. History tries to conceal itself in the
rubbish of ages; but with ink man preserves the past. His asylums,
hospitals, churches, schools, libraries, and universities are lights
along the shore guiding the human race in its voyage down the ever
widening stream of growth and possibility.

The centuries do not yield to man equal advancement. Some are very
fertile; others are almost, if not quite, barren. The entire period of
a thousand years stretching from the fall of Rome to the discovery of
America was as sterile as a heath. On the other hand, the nineteenth
century was the greatest in history in point of human progress,
especially in the field of inventions. It alone gave to man far more of
civilization than the whole ten centuries before the discovery of
America or indeed any other period of a thousand years. One hundred
years ago there was not a mile of railroad, ocean cable, or telegraph
wire in the world; not a telephone, automobile, electric light, or
typewriter. The people were then deriding the new-born idea of the
steamboat, and wireless telegraphy had not been dreamed of.

Even up to the beginning of the Revolutionary War, less than one
hundred fifty years ago, no man in America had ever seen an envelope, a
match, a stove, a piece of coal, a daily newspaper, a sewing machine, a
reaper, a drill, a mowing machine, ether, chloroform, galvanized iron,
India-rubber, or steam-driven machinery. We who are alive to-day are
fortunate more than any other generation thus far in the world's
population.

    "We are living, we are dwelling
        In a grand and awful time;
    In an age on ages telling--
        To be living is sublime."

The horse and the dog of to-day are not very different from the horses
and the dogs of a thousand years ago. From the beginning they have done
about all they can ever do. Not so with man. He is a progressive
animal. He is always reaching outward and upward for broader and higher
things. Tennyson sings,

    "For I doubt not thro' the ages one increasing purpose runs,
    And the thoughts of men are widen'd with the process of the suns."

The difference between the lives of the primitive cave-dweller and the
modern American is unspeakably vast. But looking far down the vista of
future ages, who shall say that the fortieth century may not as far
surpass the twentieth as the twentieth does the sleepy dawn of man's
existence on the earth? We are packing more of life into a day than our
ancestors could put into a month. And the hours of the centuries to
come hold a fuller experience than our days.

Thomas Carlyle calls man a "tool-using animal." Throughout all time man
has made and used tools. These tools are the best measure of his
civilization. According to the material out of which they have been
made, man's progress has been divided into epochs or ages.

Primitive man made a few implements of bone, horn, and stone. They were
few and crude. This period is called the Stone Age. During it men dwelt
in caves or huts, dressed themselves in skins, and lived by catching
fish, chasing wild animals, and gathering wild fruits. By and by man
learned how to make tools out of bronze, an alloy composed of copper
and tin. These bronze implements were more numerous and more efficient
than the stone tools and gave man a higher degree of power and
workmanship. With them he cut down trees or carved stone for his
dwellings and acquired generally a higher order of life. This era is
named the Bronze Age. Finally the use of iron was discovered. This
metal afforded many tools that could not be made of stone or
bronze--tools that were much stronger and more efficient. Man became
correspondingly more powerful and his life more complex. The period
during which iron was used is called the Iron Age.

_Invention_ is the making of some new thing not previously existing.
_Discovery_ is the finding of something already in existence but not
known before. There was no electric telegraph until Samuel Morse made
or invented it; America has always existed, but was not known until
Christopher Columbus found or discovered it.

Among all the builders of civilization, not the least are the inventors
and discoverers. High up on the page of those who have made the world
great will always stand the names of Gutenberg or Coster, Watt,
Stephenson, Morse, Edison, Fulton, Galileo, Newton, Columbus, Morton,
Bell, Marconi, and others who have invented new machines and discovered
new processes for making life more happy, safe, and powerful.

Regarding the influence of inventions upon civilization, Lord Salisbury
says: "The inventors and even the first users of the great discoveries
in applied science had never realized what influence their work was to
have upon industry, politics, society, and even religion. The discovery
of gunpowder simply annihilated feudalism, thus effecting an entire
change in the structure of government in Europe. As to the discovery of
printing, it not only made religious revolutions possible, but was the
basis on which modern democratic forms of government rested. The steam
engine not only changed all forms of industry and the conditions under
which industries were prosecuted, but it made practically contiguous
the most distant parts of the world, reducing its vastness to a
relatively contracted area. And now the introduction of electricity as
a form of force seems destined, as its development proceeds, to bring
about results quite as important in their way, though but yet dimly
seen by the most far-sighted."

Secretary Seward pays this tribute to invention: "The exercise of the
inventive faculty is the nearest akin to the Creator of any faculty
possessed by the human mind; for while it does not create in the sense
that the Creator did, yet it is the nearest approach to it of anything
known to man."

And Lord Bacon tells us: "The introduction of new inventions seemeth
to be the very chief of all human actions. The benefits of new
inventions may extend to all mankind universally; while the good of
political achievements can respect but some particular cantons of men;
these latter do not endure above a few ages, the former forever.
Inventions make all men happy, without injury to any one single
person. Furthermore, they are, as it were, new creations, and
imitations of God's own works."




CHAPTER II

THE PRINTING PRESS

    "Blessings be on the head of Cadmus, the Phoenicians, or whoever
    it is, that first invented books."

    _Thomas Carlyle._


"Except a living man," says Charles Kingsley, "there is nothing more
wonderful than a book--a message to us from the dead--from human souls
whom we never saw, who lived perhaps thousands of miles away; and yet
these, on those little sheets of paper, speak to us, amuse us, vivify
us, teach us, comfort us, open their hearts to us as brothers. We ought
to reverence books, to look at them as useful and mighty things."
Milton calls a good book "the precious life blood of a master spirit,
embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a life beyond life." Cicero
likens a room without books to a body without a soul. Ruskin says,
"Bread of flour is good; but there is bread, sweet as honey, if we
would eat it, in a good book." And Thomas Carlyle exclaims: "Wondrous,
indeed, is the virtue of a true book! O thou who art able to write a
book, which once in two centuries or oftener there is a man gifted to
do, envy not him whom they name city-builder, and inexpressibly pity
him whom they name conqueror or city-burner!"

Is it not wonderful that a record of all the world has thought and said
and felt and done can be deposited in a corner of my room, and that
there I may sit and commune with the master spirits of all the
centuries? Socrates, Plato, Homer, Cicero, Virgil, Horace, Paul, David,
Moses, Buddha, Confucius, Goethe, Dante, Shakespeare, Hugo, Wordsworth,
Tennyson, Carlyle, and Emerson, all in one room at the same time!

Great as books are, however, the world has not long had them. For many
generations after man's advent, he had no language. He communicated
with his fellows by means of gestures or gave vent to his feelings in
rude grunts or cries, much as the lower animals do now. But God gave to
man something He did not bestow upon the other animals--the power of
articulate speech. Certain sounds came to represent certain ideas and a
kind of oral language grew up. This became more and more highly
developed as time went by. For centuries the traditions, stories, and
songs of men were handed down orally from father to son and were
preserved only in the memory. The poems of Homer, the great Greek bard,
were recited by readers to large audiences, some of them numbering
probably twenty thousand.

By and by men felt the need of preserving their thoughts in some more
permanent way than by memory, and there grew up a rude system of
writing. At first pictures or rude imitations of objects were used; a
circle or a disc might represent the sun, and a crescent the moon. The
idea of a tree was denoted by the picture of a tree. The early Indians
of North America were among the peoples who used a system of picture
writing. In process of time, as men grew in knowledge and culture,
certain fixed signs began to denote certain sounds, and a phonetic
system of writing was developed.

For the first phonetic alphabet it is generally supposed that we are
indebted to the Phoenicians, an active, commercial people, who lived
along the eastern shore of the Mediterranean Sea. They were a maritime
nation and scattered their alphabet wherever they sailed, so that some
kind of phonetic alphabet finally existed throughout the civilized
world.

Books among the ancients were very different from the books of the
present. Paper has not been known long, nor, indeed, has the art of
printing. When man began to preserve his thoughts and deeds in more
permanent form than in the memory, various substances were used to
write upon. Josephus, an historian of the Jews, mentions two columns,
one of stone and the other of brick, upon which the children of Seth
wrote accounts of their inventions and astronomical discoveries.
Tablets of lead containing the works of Hesiod, a Greek writer, were
deposited in the temple of the Muses in Boeotia. According to the
Bible, the ten commandments which the Lord gave to Moses on Mount Sinai
for the children of Israel were engraved on two tablets of stone; and
the laws of Solon, the great Grecian law-giver, were carved on planks
of wood.

Sixty centuries ago on the banks of the Nile in northern Africa
flourished the civilization of the Egyptians. There grew abundantly in
Egypt a marsh reed called the papyrus. From the name of this plant is
derived our word _paper_. The Egyptians made their books from the
papyrus plant. With a sharp instrument they cut lengthwise strips
through the stalk, put these strips together edge to edge, and on them
at right angles, placed another layer of shorter strips. The two layers
were then moistened with Nile water, pressed together, and left to dry.
A leaf of writing material was thus produced. Any roughness on the
surface of the sheet was polished away with some smooth instrument. A
number of leaves were then glued together so as to form a long piece of
the material. The Egyptians took reeds, dipped them in gum water
colored with charcoal or with a kind of resinous soot, and wrote on the
long papyrus strip. Sometimes ink was made of the cuttle fish or from
lees of wine. After the papyrus had been written upon, it was rolled up
and became an Egyptian book. Papyrus was used for writing material not
only by the Egyptians but by the Greeks and the Romans also, and for a
long time it was the chief substance used for writing throughout the
civilized world. It continued in use to a greater or less extent till
about the seventh century after Christ.

On the plains of Asia lived the Chaldeans, whose civilization was
about as old as that of the Egyptians. But their books were very
different. Men use for their purposes the things that are close at
hand. In Egypt the papyrus plant was utilized for making books. In
Chaldea, instead of this marsh reed, there were great stores of clay
and of this material the ancient Chaldeans, and the Babylonians and
the Assyrians who followed them, made their books. The Chaldeans took
bricks or masses of smooth clay and, while they were yet soft, made
impressions on them with a metal stiletto shaped at the end like the
side of a wedge. In Latin the word for _wedge_ is _cuneus_. Hence
this old writing of the Chaldeans is called cuneiform or wedge-shaped.
Some of these wedge-shaped impressions stood for whole words, others
for syllables. After the clay tablets had been written upon, they were
burned or dried hard in the sun. A Chaldean book was thus made very
durable and lasted for ages. During recent years many of them have
been dug up in ancient Babylonia and deciphered. They consist of
grammars, dictionaries, religious books and hymns, laws, public
documents, and records of private business transactions.

The early Greeks and Romans used for their books tablets of ivory or
metal or, more commonly, tablets of wood taken from the beech or fir
tree. The inner sides of these tablets were coated with wax. On this
wax coating the letters were traced with a pointed metallic pen or
stiletto called the stylus. Our English word _style_, as used in
rhetoric, comes from the name of this instrument. The other end of the
stylus was used for erasing. Two of these waxed tablets, joined at the
edges by wire hinges, were the earliest specimens of bookbinding. Wax
tablets of this kind continued in partial use in Europe through the
Middle Ages. Later the leaves of the palm tree were used; then the
inner bark of the lime, ash, maple, or elm.

The next material that came into general use for writing purposes was
parchment. This was made from the skins of animals, particularly sheep
or lambs. Next came vellum, the prepared skin of the calf. Parchment
and vellum were written upon with a metallic pen. As these substances
were very costly, sometimes one book was written over another on the
same piece of parchment or vellum. Of course this made the reading of
the manuscript very difficult.

About the end of the ninth century or the beginning of the tenth, after
Christ, parchment and vellum as material for books gave way to paper.
At first paper was made of cotton, but during the twelfth century it
was produced from linen. It is not known who invented linen paper, but
its introduction gave the first great impulse to book making.

In the early Greek books the lines ran in opposite directions
alternately. That is, there would be a line from left to right across
the page, and then the next lower line would begin at the right and run
towards the left. Among some of the Orientals the lines ran from right
to left. In the old Chinese books the lines were vertical down the
page, as they are still. Among Western and Northern peoples the lines
ran from left to right as in our modern books.

The old civilizations of Egypt and Babylonia, in which the art of
book-making originated, sprang up, flourished, and decayed, burying
from the sight of men precious secrets in the arts and sciences. The
beautiful flower of Greek culture budded, bloomed, and withered.
Passing on from east to west, civilization knocked at the door of Rome
and awakened there such military and legal genius as the world had not
yet seen. Then a horde of wild barbarians poured over the mountains of
northern Italy and overthrew the mighty city on the Tiber. The sun of
civilization was setting, at least for a time. Night was coming on, the
night of the Dark Ages, a night without a star of human thought or
achievement, a night full of the noxious vapors of ignorance and
superstition.

About the beginning of the fifteenth century after Christ there came
over the world a great intellectual awakening. The human intellect
began to awake, to stretch itself, to go forth and conquer. One of the
first signs and causes of this intellectual awakening was an event that
happened at Mainz in Germany or at Haarlem in Holland, or possibly in
both places at the same time. Of all the events that have made for
civilization and have influenced the progress of the human race, this
event at Haarlem or Mainz is the most important. It is the invention of
printing. Before this time, ever since man began to record his
thoughts, whether on plank, stone, or papyrus, on bark of tree, skin of
animal, or tablet of wax or paper, every letter was made by hand. The
process was necessarily slow, books were rare and costly, and only the
few could have them. But with the advent of a process that would
multiply books and make them cheap, learning was made accessible to the
multitude. The clang of the first printing press was the death knell of
ignorance and tyranny.

[Illustration: AN ADVERTISEMENT OF CAXTON, THE FIRST PRINTER IN
ENGLAND]

Before the invention of printing with movable, metal types, a kind of
block printing was used. The words or letters were carved on a block of
wood; the block was applied to paper, silk, cloth, or vellum, and thus
impressions were made.

It has always been a matter of dispute as to who invented printing. It
is fairly clear that printing, both with blocks and with movable types,
was practised in China and Japan long before it was in Europe. There is
a tradition that as far back as 175 A.D. Chinese classics were cut upon
tablets of stone, that these tablets were placed outside the
university, and that impressions were made from them. However, we are
not indebted to China or Japan for the art of printing. The real
invention of printing, so far as the civilized world is concerned,
occurred in Europe in the latter part of the fifteenth century. The
inventor is often said to be Johann Gutenberg, of Mainz, Germany.
Another strong claimant for this honor is Lourens Janszoon Coster, who
lived at Haarlem, in Holland.

Concerning the lives of Coster and Gutenberg little is known. Coster
was born at Haarlem, Holland, about 1370 A.D. He was a member of the
Haarlem Council, assessor and treasurer. He probably perished in the
plague that visited Haarlem in 1439-40. Gutenberg was born of noble
parents at Mainz, Germany, in 1410. He had an active mind and gave
attention to the manufacture of money, the polishing of stones, and the
making of looking-glasses, besides his efforts in printing. He died in
February, 1468, poor, childless, and almost friendless.

The first printed book, so far as can be determined, was made at Mainz,
Germany, and bears the date of 1454 A.D. From certain legal records it
is supposed that Gutenberg was the maker of this book and the inventor
of printing. On the other hand, there is a story that Coster, while
walking in the woods one autumn afternoon, chanced to make for his
little grandchild some letters from the bark of a tree; that these
letters suggested to him the idea of metallic types; and that he, and
not Gutenberg, was the inventor of printing. As the story goes, a slave
stole Coster's types and ran away with them from Haarlem to Mainz; and
the books which, it is supposed, were made at the latter place came
really from Coster's types, not Gutenberg's. The fact cannot be known.
It has hopelessly gone with the years.

This first book, which was printed in two different editions, consisted
of certain letters written by Pope Nicholas V in behalf of the kingdom
of Cyprus. By about 1477 A.D. printing had extended from Mainz to all
the chief towns of Germany, Italy, Switzerland, France, the
Netherlands, Spain, and England. By the beginning of the sixteenth
century it had spread to all the principal places of Europe.

In the type of the early books the various letter forms were not fixed
as they are in modern books, but the type for each book was made as
much as possible like the writing of the original manuscript. As
printers moved from place to place introducing their art, it seems that
not one carried away the types of his master but each made his own
anew. Type was originally made and set up by hand, piece by piece, so
that even the production of printed books was very slow. Various
mechanical devices have been invented from time to time, quickening and
cheapening the making of books and other printed matter, so that to-day
printers turn out books and papers in large quantities in an amazingly
short time.

[Illustration: THE PRINTING PRESS IN BOSTON AT WHICH FRANKLIN
WORKED]

The first newspaper in the world is believed to have been the _Frankfurter
Journal_, published about 1615 A.D. at Frankfort-on-the-Main, in
Germany. But of this there is no certainty. Newspapers, however, had
their beginnings in Germany and Italy some time in the latter part of
the sixteenth or the first part of the seventeenth century. It is
believed that the _Weekly News_, started in London in 1622, was the
first newspaper published in England. In the United States there
was a printing press attached to Harvard College, at Cambridge,
Massachusetts, as early as 1638, two years after the college was
founded, and only six years after the settlement of Boston. With this
one exception, for a long time there were no printing presses in the
colonies. A newspaper called _Publick Occurrences_ was started in
Boston in 1690, but it was soon afterward suppressed by the British
government. The first permanent newspaper in America was the _Boston
News Letter_, established at Boston in 1704.

One of the greatest wonders and triumphs of civilization is the great
modern daily newspaper. It occupies a giant "sky-scraper" as its home,
employs a small army of workmen, spends vast sums of money in obtaining
and printing the news, and is sold for a cent per copy. The head of a
newspaper staff is the editor-in-chief. He is in a general way
responsible to the publishers for the paper. Next in command is the
managing editor who has charge of the actual work of publication.
Subordinate to the managing editor are other editors who have control
over various departments of the paper. The telegraph editor looks after
news sent by telegraph; the city editor has charge of happenings in the
city of publication; the exchange editor clips items from other papers;
the religious editor attends to affairs of religion; the sporting
editor collects and arranges news of sports and games; the commercial
editor works with the markets and matters of commerce and business; the
society editor gives attention to social functions; and the dramatic
editor takes note of the theaters. The city editor commands a company
of perhaps half a hundred reporters, who are sent scurrying daily
throughout the city to bring in the news from its various sources. One
goes to the ball game, another to a funeral, another to the courts,
another to a hotel to interview some prominent person, and still
another goes to a political convention. There are also photographers,
illustrators, and editorial writers.

At the close of the day, special correspondents and representatives of
press associations in every nook and corner of the earth send the
world's news for the day by telegraph and ocean cable direct into the
newspaper office. A king has died; a battle has been fought; storm,
earthquake, or fire has destroyed a city; or there has been some
achievement in science or art. The local reporters have brought in the
news of the city. After all has been quickly written, examined, and
edited, the reports are sent to the composing room to be put into type.

The foreman of the composing room distributes the manuscript, called
copy, among skilled operators, who by means of type-setting machines
put it into type. Impressions are then made from this type on strips of
paper. These impressions are called proofs. Proof readers compare these
proofs with the original copy for the purpose of correcting errors.
After the correction of errors the columns of type, called galleys, are
locked up in a form which is the size of a page. The form is next sent
to the stereotyping room, where an exact reproduction is made in metal.
The metal plates are put in place on the presses. The machinery is
started. Tons of white paper are fed into the presses at one end. Out
at another in an instant comes the finished newspaper, printed, cut,
and folded. These papers are counted and delivered automatically to the
mailing room, at the rate of about 100,000 copies in an hour, for the
improved, modern press. After their arrival at the mailing room, papers
that are for out-of-town subscribers are wrapped in packages,
addressed, and carried in express wagons to fast mail trains, which
carry this record of what man did the previous day to readers hundreds
of miles away.

This afternoon at five o'clock a prominent man dies suddenly in San
Francisco. To-night at midnight the newspapers of St. Louis, Chicago,
and New York will come from the press with his picture and a long
sketch of his life. How is this possible in so short a time? The papers
have on file, arranged in alphabetical order, photographs of prominent
persons and places and biographical sketches of great men, kept up to
date. Whenever any noted person, place, or thing is made conspicuous by
any event, the picture and sketch are taken from the files and used.

It is the electric telegraph that makes possible the modern daily
newspaper. Before its invention, papers resorted to various devices for
transmitting news. For some years messengers riding ponies brought news
from Washington to the New York papers. These papers also utilized
small, swift-sailing vessels to meet incoming ships bearing news from
foreign countries.

A recent bulletin on printing and publishing issued by the Census
Bureau of the United States government showed that there were in the
United States 21,394 newspapers and periodicals, printed in
twenty-seven different languages. Of these, 2,452 were daily; 15,046
weekly; 2,500 monthly; 353 quarterly; 58 tri-weekly; 645 semi-weekly;
and 340 of all other kinds. 20,184 of these papers were English; 619
German; 158 Scandinavian; 58 Italian; 41 French; 44 Bohemian; 31
Spanish; 18 Hebrew; 21 Dutch; 7 Chinese; 9 Japanese; 5 Greek; 46
Polish; 5 Hungarian; 3 Arabic; and two each in the Welsh, Syrian and
Gaelic languages. The capital invested in printing and publishing in
the United States was a little more than $385,000,000. It would take
one person twelve hours a day every day for six thousand years, or from
the beginnings of Egyptian and Babylonian civilization to the dawn of
the twentieth century, to read at an average rate all the papers
published in the United States during a single year.




CHAPTER III

THE STEAM ENGINE


THE SONG OF STEAM

BY GEORGE WASHINGTON CUTTER

    Harness me down with your iron bands;
      Be sure of your curb and rein;
    For I scorn the power of your puny hands,
      As the tempest scorns a chain.
    How I laughed as I lay concealed from sight
      For many a countless hour,
    At the childish boast of human might,
      And the pride of human power.

    When I saw an army upon the land,
      A navy upon the seas,
    Creeping along, a snail-like band,
      Or waiting the wayward breeze;
    When I marked the peasant faintly reel
      With the toil which he daily bore,
    As he feebly turned the tardy wheel,
      Or tugged at the weary oar;

    When I measured the panting courser's speed,
      The flight of the courier dove,
    As they bore the law a king decreed,
      Or the lines of impatient love,--
    I could not but think how the world would feel,
      As these were outstripped afar,
    When I should be bound to the rushing keel,
      Or chained to the flying car;

    Ha, ha! they found me out at last;
      They invited me forth at length;
    And I rushed to my throne with a thunder-blast,
      And I laughed in my iron strength.
    Oh, then ye saw a wondrous change
      On the earth and the ocean wide,
    Where now my fiery armies range,
      Nor wait for wind and tide.

    Hurrah! hurrah! the waters o'er;
      The mountain's steep decline;
    Time--space--have yielded to my power;
      The world--the world is mine!
    The rivers the sun hath earliest blest,
      Or those where his beams decline;
    The giant streams of the queenly West,
      And the Orient floods divine.

    The ocean pales where'er I sweep,
      I in my strength rejoice;
    And the monsters of the briny deep
      Cower, trembling, at my voice.
    I carry the wealth and the lord of earth,
      The thoughts of his god-like mind;
    The wind lags after my going forth,
      The lightning is left behind.

    In the darksome depths of the fathomless mine
      My tireless arm doth play,
    Where the rocks never saw the sun decline,
      Or the dawn of the glorious day.
    I bring earth's glittering jewels up
      From the hidden caves below,
    And I make the fountain's granite cup
      With a crystal gush o'erflow.

    I blow the bellows, I forge the steel,
      In all the shops of trade;
    I hammer the ore, and turn the wheel,
      Where my arms of strength are made;
    I manage the furnace, the mill, the mint;
      I carry, I spin, I weave;
    And all my doings I put into print
      On every Saturday eve.

    I've no muscle to weary, no breast to decay,
      No bones to be "laid on the shelf,"
    And soon I intend you may "go and play,"
      While I manage this world myself.
    But harness me down with your iron bands,
      Be sure of your curb and rein;
    For I scorn the power of your puny hands,
      As the tempest scorns a chain!

The most powerful and important mass of matter on the earth is the
steam engine. It is the throbbing heart of civilization, even as the
printing press is its brain. It would be difficult for man to compute
his debt to steam. Upon it he relies for food, clothing, and shelter,
the three necessities for which the race has always striven; and
without it he could have scarcely any of life's comforts and luxuries.
Steam is the mistress of commerce, manufacturing, and mining, and the
servant of agriculture. Steam gives employment to millions of men. It
plants cities and towns in waste places. It enables man to leave the
little valley or hillside where his fathers lived, and makes of him a
citizen of the world. It lessens the power of time and space, and makes
neighbors of ocean-divided continents.

It would not be easy for men living in the twentieth century to imagine
a society uninfluenced by the use of steam; but nearly all of man's
life on the earth has been passed without its help. Fire and water, the
two productive factors of steam, have always existed; but it was not
until a few score of years ago that man learned to put them together
successfully, and to produce the greatest force known to civilization.
In the few years since its discovery it has spread to every nook and
corner of civilization. Suppose you could ascend to some great height
whence you could see working at one time all the steam driven machinery
in the world. What a sight it would be! What if the noise from all this
machinery--the screech of the speeding locomotive, the hum and roar of
factory and mill, the hoarse yell of ships, and the puffing of
mine-engines--should reach your ear at once? What a sound it would be!

The idea of using steam for driving stationary machinery originated in
the early centuries. This was the first use to which steam was put. For
a long time no one seems to have thought of using it for transportation
purposes. As far back as 130 B.C., we find mention of "heat engines,"
which employed steam as their motive power, and were used for organ
blowing, the turning of spits, and like purposes. But from this early
date till the seventeenth century practically no progress was made in
the use of steam. Though men had experimented with steam up to this
time with more or less success, the world is chiefly indebted for the
developed type of the steam engine to James Watt and George Stephenson.

Watt was born in Greenock, Scotland, January 19, 1736. He was a poor
boy and early in life he was thrown upon his own resources. During his
youth he struggled against ill health; for days at a time he was
prostrated with severe headaches. But he was bright, determined, and
had a genial disposition that made him many friends. When he was
twenty-one years old, he secured a position as maker of scientific
instruments for the university in Glasgow. He began discussing with
some scientific friends at the university the possibility of improving
the steam engine, which at that time was used only for pumping water,
chiefly in the drainage of mines. He entered upon a scientific study of
the properties of steam and tried to devise means for making the steam
engine more useful. One Sunday afternoon early in 1765, while walking
in Glasgow, the idea he had studied so long to evolve suddenly flashed
into his mind. Without delay Watt put his plan to the test and found
that it worked.

For a long time, owing to a lack of money, he had difficulty in
establishing the merits of his improvements. Finally he formed a
partnership with Matthew Boulton, a wealthy and energetic man who lived
at Birmingham, England. They began the manufacture of steam engines at
Birmingham, under the firm name of Boulton and Watt. This partnership
was very successful. Watt supplied the inventions; Boulton furnished
the money and attended to the business.

Before the time of Watt, the steam engine was exclusively a steam
pump--slow, cumbrous, wasteful of fuel, and very little used. Watt made
it a quick, powerful, and efficient engine, requiring only a fourth as
much fuel as before. Under his first patent the engine was still used
only as a steam pump; but his later improvements adapted it for driving
stationary machinery of all kinds and, save in a few respects, left it
essentially what it is to-day. Prior to Watt's inventions, the mines of
Great Britain were far from thriving. Many were even on the point of
being abandoned, through the difficulty of removing the large
quantities of water that collected in them. His improvements made it
possible to remove this water at a moderate cost, and this gave many of
the mines a new lease of life. The commercial success of his engine was
soon fully established.

Watt paid practically no attention to the use of steam for purposes of
transportation. In one of his patents he described a steam locomotive;
but he offered little encouragement when his chief assistant, Murdoch,
who was the inventor of gas lighting, made experiments with steam for
locomotion. The notion then was to use a steam carriage on ordinary
roads. Railroads had not been thought of. When the idea of using steam
on railways began to take shape in the later days of Watt, he refused
to encourage the plan. It is said that he even put a clause in a lease
of his house, providing that no steam carriage should ever approach it
under any pretext whatever.

Besides developing the steam engine, Watt made other inventions,
including a press for copying letters. He also probably discovered the
chemical composition of water. He died at Heathfield, England, on the
nineteenth of August, 1819.

It is denied many men to see the magnitude of their achievements. Moses
died on Pisgah, in sight of the "Promised Land," toward which for forty
years he had led the children of Israel through the wilderness. Wolfe
gave up his life on the plains of Quebec just as the first shouts of
the routed French greeted his ears. Columbus was sent home in chains
from the America he had discovered, not dreaming he had given to
civilization another world. Lincoln's eyes were closed forever at the
very dawn of peace, after he had watched in patience through the long
and fearful night of the Civil War. It never appeared to James Watt
that the idea which flashed into his mind that Sunday afternoon while
he was walking in the streets of Glasgow, would transform human life;
that like a mighty multiplier it would increase the product of man's
power and give him dominion, not over the beasts of the field and the
fowls of the air, but over tide and wind, space and time.

Victor Hugo calls locomotives "these giant draft horses of
civilization." But man never harnessed these wonderful iron animals
until the time of George Stephenson, less than a hundred years ago.

Stephenson was born at Wylam, near Newcastle, England, June 9, 1781.
His father was a fireman of a coal-mine engine at that place. In
boyhood George was a cowherd, but he spent his spare time making clay
models of engines and other objects of a mechanical nature. When he was
fourteen years old, he became assistant to his father in firing the
engine at the colliery, and three years later he was advanced to engine
driving. At this time he could not even read; but, stimulated by a
strong desire to know more of the engines made by Boulton and Watt, he
began in his eighteenth year to attend a night school. He learned
rapidly. During most of this time he studied various experiments with a
view to making a successful steam locomotive.

Modern railways had their origin in roads called tramways, which were
used for hauling coal from the mines of England to the sea. At first
ordinary dirt roads were used for this purpose; but as the heavy
traffic wore these roads away, it become the practice to place planks
or timbers at the bottoms of the ruts. Afterwards wooden rails were
laid straight and parallel on the level surface. The rails were oak
scantlings held together with cross timbers of the same material,
fastened by means of large oak pins. Later strips of iron were nailed
on the tops of the wooden rails. Over these rails, bulky, four-wheeled
carts loaded with coal were pulled by horses.

Stephenson made what he called a traveling engine for the tramways
leading from the mines where he worked to the sea, nine miles distant.
He named his engine "My Lord." On July 25, 1814, he made a successful
trial trip with it.

The successful use of steam in hauling coal from the mines led
thoughtful persons to consider its use for carrying merchandise and
passengers. At this time freight was transported inland by means of
canals. This method was slow; thirty-six hours were required for
traveling fifty miles. Passengers were conveyed by coaches drawn by
horses. In 1821 a railroad for the transportation of merchandise and
passengers was opened between Stockton and Darlington in England. The
line, including three branches, was thirty-eight miles long. The plan
was to use animal power on this road, but George Stephenson secured
permission to try on it his steam locomotive.

In September, 1825, the first train passed over the road. It consisted
of thirty-four cars weighing, all told, ninety tons. The train was
pulled by Stephenson's engine, operated by Stephenson himself, with a
signalman riding on horseback in advance. The train moved off at the
rate of ten or twelve miles an hour, and on certain parts of the road
it reached a speed of fifteen miles per hour. The trial was a complete
success.

The road had been built chiefly for the transportation of freight, but
from the first passengers insisted on being carried, and in October,
1825, the Company began to run a daily passenger coach called the
"Experiment." This coach carried six persons inside and from fifteen
to twenty outside. The round trip between Stockton and Darlington was
made in two hours. A fare of one shilling was charged, and each
passenger was allowed fourteen pounds of baggage free. The Stockton
and Darlington was the first railway in the world over which
passengers and freight were hauled by steam.

Stephenson was next employed to help construct a railway between
Liverpool and Manchester. The most eminent engineers of the day
predicted that the road could not be built. But it was built. On the
fifteenth of September, 1830, Stephenson made a trial trip over the
road with an improved locomotive named the "Rocket." On the trial trip
the "Rocket" made twenty-nine miles an hour. This trip firmly proved
the possibilities of steam as motive power on railways and started the
modern era of railroad building. Other railways were quickly built and
soon they radiated from London to nearly every English seaport.

[Illustration: AN EARLY RAILROAD TRAIN IN ENGLANDAN EARLY RAILROAD
TRAIN IN ENGLAND]

Stephenson's son, Robert, assisted him in the construction of the
"Rocket" and later attained considerable reputation as an engineer.

It is claimed that George Stephenson was the inventor of the safety
lamp for use in mines, an invention usually accredited to Sir Humphry
Davy. He was often consulted in the building of subsequent railroads,
but he spent the last years of his life in farming and gardening at his
home at Chesterfield, England, where he died August 12, 1848.


Before the days of railroads in America, freight was hauled on canals
and passengers rode in stage coaches or on horseback. A coach made the
trip from Boston to New York twice a week and the journey required six
days. A trip from New York to Philadelphia took two days. From
Philadelphia to Baltimore the roads were good, but south of Baltimore
they were bad and even dangerous. South of the James River the traveler
was compelled to make his journey on horseback. A coach from Charleston
to Savannah was the only public conveyance south of the Potomac River.

In the days of the old colonial stagecoach, if a traveler wished to go
from Boston to New York, he would have to be ready to begin the journey
at three o'clock in the morning. The stage had no glass windows, no
door or step, and passengers were obliged to climb in at the front. One
pair of horses pulled the stage eighteen miles, and then they were
relieved by another pair. At about ten o'clock in the evening, after a
day's journey of forty miles, the stage drew up at an inn for the
night. At three o'clock the next morning, after dressing by the light
of a horn lantern, the traveler must resume his journey. If the roads
were bad, he might have to alight from the stage and help the driver
pull the wheels out of the mud. Rivers were crossed on clumsy
flat-boats. When the streams were swollen with rains or filled with
floating ice, the passage across was often dangerous. The trip from
Boston to Philadelphia, which would have taken eight days of
Washington's time, can easily be made now by train in as many hours. In
these days of the modern railroad, San Francisco is nearer in time to
New York than Washington was scarcely a hundred years ago.

The first railway in America was built in 1826. It connected a granite
quarry at Quincy, Massachusetts, with the town of Milton in the same
state. It was only two or three miles long, and was operated with
horses. In May, 1829, three English locomotives--the first ever seen in
America--were unloaded at New York City. On August 9 of the same year,
one of these engines was tried at Honesdale, Pennsylvania. This was the
first time that a locomotive ever turned a wheel on a railway in
America.

A canal which the business men of Philadelphia proposed to construct
from their city to Pittsburg, in order to give them access to the trade
centers of the West, threatened the commercial prosperity of Baltimore.
To offset the advantages which this canal would give Philadelphia, at a
great public meeting in Baltimore it was decided to build a railway
from Baltimore to some point on the Ohio River. The road was named the
Baltimore and Ohio. In 1830 it was finished from Baltimore as far as
Ellicott's Mills, a distance of fifteen miles. The Baltimore and Ohio
was the first railroad in the United States built for the express
purpose of carrying passengers and freight. The original intention was
to pull cars over this road with horses. But Peter Cooper persuaded the
railroad officials to try his engine "Tom Thumb," which he had built in
1829. The trial was successful, for "Tom Thumb" drew a car-load of
passengers at the rate of fifteen to eighteen miles per hour. This
engine was the first locomotive built in America, and its trial was the
first trip ever made by an American locomotive.

The first railroad in the United States constructed with the original
purpose of using steam as motive power was the South Carolina railroad,
a line one hundred thirty-six miles long between Charleston and
Hamburg. A locomotive built in New York City, called the "Best Friend,"
made its first trip over this road in November, 1830. It was the first
locomotive to run regularly on a railroad in the United States.

Railroad building spread rapidly in America, as it had in England. By
1835 there were twenty-two railroads in the United States, two of them
being west of the Alleghenies, though no road was more than one hundred
forty miles in length. There was no railroad west of the Mississippi
River prior to 1853, and in that year a line only thirty-eight miles
long was built. During 1906 alone, 5516 miles of railroad were
constructed in the United States. At the end of that year, there was a
total in the United States of 222,635 miles, or nearly enough to reach
nine times around the entire globe. The United States now has thirty
per cent. more miles of railway main track than all of Europe, and
contains two fifths of the railroad mileage of the world. The railroads
of the United States represent a value of about fifteen billion
dollars, and give employment to a million and a half persons.

The Pennsylvania Railroad was originally owned by the state. Any one
could use it by paying certain charges, and each person operating the
road furnished his own cars, horses, and drivers. There were frequent
blockades; when two cars going in opposite directions met, one had to
turn back. If rival shippers came together and neither was willing to
yield to the other, a fight probably settled the rights of precedence.
After a time steam became the sole motive power, and the locomotives
were owned by the state.

The railroad journeys of our grandfathers were very different from our
own. In their day the rails were wooden beams or stringers laid on
horizontal blocks of stone. Strips of iron were fastened with spikes to
the tops of the wooden rails. The cars were small, each seating only a
few passengers. The locomotive was crude. Its greatest speed was about
fifteen miles an hour. It could not climb a hill, and when a grade was
reached, the cars had to be pulled up or let down with ropes managed by
a stationary engine. No cab sheltered the engineer; no brake checked
the speed. Sometimes the spikes fastening the iron strips to the tops
of the wooden rails worked loose, and these strips curled up and
penetrated the bottoms of the cars, greatly to the annoyance and fright
of the traveler. The bridges in those days were roofed. The smokestack
of the locomotive, being too tall to pass under the roof, was made in
two joints or sections fastened together with hinges. When the train
approached a bridge, the top section of the stack was lowered. As wood
only was used for fuel, the stack emitted a shower of sparks, smoke,
and hot cinders. The passengers coughed and sputtered, and covered
their eyes, mouths, and noses with handkerchiefs.

The trip from Chicago to New York is about a thousand miles, over
prairie, river, and mountain. Should you make the journey between these
cities over the Pennsylvania Railroad of to-day, there would be little
danger of conflict because two rival trains might want the track at the
same time. Nor would you have to wait while ropes pulled the train up a
grade, for the locomotive can climb the hills. Instead of the old
wooden rails with their strips of iron, there is a double track of
solid steel rails all the way. The landscape would fly past you at the
rate of a mile a minute, instead of fifteen miles an hour.

Let us suppose that you leave Chicago at 2.45 o'clock P.M., central
time. Before the train starts you could telephone to a friend without
leaving the car. You might sit down, in an elegant dining-car, to a
dinner of all the delicacies the market could afford. You might occupy
your own exclusive compartment in a luxuriously equipped Pullman car,
lit by electric bulbs, or you could spend the evening reading the
magazines, newspapers, and books provided in the train library. You
might write at a comfortable desk with train stationery, or dictate
letters and telegrams to the train stenographer. You are provided with
hot and cold water, bathing facilities, and a barber shop. A maid could
be summoned to the service of women and children; and a valet would be
in attendance to sponge and press clothing over night. You would arrive
in New York the next morning at 9.45 o'clock, having traveled the
thousand miles in eighteen hours.

Simple as the idea of the sleeping-car is in reality, it was not
introduced until 1858, when the Lake Shore Railroad ran the first crude
and uncomfortable night-cars. George M. Pullman in 1859 set for himself
the task of producing a palace car which should be used for continuous
and comfortable travel through long distances by day and night. He
remodelled into sleeping-cars two passenger coaches belonging to the
Chicago and Alton Railroad. Though these cars fell far below the
inventor's ideal, they were far in advance of the first make-shifts and
in consequence created a demand for more and better cars of the same
kind. In 1863, at his factory in Chicago, Pullman began the
construction of the "Pioneer," the first of the Pullman palace cars.
This car was built at a cost of $18,000. It was first used in the
funeral train which conveyed the body of President Lincoln to his
burial place in Springfield, Illinois.

Few inventions have been financially so remunerative to the inventors
as the Pullman palace car. It brought Mr. Pullman an immense fortune.
The Pullman Palace Car Company, founded by Pullman in 1867, is one of
the largest and most successful manufacturing concerns in America. It
employs a capital of $40,000,000, gives work to fourteen thousand
persons, furnishes sleeping-car service for 120,000 miles of railway,
and operates over 2,000 cars. Mr. Pullman adopted plans for the
vestibule car in 1887. He died at his home in Chicago, October 19,
1897.


The idea of the steamboat did not originate in the brain of Robert
Fulton. It is claimed that, as early as 1543, Blasco de Garay propelled
a boat by steam, and that in 1707, just a hundred years before the time
of Fulton's _Clermont_, Papin ran a boat with steam on a river in
Germany. In 1763 William Henry experimented with a steamboat on the
Conistoga River in Pennsylvania.

James Rumsey, a Scotchman living in Maryland, is said to have been the
first American to discover a method for running a vessel with steam
against wind and tide. He conceived the idea in August, 1783. During
1785 he made his boat, and in 1786 he navigated it on the Potomac River
at Shepherdstown, Virginia, in the presence of hundreds of spectators.
He wrote to General Washington of his invention, and Washington wrote
concerning it to Governor Johnson of Maryland. In 1839 Congress voted a
gold medal to James Rumsey, Jr., son and only surviving child of the
inventor, in recognition of the elder Rumsey's achievement.

In 1787 John Fitch exhibited on the Delaware River a vessel to be
propelled by steam, and in 1790, from June to September, he ran a
steamboat on that river between Philadelphia and Trenton. But he could
not induce the public to patronize his boat, and for lack of business
it had to be withdrawn.

Some British authorities claim that the first practical steamboat
in the world was the tug "_Charlotte Dundas_," built by William
Symmington, and tried in 1802 on the Clyde and Forth Canal in Scotland.
The trial was successful, but steam towing was abandoned for fear of
injuring the banks of the canal. Symmington had built a small steamboat
that traveled five miles an hour in 1788.

[Illustration: ROBERT FULTON]

To Robert Fulton, an American, belongs the credit for placing the
steamboat on a successful commercial basis. Fulton was born at Little
Britain, Pennsylvania, in 1765. At the age of seventeen he adopted the
profession of portrait and landscape painter. At twenty-two he went to
England to study art. There he met James Watt, the inventor of the
steam engine, and soon he began to give attention to mechanics. In
1793 he started to work on the idea of propelling boats by steam. He
made an unsuccessful experiment with a steamboat on the Seine River in
France. The vessel sank because its construction was faulty. Fulton
returned to America and in New York harbor began to build another
boat which he named the _Katherine of Clermont_, shortened to the
_Clermont_. Her engine was procured from Boulton and Watt in England.
The boat was one hundred feet long and twenty feet wide, weighed one
hundred sixty tons, and was equipped with side paddle wheels and a
sheet-iron boiler. As the inventor worked patiently at his task, the
newspapers gave him but little notice and the public ridiculed him.
The New York legislature had passed a bill granting to Fulton and to
Chancellor Livingston the exclusive right to navigate with steam boats
the waters of New York State. This bill was a standing subject of
ridicule among the legislators at Albany.

In August, 1807, the _Clermont_ was ready for her trial trip. A large
crowd of spectators lined the banks of the Hudson as the boat slowly
steamed out into the river. The crowd jeered and hooted and shouted at
the vessel their nick-name of "Fulton's Folly." As the _Clermont_
moved up the river, making slow headway against the current, the crowd
changed their jeers to expressions of wonder and finally to cheers.
The dry pine wood used for fuel sent out a cloud of thick, black
smoke, flames, and sparks, which spread terror among the watermen of
the harbor. The _Clermont_ made the voyage from New York up the Hudson
to Chancellor Livingston's country estate near Albany, a distance of a
hundred ten miles, in twenty-four hours. The trip was without mishap
and it thoroughly established the practicability of steam for purposes
of navigation.

Concerning this voyage Fulton wrote to a friend in Paris: "My
steamboat voyage to Albany and back has turned out rather more
favorably than I had calculated. The voyage was performed wholly by
power of the steam engine. I overtook many sloops and schooners
beating to windward, and parted with them as if they had been at
anchor. The power of propelling boats by steam is now fully proved.
The morning I left New York there were not thirty persons in the city
who believed that the boat would ever move a mile an hour, or be of
the least utility. While we were putting off from the wharf, I heard a
number of sarcastic remarks. This is the way in which ignorant men
compliment what they call philosophers and projectors. I feel infinite
pleasure in reflecting on the immense advantages my country will
derive from the invention."

The _Clermont_ was soon running as a regular packet between New York
and Albany. The owners of sailing craft on the river hated her and
tried to sink her. The New York legislature passed a bill declaring
that any attempt to destroy or injure the _Clermont_ should be a
public offense punishable by fine and imprisonment. Then the enemies
of the boat applied to the courts for an injunction restraining Fulton
from navigating the Hudson with his steamboat. Daniel Webster appeared
as Fulton's attorney. He won the case and secured for the _Clermont_
the full rights of the river.

Fulton afterward built other steamboats, including a system of steam
ferries for New York City. In 1814 he constructed the first United
States war steamer. Before constructing the _Clermont_, Fulton was
interested in canals and in the invention of machinery for spinning
flax and twisting rope. He also made experiments with sub-marine
explosives in England, France, and the United States; but these were
considered failures. He died February 24, 1815.

[Illustration: THE CLERMONT ON THE HUDSON]

The first steamboat in the West was built at Pittsburg in 1811, and
within a few years after the first trip of the _Clermont_, steamboats
were being used on all the leading rivers of the country.

From the earliest times men had sailed the seas, but their ships were
small and slow and subject to wind, tide, and current. The success of
the river steamboat led to the use of steam in ocean navigation. The
first steamship to cross the Atlantic was the _Savannah_, in 1818.
The vessel relied almost as much upon wind as upon steam for motive
power, but during the voyage of twenty-five days steam was used on
eighteen days.

The wood required for fuel left little room in the vessel for freight.
With the advent of coal for fuel, and better machinery, steamships
grew in importance, and in 1837 two ships, the _Sirius_ and the _Great
Western_, crossed the Atlantic from Liverpool to New York with the use
of steam alone. By 1850 the average time for a trans-Atlantic voyage
had been reduced to eleven or twelve days.

[Illustration: THE LUSITANIA OF THE CUNARD LINE]

If the old _Savannah_ could be placed beside the _Lusitania_, the
giantess of the Cunard line of ocean steamers, a comparison would
demonstrate the triumphs of the century in ocean navigation. If you
were to cross the ocean on the _Lusitania_ or her sister-ship the
_Mauretania_, you would enter a vast floating mansion seven hundred
ninety feet long, eighty-eight feet wide, eighty-one feet high from
keel to boat deck, and weighing thirty-two thousand five hundred tons.
Her height to the mastheads is two hundred sixteen feet; each of her
three anchors weighs ten tons; and her funnels are so large that a
trolley car could easily run through them. The _Lusitania_ has
accommodation for three thousand passengers, officers, and crew, and
is driven by mighty turbine engines of sixty-eight thousand horse
power. The steamer was built at a cost of $7,500,000. She has traveled
the three thousand miles across the Atlantic in about four and a half
days--the quickest trans-Atlantic voyage ever made. She moves through
the great waves of the ocean with such steadiness that passengers can
scarcely tell whether they are on water or land. A telephone system
connects all parts of the ship; there are electric elevators, a
special nursery in which children may play; a gymnasium for exercise,
shower baths, and an acre and a half of upper deck. There are five
thousand electric lights, requiring two hundred miles of wire.
Wireless telegraphy flashes messages to the moving ship from distant
parts of the world, and bears back greetings from her passengers. A
daily illustrated newspaper of thirty-two pages is published on board
ship.




CHAPTER IV

ELECTRICITY: THE TELEGRAPH AND THE TELEPHONE


The great miracle of the twentieth century is electricity. If the
printing press is the brain of civilization and the steam engine is
its heart, electric wires are its nervous system. Steam is a giant;
electricity is a witch. There is something uncanny about it. Man
writes volumes about electricity; calls it positive and negative and
measures it in ohms and volts; gives courses to explain it in his
schools and universities; kills criminals, cures the sick, and
scatters darkness with it; makes it whirl him through space; compels
it to bear his whisper through hundreds of miles, and can make it fly
around the entire earth with his written word--and yet no man knows
what electricity is. Electricity exists, and has always existed, from
the back of a cat to the infinite arch of the sky.

A hundred years ago practically nothing was known of electricity.
Persons now living were born into a world that had never seen an
electric telegraph, a telephone, an electric car, or an electric
light. We are living in the morning of electrical knowledge, and what
the day may bring no one can imagine. Americans have given the world
many of the greatest inventions, and in the field of electricity they
have given it nearly everything of value. It is to American ingenuity
that civilization is indebted for the electrical telegraph, the
sub-marine cable, the telephone, the electric light, and the electric
car. The names of Morse, Vail, Field, Bell, Brush, Gray, Edison, and
Sprague--all American electrical inventors--will always be prominent
in the list of the world's great benefactors.

If you will rub a stick of sealing wax briskly with a woolen cloth,
you will find that the stick of wax will attract to itself bits of
bran, small shreds of paper, and the like. This is the simplest
experiment in electricity. In the same way, by rubbing amber with
silk, Thales, a Greek philosopher who lived in the sixth century
before Christ, is thought to have discovered electricity. The Greek
word for _amber_ is _elektron_. Because of the supposed discovery of
electricity in amber by Thales, the English word _electricity_ was
"coined" and used for the first time by William Gilbert, a British
physician and scientist, who lived during the reigns of Elizabeth and
James.

For nearly twenty-five centuries, reaching from the time of Thales to
the opening of the nineteenth century, the world learned practically
nothing about electricity. The start in modern electrical knowledge
was made by Galvani, an Italian scientist, born in 1737, who just
before the last century dawned showed that electricity can be produced
by the contact of metals with fluids. The term _galvanic_, used in
connection with electricity, comes from the name of this investigator.
Galvani's experiments suggested the electric battery to Volta, another
Italian scientist who was born in 1745. The electrical word _voltaic_
is in honor of Volta. In 1752 Benjamin Franklin flew his kite into the
thunderstorm and proved that lightning is electricity. A little later
Hans Christian Oersted, a Danish investigator, pointed out the
relation between electricity and magnetism. In the early part of the
nineteenth century, Michael Faraday, an eminent English physicist,
discovered the possibility of producing electric currents through the
motion of a magnet. Faraday's discovery led to the electric dynamo
machine, the source of modern power over electricity.

The oldest and greatest of electrical inventions is the telegraph.
_Tele_ is a Greek adverb meaning "afar." _Graph_ comes from the Greek
verb "to write." _Telegraph_ therefore means "to write afar."

The idea of telegraphic communication is more than two and a half
centuries old. In 1632 Galileo referred to a secret art of
communicating at great distances by means of magnetic needles. In 1753
there appeared in the _Scots Magazine_ an article signed "C. M."
(since ascertained to have been Charles Morrison, of Greenock in
Scotland) setting forth a fairly clear idea of the electric telegraph.
Joseph Henry, of Washington, D.C., in 1831 signaled through an
electrical circuit a mile in length. The first commercially successful
telegraph was devised in 1837 by Samuel F. B. Morse, an American.

Samuel Finley Breese Morse was born in Charlestown, Massachusetts,
April 27, 1791. He was educated in the common schools of his native
town and in Yale University, where he was graduated in 1810. After
graduation, like Fulton, the inventor of the steamboat, he went to
Europe to study art, and became successful as an artist. On his return
to America in 1832, one of his fellow passengers on the ship was
Charles T. Jackson, who had been studying electricity in Paris. Jackson
told Morse of some experiments in electricity which the French had been
making, and remarked that it would be a good thing if news could be
transmitted through long distances by electricity. Morse replied, "Why
can't it be done?" From that hour he gave his time and energy to the
invention of the electric telegraph. During the remainder of the voyage
he drew plans for apparatus and tried to devise an electric alphabet.
In 1837 he put two instruments at the ends of a short line through
which he sent and received messages. About this time he met a man who
was destined to be of great service to him in promoting his invention,
and one who deserves almost as much credit for it as Morse himself.
This was Alfred Vail.

Vail was born at Morristown, New Jersey, September 25, 1807. He was a
son of Stephen Vail, the wealthy owner of the Speedwell iron works.

One day in September, 1837, after Morse had completed his apparatus, he
was invited to exhibit it at the University of the City of New York.
Alfred Vail was a student in the university at the time and was one of
the spectators to whom the apparatus was exhibited. He was much
impressed with it. Morse needed money, and Alfred Vail's father had it.
Morse was invited to the home of the Vails in Speedwell, where the
matter of the invention was talked over. The sum of two thousand
dollars was necessary to get the invention started. Stephen Vail agreed
to furnish the money. Alfred Vail was to construct apparatus and
exhibit it to Congress. For this he was to have one-fourth of the
proceeds arising from the patent.

Alfred Vail set to work to construct the apparatus. A room in his
father's factory was set apart for this purpose. William Baxter, a
bright mechanic employed in the iron shops, was chosen to assist him.
As secrecy was required for the work, the room was kept locked. For
several months Vail and Baxter occupied together the locked room,
sharing each other's confidence and each other's elation or
disappointment as the work went well or ill. On January 6, 1838,
Baxter, without hat or coat, rushed to the elder Vail's residence to
announce that the apparatus was completed.

Mr. Vail had become discouraged. However, he went to see the trial of
the apparatus. He found his son at one end of the three miles of wire
that was stretched around the room, and Morse at the other. After a
short explanation had been made to him, he wrote on a piece of paper,
"A patient waiter is no loser." He then said to his son, "If you can
send this, and Mr. Morse can read it at the other end, I shall be
convinced." The message was sent and read at the other end of the wire.
The apparatus was taken to Washington, where it created not only wonder
but excitement.

[Illustration: SAMUEL F. B. MORSE]

In September, 1837, Morse filed an application for a patent on his
invention. In December of the same year he failed in his effort to
secure from Congress an appropriation for an experimental line which he
proposed to build between Washington and Baltimore. In May, 1838, he
went to Europe seeking aid. The governments there refused him funds or
patents. In May, 1839, he returned to the United States and began an
heroic struggle for recognition. During this period he often suffered
for the barest necessities of life. Sometimes he could afford but a
single meal in twenty-four hours.

Finally, after repeated disappointments, when Morse himself had almost
given up hope, the House of Representatives of the Twenty-seventh
Congress, on the last night of its session, March 3, 1843, by a vote of
ninety to eighty-two, appropriated thirty thousand dollars for building
a trial line between Washington and Baltimore. After the bill had
passed the House, the outlook for its passage in the Senate was not
bright. One Senator who was favorable to the bill advised Morse to
"give it up, return home, and think no more of it." The bill had been
made the object of opposition and ridicule; one prominent official, to
show his contempt for the project, proposed that half the amount asked
for should be used in mesmeric experiments. Morse, believing that the
Senate would defeat the appropriation, went to his lodging place to
retire for the night. He found that after paying the amount he owed at
the hotel, he would have less than forty cents left. Early the next
morning information reached him that a little before midnight the
Senate had passed the bill. Apparent failure had turned into victory;
the fight was won.

"Work was begun at once.[1] On April 30 the line reached Annapolis
Junction, twenty-two miles from Washington, and was operated with
satisfactory results.

        [1] From an account by Stephen Vail used in _Graded Literature
        Readers_, by permission of _Truth_.

"May 1, 1844, was the date upon which the Whig convention was to
assemble in Baltimore, to nominate the candidates of that party for
President and Vice-President. It was arranged between Morse and Vail
that the latter should obtain from the passengers upon the afternoon
train from Baltimore to Washington, when it stopped at Annapolis
Junction, information of the proceedings of the convention and transmit
it at once to Morse at the Capitol in Washington.

"The train arrived at half-past three o'clock, and from the passengers,
among whom were many of the delegates to the convention, Mr. Vail
ascertained that the convention had assembled, nominated the
candidates, and adjourned. This information he at once dispatched to
Morse, with whom was gathered a number of prominent men who had been
invited to be present. Morse sat awaiting the prearranged signal from
Vail, when suddenly there came from the instrument the understood
clicking, and as the mechanism started, unwinding the ribbon of paper
upon which came the embossed dots and dashes, the complete success of
the telegraph over twenty-two miles of wire was established.

"Slowly came the message. When it had ended, Morse rose and said:
'Gentlemen, the convention has adjourned. The train bearing that
information has just left Annapolis Junction for Washington, and Mr.
Vail has telegraphed me the ticket nominated, and it is--' he
hesitated, holding in his hand the final proof of victory over space,
'it is--it is Clay and Frelinghuysen.'

"'You are quizzing us,' was the quiet remark. 'It's easy enough for you
to guess that Clay is at the head of the ticket, but Frelinghuysen--who
is Frelinghuysen?'

"'I only know,' was the dignified answer, 'that it is the name Mr. Vail
has sent to me from Annapolis Junction, where he had the news five
minutes ago from the train bound this way bearing the delegates.'

"At that time the twenty-two miles from the Junction to Washington
required an hour and a quarter for the fastest trains, and long before
the train reached Washington the newsboys--enterprising even in those
days--had their 'extras' upon the streets, their headings 'By
Telegraph' telling the story, and being the first time that such a
legend had ever appeared upon a printed sheet.

"A great and enthusiastic crowd greeted the delegates as they alighted
from the train at the station. They were struck dumb with astonishment
when they heard the people hurrahing for 'Clay and Frelinghuysen,' and
saw in cold type before their very eyes the information which they
supposed was exclusively their own, but which had preceded them 'by
telegraph.' They had asked Mr. Vail at the Junction what he was doing
when they saw him working the telegraph key, and when he told them,
they joked about it most glibly, for no one had any belief in the
success of the telegraph."

[Illustration: THE FIRST MESSAGE BY TELEGRAPH]

By May 23 the entire line was completed from Washington to Baltimore.
On the next day, May 24, 1844, Morse from Washington sent to Vail at
Baltimore the first message ever sent over the completed wire, "What
hath God wrought?"

This famous message was dictated by Miss Ellsworth, daughter of the
commissioner of patents at that time. She had taken a keen interest in
the success of the bill appropriating the thirty thousand dollars for
the experiment, and was the first to convey to Morse the news that the
bill had passed. Morse thereupon gave Miss Ellsworth his promise that
the first message to pass over the line should be dictated by her. A
bit of the original wire and the receiver that Vail used at Baltimore
are now preserved in the National Museum in Washington. The transmitter
used by Morse at the Washington end of the line has been lost.

Morse lived to see his system of telegraphy adopted by the United
States, France, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Russia, and Australia.
Ninety-five per cent of all telegraphy is by his system. He finally
received a large fortune from his invention. Unlike Columbus, Morse was
honored in his lifetime for his achievement. Foreign nations bestowed
upon him honors and medals, and in August, 1858, a convention of
European powers called by Napoleon III at Paris gave Morse four hundred
thousand francs (about $80,000) as a testimonial of his services to
civilization. In October, 1842, he laid the first sub-marine telegraph
line. It was across the harbor of New York. Later he assisted Peter
Cooper and Cyrus W. Field in their efforts to lay the first Atlantic
cable. Honored by all the civilized world, he died in New York City
April 2, 1872. Thirteen years earlier Vail had died at his home in
Morristown, New Jersey.

In the Morse system the alphabet is represented by combinations of
dots and dashes. The dots denote short currents of electricity flowing
through the wire; the dashes, longer ones. Credit for the alphabet
really belongs to Vail; Morse had devised a somewhat complicated
system, but Vail invented the dots and dashes. He discovered that _e_
and _t_ are the most frequently used letters. He denoted _e_ by one
dot, or one short current; _t_ he indicated by one dash, or one long
current. The other letters are denoted by dots and dashes, as _a_, one
dot and one dash; _b_, one dash and three dots, etc.

In 1838 Steinheil, a German investigator, contributed an important
element to the practical operation of the electric telegraph by
discovering that the earth could take the place of the return wire,
which up to that time had been deemed necessary to complete the
circuit.

At first only one message could be sent over a wire at a time. Now
several messages may be transmitted in opposite directions over the
same wire at the same time.

Wireless telegraphy is based on the principle discovered and announced
by the English scientist Michael Faraday, that heat, light, and
electricity are transmitted by ether waves, and that these ether waves
permeate all space. The first to demonstrate the practical operation of
wireless telegraphy was Guglielmo Marconi, an Italian. In 1890 he
undertook experiments to prove his theory that the electric current
readily passes through any substance, and when once started in a given
direction follows a direct course without the aid of a conductor.
Marconi made the first practical demonstration of wireless telegraphy
in 1896. In March, 1899, he sent a wireless message across the English
channel from France to England. In December, 1901, be began his first
experiments in wireless telegraphy across the Atlantic. In December of
the following year the first official trans-Atlantic wireless message
was sent. Now wireless telegraphic messages are sent regularly to and
from moving ships in mid-ocean, and across the three thousand miles of
the Atlantic between Europe and America.

One of the most striking illustrations of the power of perseverance is
the successful struggle of Cyrus West Field in laying the Atlantic
cable. Mr. Field was born in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, November 30,
1819. His schooling, which was slight, was secured in his native town.
When he was fifteen years old, he secured a position in a business
house in New York City at a salary of fifty dollars a year. He
subsequently founded a prosperous business in the manufacture and sale
of paper. In 1854 Mr. Field's attention was directed to an attempt to
lay an electric cable at Newfoundland, which had failed for want of
funds. The idea of laying a cable across the Atlantic occurred to him.
He laid his plans before a number of prominent citizens of New York. On
four successive evenings they met at his home to study the project, and
they finally decided to undertake it. On May 6, 1854, a company was
organized to lay the cable, with Peter Cooper as president.

The next twelve years Field devoted exclusively to the cable. He went
to England thirty times. The first cable was brought from England and
was to be laid across the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Forty miles had been
successfully laid, when a storm arose and the cable was cut in order to
save the ship. Then came a year's delay. Meantime the bottom of the sea
was being explored and a vast tableland was discovered stretching from
Newfoundland to Ireland. Field went to England, where he had little
difficulty in organizing a company, and work was then begun on the
construction of a new cable. Next he laid his enterprise before
Congress, and asked for money. An appropriation bill was finally passed
in the Senate by a majority of one, and was signed by President Pierce
on March 3, 1857, the day before he retired from office. Field returned
to England to superintend the construction of the cable and to make
preparations for laying it. At last it was ready, tested, and coiled on
the ship. On August 11, 1857, the sixth day out, after three hundred
and thirty-five miles had been laid, the cable parted.

Lord Clarendon, in an interview with Field, had remarked: "But,
suppose you don't succeed? Suppose you make the attempt and fail--your
cable is lost in the sea--then what will you do?" The reply came
promptly, "Charge it to profit and loss, and go to work to lay
another." Lord Clarendon was so well pleased with the reply that he
pledged his aid. The loss of three hundred and thirty-five miles of
cable was the loss of half a million dollars. Field came back to
America and secured from the Secretary of the Navy the vessels needed
for another trial. On June 10, 1858, the United States steam frigate
_Niagara_, then the largest in the world, and the British ship
_Agamemnon_ set out from opposite shores, bound for mid-ocean. The
vessels met, and the two sections of the cable were spliced; then they
began laying it toward both shores at the same time. After a little
more than a hundred miles had been laid, this cable parted in
mid-ocean, and Field hurried to London to meet the discouraged
directors.

On July 17, the ships set sail again for mid-ocean. The cable was
spliced in fifteen hundred fathoms of water and again the ships
started for opposite shores. Field was on the _Niagara_ headed toward
Newfoundland. Scarcely any one looked for success. Field was the only
man who kept up courage through this trying period. On August 5, 1858,
he telegraphed the safe arrival of the ship at Newfoundland. The shore
ends of the cable were laid and on August 16 a message from Queen
Victoria of England to President Buchanan flashed under the sea. There
was great excitement everywhere. The two worlds had been tied together
with a strange electric nerve.

[Illustration: CYRUS W. FIELD]

On the evening of the first of September a great ovation was tendered
Field in New York. National salutes were fired; processions were
formed; there was an address by the mayor, and late at night a great
banquet. While the banquet was in progress, the cable parted.

Everyone except Field was disheartened. He went to work again, and
during the next five years, the long years of the Civil War, he
labored unceasingly. A larger cable with a greater resisting force was
made. On the twenty-third of July, 1865, the steamship _Great Eastern_
began another attempt to lay the cable. When it was within six hundred
miles of Newfoundland, the cable parted again. For nine days attempts
were made, in two and a half miles of water, to grapple the cable,
splice it, and continue the work of laying it. Three times the cable
was grappled, but the apparatus on the ship was not strong enough to
hoist it aboard. Still Field never faltered. Another British company
was formed and another cable was constructed. The _Great Eastern_ was
again loaded and on July 13, a Friday, set sail westward laying the
cable. After an uncertain voyage of two weeks the _Great Eastern_
arrived at Newfoundland, and the undertaking had again been
successfully accomplished. Field telegraphed his arrival as follows:
"_Hearts Content, July 27, 1866_. We arrived here at nine o'clock this
morning. All well. Thank God, the cable is laid, and is in perfect
working order. CYRUS W. FIELD."

Twelve years of unfaltering perseverance had won. Honors were heaped
upon Field. Congress voted him a gold medal and the thanks of the
nation. The prime minister of Great Britain declared that only the fact
of his being the citizen of another nation prevented his receiving the
highest honors in the power of the British government to bestow. The
Paris "Exposition Universelle" of 1867 honored him with the Grand
Medal, the highest prize it had to give.

Mr. Field was afterward interested in the laying of cables connecting
Europe, India, China, Australia, the West Indies, and South America. In
1880-81 he made a trip around the world, full of satisfaction in his
own part in making a new era of the world's civilization. He died at
his home in New York on July 11, 1892.

The effect of the electric telegraph on government, intelligence, and
civilization in general can scarcely be overstated. Sydney Smith,
writing to Earl Grey after the admission of California into the United
States, said that this marked an end to the great American republic;
for how could people with such diversified interests, with such natural
barriers, hold together? He did not foresee how strongly a fine copper
wire could bind together the two seaboards and the great plains of the
interior. Without the electric telegraph, neither the great daily
newspaper nor the modern operation of railroads would be possible. It
wipes away the natural boundaries of nations and makes neighbors of all
men.

In 1819 Sir Charles Wheatsone, an English physicist, invented an
instrument popularly known as the "magic lyre," but which he called
the telephone. The first part of this word is the same Greek adverb
_tele_ that is found in _telegraph_. The _phone_ is from another Greek
word meaning "to sound." To _telephone_, therefore, means "to sound
afar." The use of the English word _telephone_ by Wheatsone is
historically the first appearance of the word in our language. His
device did nothing but reproduce music by means of sounding boards.
The inventor of the modern telephone is Alexander Graham Bell.

Mr. Bell was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, March 3, 1847. His father was
Alexander Melville Bell, a Scotch educator, inventor of a system of
visible speech, and author of some text-books on elocution. His
grandfather was Alexander Bell, noted for his efforts to remove
impediments of speech. Alexander Graham Bell was therefore well fitted
by heredity for the invention of an instrument to transmit speech. He
was educated in the Edinburgh high school and in the University of
Edinburgh, and in 1867 he entered the University of London. Hard study
broke down his health and he moved to Canada. Thence he moved to the
United States, becoming first a teacher of deaf mutes, and afterward
professor of vocal physiology in Boston University. In 1874, at the
suggestion of the Boston Board of Education, he began some experiments
to show to the eye the vibrations of sound, for the use of the deaf and
dumb. The results of these experiments convinced Bell that articulate
speech could be transmitted through space. Early in 1876 he completed
the first telephone. The same year he exhibited it at the Centennial
Exposition at Philadelphia, where it was pronounced the "wonder of
wonders."

He filed application for a patent on his invention at the Patent Office
in Washington, February 14, 1876. It is a singular fact that another
application for a patent on the telephone was received at the Patent
Office a few hours later on the same day from Elisha Gray, an
electrical inventor of Chicago. The patent was issued to Bell, not
because his invention was superior in merit to Gray's, but on the
ground that his application was received first. This is a case where
"the early bird catches the worm," for the profits arising from the
patent have made Mr. Bell very wealthy, and high honors have come to
him as the inventor of one of the world's greatest and most marvelous
inventions.

The Bell Telephone Company was organized in 1877, and in 1878 the first
telephone exchanges were constructed. By the following year the
telephone was firmly established as a social and commercial necessity.
It has grown with great rapidity. It is now found in every city of the
world; hotels, large buildings, and ships have their private exchanges,
and it has found its way recently into thousands of farmhouses.

Bell had to fight hard in the courts to sustain his patent. Suit after
suit was brought by rival claimants, attacking his right to the patent.
The litigation was bitter and protracted. One of the most noteworthy of
these suits was brought by a Pennsylvania mechanic named Drawbaugh. He
claimed that about 1872 he had made a working telephone out of a cigar
box, a glass tumbler, a tin can, and some other crude materials; and
that with the apparatus thus constructed he had talked over a wire
several hundred feet long. Many persons testified that they were
acquainted with Drawbaugh's apparatus, some of them having used it.
Some instruments, said to be the original ones which Drawbaugh had
constructed, were brought into court and exhibited. It was shown that
speech could be transmitted with them in a crude way. Drawbaugh claimed
that he was too poor at the time of making the apparatus to take out
the necessary patent. The Court decided in favor of Bell. Elisha Gray,
whose application for a patent had been received the same day that
Bell's was, also brought suit against Bell. Before making his
application, Gray had filed some preliminary papers looking forward to
a patent on the telephone. In his suit against Bell he charged that the
patent examiner had fraudulently and secretly conveyed to Bell the
contents of those papers. But Bell won this suit, and he finally
established over all rivals his legal title as the inventor of the
telephone.

Recently a wireless system of telephoning has been in process of
development, and it will not be strange if, within a few years, we
shall be talking through space without wires, so boundless seem the
possibilities of the age.




CHAPTER V

ELECTRICITY: LIGHTING, TRANSPORTATION, AND OTHER USES


Man must have discovered artificial light as soon as he discovered
fire, for the two exist together. The first light was probably produced
by burning sticks or pieces of wood. In his search for more light, man
learned how to make the tallow candle. Lights made in one form or other
from the fats of animals persisted almost to the threshold of the
present. The next step forward was to the use of oil; and the next, to
the use of gas.

The first practical use of gas for purposes of illumination was in
1792. In that year William Murdoch, an English engineer, produced gas
artificially from coal, and with it lighted his house in Cornwall, a
county of England. Nine years afterward a Frenchman named Lebon
illuminated his house and garden in Paris with gas produced from wood.
Street lighting by gas was introduced in 1807 by an Englishman named F.
A. Winzer or Windsor, in Pall Mall, one of the fine streets of London.
The first gas lights in America were installed in 1806 by David
Melville, of Newport, Rhode Island, in his residence and in the streets
adjacent. Baltimore was the first city in the United States to adopt
gas lighting for its streets. This was in 1817.

When gas was first used, there was much opposition to it, as there
usually has been to improvements in general. The citizens of
Philadelphia protested for more than twenty years against the
introduction of gas into that city for purposes of illumination. Some
of the newspapers of the time called gas a "folly and a nuisance"; and
one of the professors in the University of Pennsylvania declared that
even if gas were the good thing its supporters were declaring it to be,
tallow candles and oil lamps were good enough for him. But gas
triumphed, and to-day the world could scarcely do without it, either
for illumination or for fuel.

The electric light had its beginning about 1800 in the experiments of
Sir Humphry Davy, a British investigator. He discovered that if two
pieces of carbon are brought into contact, completing a circuit
through which an electric current flows, and if the carbon points are
separated by a short distance, the points will become intensely hot
and emit a brilliant light. The word _arc_, used in connection with
the arc lamp or light, refers to the gap or arc between the two carbon
points, across which the electric current leaps in creating the light.

Following Sir Humphry Davy's experiments, several arc lights were
invented, with greater or less degree of success, and about 1860
electricity was tried successfully for lighting in some lighthouses
along the British coast. The widespread usage and the usefulness of the
arc electric light, however, are due to Charles Francis Brush, an
electrical inventor of Cleveland, Ohio, who in 1876 simplified the arc
light so as to bring it into general use for lighting streets, large
rooms, halls, and outdoor spaces. Brush was also the inventor of an
electric-dynamo machine that has added to his fame. After the invention
of the arc light, he took out more than fifty other patents. The
incandescent electric light, for lighting residences and small rooms,
came a little later as the invention of Edison.

Thomas Alva Edison is one of the most remarkable men of all times and
places. Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon together did not benefit
mankind as has this quiet American inventor. He was born at Milan,
Ohio, February 11, 1847. His father was of Dutch descent and his mother
was Scotch. The mother, who had been a teacher, gave him all the
schooling he received. Early in life he showed great mental vigor and
ingenuity. When he was twelve years old, he is said to have read the
histories of Hume and Gibbon.

[Illustration: THOMAS A. EDISON]

When Thomas was seven years old, the Edison family moved to Port
Huron, Michigan. He soon became a newsboy on the Grand Trunk railway
running into Detroit. He also became proprietor of a news stand, a
book store, and a vegetable market, each a separate enterprise in Port
Huron, employing eleven boys in all. His spare hours in Detroit,
between the arrival and departure of his train, he spent reading in
the Free Library. Before long he had bought a small hand printing
press, some old type, and plates for "patent insides" from the
proprietor of a Detroit newspaper, and using the baggage car for an
office, he started the _Grand Trunk Herald_, the first and only
newspaper ever published on a railway train. His inquiring mind led
him one day to make some chemical experiments in the car. He
overturned a bottle of phosphorus, set the car on fire, and as a
result was not permitted to use it longer for a newspaper office.

One day young Edison snatched the child of the station agent at Mount
Clemens, Michigan, from beneath the wheels of a locomotive. In
gratitude for this act, the station agent taught him telegraphy. In a
few months his ingenuity, one of the chief characteristics of the great
inventor, led him to string a private telegraph wire from the depot to
the town. Over this wire he forwarded messages, charging ten cents for
each message. Next he went to Stratford, Canada, as night operator for
the Grand Trunk railway. One night he received an order to hold a
train. He stopped to reply before signaling the train, and when he
reached the platform the train had passed. A collision resulted, though
not a serious one, and Edison was ordered to report at the office of
the general manager. Edison hastily climbed on a freight train, went to
Port Huron, and probably has not yet called on the general manager.

Edison worked as telegraph operator at various places. Although he was
a brilliant and rapid telegrapher, his fondness for playing pranks and
making fun lost him several positions. After making his first
experiments with a telegraph repeater, he left Indianapolis for
Cincinnati, where he earned sixty dollars per month, besides something
extra for night work. He Worked next in Louisville and Memphis. He was
poor in purse, for all his money went to defray the expenses of his
experiments. His fondness for Victor Hugo's great work, _Les
Miserables_, gained for him the nicknames of "Victor" and "Hugo."

At Memphis he perfected his telegraph repeater and was the first to
bring New Orleans into direct communication with New York. However, the
manager at Memphis was jealous of him and dismissed him. Shabby and
destitute, he made his way back to Louisville, walking a hundred miles
of the way, and resumed his old position. After he had worked in the
Louisville office for two years, his experimenting again got him into
trouble. He upset some sulphuric acid, part of which trickled through
the floor and spoiled the carpet in the manager's room below. For this
he was discharged. He next went to New Orleans, intending to sail for
Brazil; but the ship had gone and an old Spanish sailor advised him to
stay in America. He went back to Cincinnati, where he made some of his
first experiments in duplex telegraphy, a system whereby two messages
may be sent over the same wire at the same time.

A little while afterward, as poor as ever and as unattractive in dress,
he walked into the telegraph office in Boston, where he had procured
work. His co-workers there, thinking they would have some fun at his
expense, set him to receiving messages from the most rapid operators in
New York. Instead of throwing up his hands in defeat, as his companions
expected, he received the messages easily, with a good margin to spare,
and asked the operator sending at the other end of the line to "please
send with the other foot." He was at once placed regularly on the New
York wire. While in Boston, Edison opened a small workshop, put many of
his ideas into definite shape, and took out his first patent. It was
upon a chemical apparatus to record votes. He tried to introduce this
into Congress, but failed, although he proved that it "would work."

He left Boston not only without money, but in debt, and went to New
York. This was in 1871 when he was twenty-four years old. At that time
an apparatus called a "gold indicator" was in use in the offices of
about six hundred brokers, to show fluctuations in the prices of gold.
The system was operated from a central office near Wall street. One day
this central office was filled with six hundred messenger boys, each
bringing the complaint that the machinery had broken. No one knew how
to repair it. A stranger walked up, looked at the apparatus, and said
to the manager, "Mr. Law, I think I can show you where the trouble is."
The machinery was repaired, the office was cleared, and order was
restored. "What is your name, sir?" asked the delighted manager.
"Edison," was the reply. He was engaged as superintendent at a salary
of $200 per month, and from that hour his fortunes were assured.

Edison at once busied himself with inventing. He improved and invented
various machines used in the stock markets, and in 1872 perfected his
system of duplex telegraphy. Two years later he brought out the
wonderful quadruplex system, by which four messages may be sent over
the same wire at the same time. This system saved millions of dollars
and dispensed with thousands of miles of poles and wires.

He started a large factory at Newark, New Jersey, employing some three
hundred men. Sometimes he was working on as many as forty-five
improvements and original inventions at once. In 1876 he stopped
manufacturing and turned all his attention to inventing. In that year
he established a laboratory at Menlo Park, New Jersey, twenty-five
miles from New York City. When this laboratory was outgrown, he founded
a new one at Orange, New Jersey, the largest laboratory ever
established by one man for scientific research and invention. It
comprises one building 250 feet long and three stories high, and four
smaller buildings, each one hundred feet long and one story high. The
principal building contains a library of thirty thousand reference
books, a lecture room, and an exhibition room, where a remarkable
collection of instruments of almost every kind is to be seen.

When Edison began working to produce an incandescent electric light for
illuminating residences and small rooms, most of the scientists of
England said that such a light could not be produced. For nine years he
worked on this invention. The chief problem was to find, for the
horseshoe thread or filament used to give off the light, a material
that should glow with sufficient intensity and yet not be consumed by
the great heat necessary to produce the light. In his search for this
material he tried all kinds of rags and textiles steeped in various
chemicals, different kinds of paper, wood, inner and outer bark,
cornstalks, etc. Finally he sent one of his assistants to the East, and
in Japan a kind of bamboo was found answering the requirements.
Perseverance won, and the incandescent electric light became a reality
about 1880.

[Illustration: AN INCANDESCENT LIGHT]

Thomas Edison is one of the most systematic of workers, and nearly all
his inventions have been the result of intelligent and methodical labor
directed toward a definite aim. He reads carefully what other
investigators have found out, so as not to waste time in going over
fruitless ground. He also keeps copious note books of his own
operations, so that there may be no loss of time and energy. His
invention of the phonograph, however, was accidental. While he was
working to improve the telephone, the idea of the phonograph suddenly
came into his mind. A little while afterward the first phonograph,
crude but successful, was finished. At first this instrument was
regarded as a toy, but later the invention was sold for a million
dollars.

Edison is a man of remarkable personality. Once when someone referred
to him as a genius and said that he supposed a genius worked only when
the spirit moved him, the inventor replied, "Genius is two per cent
inspiration and ninety-eight per cent perspiration." He certainly
possesses great native talent for inventing. This was apparent in his
early boyhood. But much of his marvelous success is due to the
intelligent direction of effort, to tireless perseverance, and to long
hours of work. In 1897 he devoted his attention exclusively to the
invention of a new storage battery, upon which he had been working for
five years. For more than a year he worked harder than a day laborer.
He was in his laboratory by half past seven in the morning; his
luncheon was sent to him there; he went home to dinner, but he returned
by eight o'clock. At half past eleven his carriage called for him, but
often the coachman was compelled to wait three or four hours before the
inventor was willing to suspend his work. While the first incandescent
electric lighting plant was being prepared in New York City, Edison
himself worked part of the time in the trenches, to be sure that the
work would be properly done.

There is scarcely an electrical apparatus or an electrical process in
existence to-day that does not bear the mark of some great change for
the better coming from this most ingenious of American inventors. He
has taken out more than four hundred patents on original inventions and
improvements. Mr. Edison is still living in his beautiful home at West
Orange, New Jersey, near his laboratory. He is frequently called the
"Wizard of Menlo Park."

The idea of using electricity as motive power on railroads is nearly as
old as the railroads themselves. In 1837, when the utility of steam for
purposes of transportation was doubted, Robert Davidson propelled a car
with an electric engine on the Edinburgh and Glasgow road. In the
fifties Thomas Davenport, a Vermont blacksmith, constructed an electric
engine containing all the essential elements of the modern electric
motor. Little progress, however, was made in the use of electricity for
motive power, because the cost of producing the electric current was so
great. In 1887 Lieut. Sprague, overcoming most of the difficulties then
existing, installed at Richmond, Virginia, the first successful
electric railway in the world. Managers of street railways in other
cities visited Richmond, and after an inspection of what Sprague had
done there, decided to substitute electricity for animal power. No
other construction has had a more rapid growth since the time of its
invention than the electric railway. In 1890 there were only thirteen
unimportant electric roads. Now there is hardly a city of the civilized
world where the hum of the electric street car is not heard at all
hours of day and night. Modern urban life could scarcely exist without
it. It is rapidly pushing its way into the country and giving the
farmer the privilege of rapid and cheap transit.

The uses of electricity are by no means exhausted in the four major
inventions of the telegraph, the telephone, the electric light, and the
electric street car. It has been put to many minor uses. Among the most
interesting and important of these are the Roentgen or X-rays,
discovered by Wilhelm Konrad von Roentgen, a German physicist, in 1895.
They were named X-rays by their discoverer, because the ultimate nature
of their radiation was unknown, the letter X being commonly used in
algebra to represent an unknown quantity. The X-rays are peculiar
electric rays having the power to penetrate wood, flesh, and other
opaque substances. They are of much value to surgery in disclosing the
location of bullets, foreign substances of various kinds, and other
objective points in the interior of the human body.

The United States government has demonstrated through its Department of
Agriculture that electricity applied to the soil will quicken and help
the growth of certain vegetables. It has also shown that certain crops
are forwarded by the application of electric light.

The New York legislature in 1888 passed a law providing that criminals
should be executed in that state thereafter by electrocution, that is,
by sending through the body of the condemned person, a current of
electricity strong enough to produce death. Execution in this way makes
death quicker and apparently less painful than by hanging, the method
used previously, and subsequently several other states have passed laws
for electrical execution, following the example of New York.

Elisha Gray, who contested with Bell the invention of the telephone,
was the inventor of a peculiar machine called the telautograph. _Tele_
and _graph_ have been previously explained. _Auto_ is from a Greek
word meaning "itself." The meaning of _telautograph_, therefore, is
"to write afar by itself." By means of the telautograph, which is
operated with electric currents, if a person writes with an ordinary
lead pencil on paper, say in Washington or any other place, at the
same time the writing will be reproduced with pen and paper at the
other end of the line, in New York or wherever the message may be
sent.

One of the important uses of electricity is in connection with the
electric block signal. This is a device for preventing railroad
collisions. The signals are operated with electricity, and show
engineers whether or not a certain section of the track ahead of them
is clear.

Electricity is used also in the production of certain chemical
substances; in covering base metals with a coating of a precious metal,
as gold or silver, called electroplating; in producing a solid metal
page from rows of type, called an electrotype, which is used in
printing; in the navigation of small boats and the propulsion of
automobiles; in playing organs and pianos; in driving electric fans; in
drawing elevators in high buildings; in call-bells and door-bells; in
police-alarms and fire-alarms; in the treatment of certain diseases;
and in many other useful ways. What electricity may do for the future
cannot even be guessed.




CHAPTER VI

THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA


The birthplace of mankind is supposed to have been somewhere in Asia,
untold thousands of years ago. The race is thought to have spread
thence to the northern coast of Africa and to the peninsulas that jut
down from the south of Europe. The travelers of ancient times were the
Phoenicians. They occupied a narrow strip of land along the eastern
shore of the Mediterranean Sea. Their country was small and with
difficulty supported an increasing population. To the east of them were
barbaric hordes, who poured over the mountains and pushed the
Phoenicians to the sea, making of them traders and colonizers. As
early as twelve centuries before Christ they were founding colonies,
exploring strange lands, trading all over the known world, and leaving
their alphabet wherever they went. Arriving at a favorable place, they
would pull their ships ashore, plant a crop, wait till it had matured,
reap it, and go on. They founded many colonies on such sites.

Herodotus, a Greek, born in Asia Minor nearly five hundred years
before Christ, is called the father of history and geography. He tells
us that in his time the earth was thought to consist of the coast
regions of the Mediterranean Sea, extending rather vaguely north and
south, and bounded on the west by the Atlantic Ocean and on the east
by the great Persian Empire. The word _Mediterranean_ is made up of
two Latin words meaning "the middle of the earth." Eratosthenes, a
Greek geographer who was born on the northern coast of Africa about
three centuries before Christ, wrote a geographical treatise in which
he announced his belief that the earth was in the form of a sphere
revolving on its own axis. He succeeded in convincing only a few,
however, that his theory was right. The next great geographer was
Strabo, born in the northeast part of Asia Minor in the year 64 B.C.
He was a great traveler and observer, and wrote a work on geography
that has come down to us. The parts dealing with his own observations
are especially valuable.

The great traveler of mediaeval times was Marco Polo, an Italian, born
in Venice in 1254 A.D. He traveled widely, had many adventures, and
published an account of his travels. His experiences were a great
stimulus to geographical inquiry and discovery. About this time also
the mariners' compass was introduced into Europe. Civilization seems to
be indebted to the Chinese for the compass, for it is mentioned by them
as an instrument of navigation as early as the third or fourth century
after Christ. With the advent of the compass, seamen were no longer
compelled to hug the shore; they acquired more daring to sail the open
sea, and geographical exploration was correspondingly widened.

Geographical knowledge grew very slowly. By the beginning of the
eighteenth century, explorers had become familiar with the range of the
ocean, the outline of the continents, and with many islands. At the
beginning of the nineteenth century, four fifths of the land area of
the entire globe was unknown. Africa, except a narrow rim of coast, was
almost as little known as the planet Mars is to-day. At the opening of
the last century men knew little more about Asia than did Marco Polo,
three or four centuries earlier. In America the whole vast area west of
the Mississippi River was unknown in 1800. The coast of Australia had
not yet been traced, and nothing was known of its interior. At that
time South America was better known than any other of the continental
land masses, except Europe; now it is the least explored of all. The
nineteenth century, wonderful for advancement in many fields of human
endeavor, was a marvelous one for the growth of geographical knowledge.
As we stand in the doorway of the twentieth century, there is scarcely
one eleventh of the land area of the whole earth that remains
unexplored. Lewis and Clark pushed their way through the unknown
vastness of the American Northwest; Livingstone and Stanley penetrated
the dark continent of Africa; and in September, 1909, Lieut. Robert E.
Peary of the United States Navy startled civilization by announcing his
discovery of the North Pole. With the exception of a few interior
tracts to-day, the only portions of the earth unknown and unmapped lie
around the poles, and these are being rapidly sought out and brought to
knowledge.

Of all geographical conquests, by far the greatest is the discovery of
America by Christopher Columbus in 1492 A.D. The story of Columbus is
one of the most interesting and pathetic in history. It is a story of
toil, hardship, perseverance, and great success, requited with
disappointment and disgrace.

Christophoro Colombo was born in Genoa, Italy, about 1435 or 1436 A.D.
Following the custom of those times in giving names Latin forms, his
name became Christopher Columbus. In Latin the word _columba_ means
"dove." His father was a wool-comber who was wealthy enough to send
his son to a university, where he studied mathematics and astronomy.
On leaving the university, he worked a few months at his father's
trade, but when he was fifteen years old he determined to be a sailor.

Of the late boyhood and early manhood of Columbus little is known. He
seems to have traveled much, and it is certain that he studied much. It
was popularly supposed in the time of Columbus that the earth was flat;
that it was surrounded by a great world-river called "Oceanus" or the
ocean, and that if one should come to the edge he would plunge down
into illimitable space. From the time of Eratosthenes and Aristotle,
Greek thinkers and scholars who lived several hundreds of years before
the birth of Christ had known that the earth was round, and Columbus
believed this fact too. He mastered the books, both ancient and
contemporary, on geography and navigation, learned to draw charts and
to construct spheres, and fitted himself to be a practical seaman and
navigator.

In 1470 he arrived at Lisbon, Portugal, after he had been shipwrecked
in a sea fight and had escaped to land on a plank. In Portugal he
married the daughter of an old sea captain. He pored over the logs and
papers of his father-in-law, and talked with old seamen of their
voyages and of the mysteries of the western sea. About this time he
seems to have arrived at the conclusion that much of the world remained
undiscovered. There were strange rumors about the western sea.
Navigators had seen queer pieces of wood and some canes in the ocean,
and the bodies of two strange men had been washed ashore, "very
broad-faced, and differing in aspect from Christians." European
commerce was in need of a shorter route to Asia than the overland route
then in use. Columbus hoped that he could reach the eastern coast of
Asia by sailing west. He did not believe the earth as large as it
really is, and he over-estimated the size of Asia, so that he did not
realize the breadth of the Atlantic or the magnitude of the task before
him.

Columbus was poor, and money was required for so huge an undertaking as
a voyage to Asia. It was necessary, therefore, for him to seek aid in
the enterprise. He asked help first from the senate of his native town,
Genoa; but Genoa turned to him an unhearing ear. He applied next to
King John of Portugal. The king referred the matter to a council of
geographers, who reported against it. With the lurking hope that there
might be something in the plan, the king was dishonorable enough to
send out an expedition secretly to test it. The sailors who made the
attempt soon lost heart and returned without having accomplished
anything. When Columbus learned of the king's secret attempt, he was so
outraged that he left Portugal for Spain. At about the same time he
sent his brother Bartholomew to England to enlist the assistance of the
British sovereign, King Henry VII. After much waiting and much
vexation, Columbus at last gained the interest of the Spanish king,
Ferdinand, who referred the proposition to a council of his astronomers
and geographers. They finally decided that the project was vain and
visionary and that they could have nothing more to do with it.

In great discouragement Columbus began preparations to go to France. At
the door of a monastery in the little maritime town of Palos, he
knocked and asked for bread and water for his son, Diego, who was
accompanying him. He was received at the monastery, and there he met
some persons of influence who interceded for him with the Spanish
queen, Isabella. He went to the Court again, his plan was once more
investigated, and once more Columbus was refused the aid he was
seeking. He set out for France and had journeyed some distance on the
way. In the meantime an official won the queen's consent to the
enterprise, and there is a story that in her enthusiasm she offered to
pledge her jewels to raise money for the expedition. A messenger who
was sent to overtake Columbus brought him back, and on the seventeenth
of April, 1492, the formal agreement between him and the king and queen
of Spain was entered into, signed, and sealed.

Columbus's aim was to find the east coast of Asia. For the
accomplishment of this he had a number of motives. He wanted to win
wealth and fame for himself, to provide a shorter and cheaper route for
commerce with the East, and to convert to Christianity the Grand Khan,
a great Asiatic ruler, to whom he bore a letter of introduction from
the rulers of Spain.

Great difficulty was experienced in finding sailors for so uncertain
and terrifying a trip. Freedom was offered to convicts and bankrupts if
they would accompany the expedition. At last seamen were secured to man
three small ships, stores were provided, and everything was made ready
for the voyage. The adventurers numbered, all told, one hundred and
twenty. The shore presented a strange spectacle on the morning of
departure. The friends of the sailors stood on shore weeping and
wringing their hands, confident in the belief that their loved ones
would be swallowed up by some fabulous monster of the western deep, or
in some way be forever lost to them. On the morning of Friday, August
3, 1492, at eight o'clock, the little fleet of three ships weighed
anchor at the port of Palos, Spain, and set out on the most uncertain
and the greatest of all ocean voyages.

The ships had been on the sea three weeks, and no land had yet been
sighted. The compass no longer pointed due north. A meteor fell into
the ocean not far from the ships. The sailors lost courage. They
declared that they must perish if they went on, and that their
commander ought to be compelled to return. Some of them proposed to
throw him into the sea. Columbus kept two reckonings; a correct one for
himself, and an incorrect one to appease the sailors. He pleaded with
his men to be courageous, as long as mild methods availed. He then grew
harsh and commanded them. Through all the uncertainty and the
mutterings of the sailors, he clung unwaveringly to his purpose--to
push forward. He had no thought of going back.

Flying birds and floating objects promised land, but time went on and
no land appeared. The sailors grew more and more violent. On the night
of the eleventh of October, Columbus himself saw a light in the
distance, which sometimes flickered and sometimes disappeared, as if it
might be a torch borne by some one walking. All were now in eager
expectancy. At two o'clock on the morning of Friday, October twelfth, a
cannon fired from one of the vessels announced that a sailor had
actually discovered land.

When daylight came, Columbus landed. The first thing he did upon
reaching the shore was to fall upon his knees, kiss the earth, and with
tears of joy thank God for deliverance from the perils of such a
voyage. His men, ashamed of their mutiny and distrust, threw themselves
at his feet, imploring his forgiveness. Columbus next drew his sword,
planted the royal banner, and in the name of the Spanish sovereigns
took possession of the country. In honor of his deliverance he named
the place San Salvador, which means Saint Savior, or Holy Savior.

One of his three vessels was wrecked by a storm near the island of
Santo Domingo, called also Hayti and Hispaniola. Columbus built a fort
on this island from the wrecked ship, and left in it a colony of about
forty of the crew. Desirous of returning to Spain with an account of
his voyage, he set sail in January, 1493, on the return trip. A
terrific storm was encountered. Columbus, fearing that his ships might
sink, and wishing to preserve a record of what he had done, wrote an
account of the voyage on a piece of parchment and placed it in a cask,
which he threw overboard in the hope that it might be carried to shore
and found. The storm abated, however, and on the fifteenth of March he
sailed with two of his vessels into the port of Palos.

[Illustration: COLUMBUS ON THE DECK OF THE SANTA MARIA. From the
painting by von Piloty]

He entered the city amid the shouts of the people, the booming of
cannons, and the ringing of bells. Hastening to Barcelona, where the
king and queen were then holding court, he was received with a
triumphal procession. Seated next to the throne, he gave an account of
his discoveries and exhibited the new country's products which he had
brought back--gold, cotton, parrots, curious weapons, strange plants,
unknown birds and beasts, and the nine Indians whom he had brought with
him for baptism. Great honors were poured upon him. The king and queen
could scarcely do enough for him.

In September, 1493, Columbus sailed westward on his second voyage. The
fort which he had built on Santo Domingo was found burned, and the
colony was scattered. He decided to build a second fort, and coasting
forty miles east of Cape Haytien he selected a site where he founded
the town of Isabella, named in honor of the Spanish queen. He
discovered and explored a number of the islands of the West Indies,
including Porto Rico, which has belonged to the United States since the
recent war with Spain. The second voyage closed with his return to
Spain in June, 1496.

On next to the last day of May, 1498, with six ships Columbus set out
on his third voyage. On the first day of August he discovered the
Continent of South America. He thought it was only an island. Sailing
along the shore, he believed that the various capes which he passed
were islands, and not until he reached the mouth of the great Orinoco
River did he conclude that what he had discovered was not an island but
a great continent.

On his return to the new town of Isabella, he found that matters had
not gone well there while he was away. The natives had risen in revolt
against the tyranny of the governor whom Columbus left to rule the
island in his absence. For some time Columbus's enemies, who had become
jealous of him, had been trying to poison the minds of the Spanish king
and queen against him. Finally the Spanish rulers sent an officer to
inquire into the affairs of the new colony. When this officer arrived,
he took possession of Columbus's house, put Columbus in chains, and
sent him back to Spain. These chains Columbus kept to the day of his
death, and his son Hernando says his father requested that they might
be buried with him. After he arrived in Spain, he was restored to the
good will of the king and queen who soon sent him on another voyage.

In May, 1502, Columbus set sail on his fourth and last voyage, during
which he endured very great dangers. Two of his vessels were destroyed
by a storm and the other two were wrecked off the coast of Jamaica.
Separated from all the rest of the world, a number of his companions
revolted, threatened his life, deserted him, and settled on another
part of the island. The natives ceased to bring him food, and death
seemed imminent. In this extremity he took advantage of an approaching
eclipse of the moon. He told the natives that his God would destroy the
moon as a token of the punishment to be inflicted upon them, if they
did not bring the white men food. When the eclipse came, the natives
implored Columbus to intercede for them with his God, and they brought
him food in abundance. After the shipwreck, the navigator sent some of
his boldest men in canoes to ask relief of the governor of the colony
in Hispaniola. The messengers reached the colony in safety, but the
governor would not undertake the rescue of Columbus. They bought a
vessel, took it to Jamaica, and after a year of danger and anxiety on
the island, in June, 1504, Columbus started on his homeward voyage. In
September of this year he landed on Spanish soil for the last time.
This final voyage was not productive of any important results.

Soon after his return Queen Isabella died, and about two years later,
on May 12, 1506, Columbus himself died at Valladolid, Spain. He was
buried first at Valladolid, but his remains were soon transferred to a
monastery in Seville, Spain. They were exhumed in 1536 and taken across
the sea to the city of Santo Domingo, on the island of Hayti, which he
had discovered. In 1796 the remains were taken to Havana, Cuba, where
they remained until the close of the Spanish-American war. In 1898,
after the island of Cuba had passed from Spain to the United States,
the body of the great admiral was taken across the Atlantic again to
Spain, where it now rests.

In person Columbus was tall and well formed. Early in life he had
auburn hair, but by the time he was thirty years old his hair had been
turned white with care, hardship, and trouble. His face was long, and
he had gray eyes and an aquiline nose. He was moderate in all his
habits, and was one of the most religious of men. He was of a poetic
temperament and thus lacked some of the essential qualities of great
leadership. He was broad in his outlook, noble in his aspirations, and
benevolent in spirit.

Columbus died ignorant of the fact that he had discovered a new world.
He believed that the great continent which he gave to civilization was
Asia, and that he had only found a new way to that country. He called
the natives whom he found "Indians," thinking that they were
inhabitants of India. When it was known that a new country had actually
been discovered, it was named "America" in honor of Amerigo Vespucci,
an Italian geographer and navigator, who visited, it seems, the
mainland of this country in 1497. The land discovered by Columbus on
the night of October 12, 1492, is believed to have been Watling's
island, one of the groups of the West Indies.

Eighteen years elapsed between the time when Christopher Columbus
conceived his enterprise and that August morning in 1492 when he set
sail on his first voyage of discovery. He had gone about from place to
place seeking aid, but spurned everywhere. These years were spent in
almost hopeless anxiety, in poverty, and in neglect. The people of his
day thought him crazy. When he passed by, they pointed to their
foreheads and smiled. He braved the dangers of unknown waters, of
mutinous crews, of hostile natives, and of starvation. What is worse,
he endured the arrows of jealousy, slander, and misrepresentation. He
had a contract with the Spanish crown whereby he was to receive certain
honors and wealth as a result of his discoveries. He could not get King
Ferdinand to fulfill the contract. He was sent home in chains from the
great hemisphere he had discovered, and even the honor of its name went
to another who had no claim to it.

Through the career of every successful man there runs a grim
determination to do the thing in hand. Columbus had this determination
and with it he triumphed. The stars hid themselves behind storms; the
compass refused to act normally; a strange and terrible ocean roared;
mutiny howled and jealousy hissed, but on one thing he was
determined--he would do his best to accomplish the thing he had set
himself to accomplish; and he did it.

One of the most inspiring poems in American literature is Joaquin
Miller's "Columbus:"--

    Behind him lay the gray Azores,
      Behind the Gate of Hercules;
    Before him not the ghost of shores,
      Before him only shoreless seas.
    The good mate said: "Now must we pray,
      For lo! the very stars are gone.
    Brave Adm'r'l, speak, what shall I say?"
      "Why, say: 'Sail on! sail on! and on!'"

    "My men grow mutinous day by day;
      My men grow ghastly wan and weak."
    The stout mate thought of home; a spray
      Of salt wave washed his swarthy cheek.
    "What shall I say, brave Adm'r'l, say,
      If we sight naught but seas at dawn?"
    "Why, you shall say at break of day:
      'Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!'"

    They sailed and sailed, as winds might blow,
      Until at last the blanched mate said:
    "Why, now not even God would know
      Should I and all my men fall dead.
    These very winds forget their way,
      For God from these dread seas is gone.
    Now speak, brave Adm'r'l, speak and say"--
      He said: "Sail on! sail on! and on!"

    They sailed. They sailed. Then spake the mate:
      "This mad sea shows his teeth to-night.
    He curls his lips, he lies in wait,
      With lifted teeth as if to bite!
    Brave Adm'r'l, say but one good word:
      What shall we do when hope is gone?"
    The word leapt like a leaping sword:
      "Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!"

    Then, pale and worn he kept his deck
      And peered through darkness. Ah, that night
    Of all dark nights! And then a speck--
      A light! a light! a light! a light!
    It grew, a starlit flag unfurled!
      It grew to be time's burst of dawn.
    He gained a world; he gave that world
      Its grandest lesson: "Oh! sail on!"




CHAPTER VII

WEAPONS AND GUNPOWDER


Man's weapons of warfare, offensive and defensive, have been many and
curious. David slew Goliath with a stone from a sling. The Scriptures
tell us that Samson, the mighty man of the Bible, killed a thousand
Philistines at one time with the jaw-bone of an ass. The study of the
development of arms makes one of the most significant chapters in the
history of civilization.

The use of stone weapons seems to have been universally characteristic
of the earlier races of mankind, as it still is distinctive of the
ruder races. The weapons made from stone were necessarily few and
simple. The most common was an ax, made from various kinds of stone and
with varying degrees of skill. Spear-points and arrow-heads were made
of flint. These show a comparatively high type of workmanship. The
highest efforts of the ancient stone-workers culminated in a
leaf-shaped dagger or knife of flint, various in form but uniform in
type. These flint daggers differed also in size, but seldom exceeded a
foot in length. They were never ground or polished, but delicately
chipped to a fine, straight edge, and were often beautiful.

[Illustration: STATUES SHOWING KNIGHTS IN ARMOR]

In the Bronze Age several kinds of bronze daggers were made. The
characteristic weapon of this period, however, was the leaf-shaped
bronze sword. "No warlike weapon of any period is more graceful in form
or more beautifully finished." This sword had a very thin edge on both
sides running from hilt to point, and the handle was of bone, horn, or
wood. The thinness of the edge seems to have been produced without the
aid of hammer or file. The weapon was better fitted for stabbing and
thrusting than for cutting with the edge. Bronze spear-points have been
found, but throughout the Bronze Age arrow-heads were made of flint.
There were also shields of bronze, held in the hand by a handle
fastened to the center. The period of transition between the Bronze Age
and the Iron Age is marked by an iron sword, which was similar in form
to the leaf-shaped bronze sword.

Homer, the great Greek bard who is supposed to have lived about a
thousand years before the birth of Christ, in speaking of the wars of
the Greeks, describes their weapons somewhat fully. They used a
double-edged, bronze-bladed sword, the hilt and scabbard of which were
adorned with gold and silver. In the combats of the Homeric age,
however, the spear, lance, or javelin played the principal part; swords
were used only for fighting at close range. Bows and arrows also were
used. The only iron weapon specifically mentioned is the arrow-head.
This was inserted in a split shaft, precisely like the flint
arrow-heads of the early North American Indians and other modern
savages. The defensive armor of the heroic age of Greece was entirely
of bronze. It consisted of a helmet for the head, cuirass for the
chest, greaves for the legs, and a shield. The bronze cuirass was often
ornamented with gold. The shield was round or oval in shape, very
large, and covered with hide. The Greeks of the later or historic age
fought chiefly with long, heavy spears. Later the shield was reduced in
size and the sword increased in length. The light-armed troops were
furnished with a light javelin having a strap or thong fastened to the
middle to assist in hurling. A linen corselet came into use instead of
the heavy metal cuirass. The mounted troops were supplied with a longer
sword, a javelin, and a short dagger.

The military strength of early Egypt lay in her archers, who fought
either on foot or from chariots. The Egyptian bow was a little shorter
than a man's height. The string was of hide or cord; the arrows were of
reed, winged with three feathers and pointed with bronze heads, and
were from two to three feet in length. The Egyptian archers carried a
curved, broad-bladed sword, and a dagger or a battle-axe for combat at
close quarters. Their defensive armor consisted of a quilted head-piece
and coat. They used no shield, as this would have interfered with the
use of the bow. The infantry were classified according to the weapons
with which they fought--as spearmen, swordsmen, clubmen, and slingers.
The spears were five or six feet long and had triangular or leaf-shaped
heads of bronze. The spearmen carried shields shaped like a door with a
curved top, having a hole in the upper portion through which they could
look. These shields were about half as high as a man and were covered
with hairy hide, with the hair attached. The early swords of Egypt were
of bronze, straight, double-edged, tapering from hilt to point, and
measuring from two and a half to three feet in length.

The ancient Assyrians fought with swords somewhat like those of Egypt.
They used also bows, lances, spears, and javelins. Their shields were
round and convex; and their cuirass was a close-fitting garment made of
many layers of flax, plaited together or interwoven, and cemented and
hardened with glue. This linen corselet was found also among the
Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Romans.

The characteristic weapon of the Romans, the greatest warriors of
ancient times, was what the Romans themselves called the "pilum." This
weapon was a pike having a stout iron head carried on a rod of iron.
The iron rod was about twenty inches long and terminated in a socket
for the insertion of the wooden shaft, which was a little more than
three feet in length. The entire weapon was therefore about five feet
long. The pilum could be hurled as a javelin with great effect.
Piercing the shield of the enemy, the slender iron rod bent under the
weight of the shaft, which trailed along the ground, making the shield
useless for purposes of defense. When used at close quarters, the pilum
had something of the efficiency of the modern bayonet; and when wielded
firmly in both hands, it served to ward off sword-strokes, which fell
harmlessly upon the long and strong iron neck of the weapon. No warrior
of ancient times was more formidable than the Roman with his pilum. The
Romans had also swords of bronze and bronze armor, resembling the armor
and the swords of the Greeks. In the prosperous days of Rome, her
legions, under one of the greatest military commanders of all time,
Julius Caesar, brought nearly all the world of that day to the feet of
their general.

The Franks, a Germanic people who lived early in the Christian era and
who gave their name to France, used the battle-ax as their chief
weapon. It had a broad blade and a short handle and was used as a
missile. It is said that a blow of an ax, when hurled, would pierce an
enemy's shield or kill him, and that the Franks rarely missed their
aim. They wore no armor, not even helmets, though they carried swords,
round shields, and darts with barbed iron heads, which were used for
throwing or thrusting. When this dart became fixed in an adversary's
shield, it was the habit of the Frank to bound forward, place a foot
upon one end of the trailing dart, and, compelling the enemy to lower
his shield, slay him with the battle-ax. The Franks used also a short,
straight, broad-bladed sword, double-edged and obtuse at the point. The
military organization of the later Franks changed from infantry to
cavalry, and this change gave way in time to the era of chivalry. The
superior soldiers of the time of Charlemagne had added to their
equipment the celebrated coat of mail.

[Illustration: A KNIGHT IN ACTION]

Our early Anglo-Saxon fathers fought with swords, spears, axes, and a
heavy, single-edged knife. The sword was especially the weapon of the
horseman, and was not carried by anyone under the rank of thane. The
infantry bore the other weapons. The early Anglo-Saxons do not appear
to have used the bow and arrow, though in later times the long bow was
an important weapon in England. The Anglo-Saxons of olden times were
not strong in cavalry. Saxon warriors carried round or oval shields
made of wood and covered with leather. Suits of metal armor were worn
for defense.

The gallant knights of the Middle Ages fought on horseback, as they
went about protecting the weak, redressing the wrongs of the injured,
and upholding right against might. They were clad in armor of metal,
with swords buckled to their sides. Mail armor of interlinked metallic
rings was used until the beginning of the fourteenth century. From this
time to the beginning of the seventeenth century, armor was made of
solid plates of metal. After 1600, armor was gradually replaced by a
new agent of warfare, against which it was no protection. Likewise the
shield, the dagger, and the bow gave way, though the long bow continued
in use as an English weapon until the close of Queen Elizabeth's reign.

[Illustration: AN ARCHER OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY]

The invention of gunpowder was one of the most far-reaching events of
all history. This terrific substance has not only revolutionized
warfare, but has changed the current of human history itself. It is not
known who invented gunpowder, or when it was first used. It is a
compound of saltpetre, charcoal, and sulphur; the proportions in which
these three ingredients are mixed vary in different countries and in
different kinds of powders. It seems likely that powder was invented in
the Far East, perhaps in China. Saltpetre comes, for the most part,
from China and India, on whose vast plains it is found mixed with the
soil. An ordinary wood fire kindled on ground containing saltpetre
would bring the saltpetre into contact with charcoal, and thereby
practically produce powder. It is probable that the discovery of the
explosive occurred in this accidental way. Fireworks were used in China
from a very early date, but it is doubtful if the Chinese, or any other
nation of Asia, used gunpowder as a propelling force. It was left for
the Western nations to develop and give practical value to the
discovery of the Chinese.

Our first knowledge of powder as an agency of war dates from about the
year 700 A.D., when it was used by the Byzantine emperors in defending
Constantinople against the Saracens. It was employed there, however,
not as a propelling force, but in the form of rockets or a fiery liquid
called Greek fire. Its first real use in Europe as a power for
propulsion was in Spain, where the Moors and the Christians both used
some kind of artillery as early as the twelfth century after Christ.
Gunpowder was first introduced into England by Roger Bacon, a British
scientist, who was born early in the thirteenth century. He probably
did not discover its properties independently, but by reading ancient
manuscripts. Owing to the crude and uncertain methods of making
gunpowder, it did not attain much value until Berthold Schwarz, a
German monk, at about 1320 A.D. introduced an improved method of
manufacture. The improved powder thus made was first used in England by
King Edward III in his war against the Scotch in 1327. It was perhaps
used on the continent of Europe earlier than this, but the occasions
are uncertain. The tubes from which the missiles were propelled were
called "crakeys of war."

Spenser called cannon "those devilish iron engines." They were probably
used for the first time in field warfare by the English in the battle
at Crecy, a small town in France, where on August 26, 1346, the English
defeated the French. The artillery seemed to have been used in this
battle merely to frighten the horses of the enemy, and the cannon were
laughed at as ingenious toys.

From the Battle of Crecy onward, the use of gunpowder spread rapidly
throughout Europe, the Russians being the last to adopt it. Saltpetre,
at first used in its natural state, began to be produced artificially,
and then the manufacture of powder extended among the nations. During
the French Revolution, according to Carlyle, the revolutionists were
driven to such extremities for want of powder that they scraped old
cellars seeking material for its manufacture. Many recent improvements
have been made in the production of gunpowder, the most important
resulting in the smokeless powder.

Before the introduction of cannon using gunpowder as a propelling
force, various machines were used in warfare for hurling missiles.
Large stones and heavy darts or arrows were thrown by means of tightly
twisted ropes, like the action of a bow, or through the aid of a lever
and sling. Various names were applied to these weapons, the chief of
which were the ballista and the catapult. The ballista hurled stones by
means of a twisted cord or a lever; the catapult by darts or arrows
could throw a projectile half a mile. Both machines were used by the
Romans with great effect, in both defensive and offensive warfare.
In destroying the wall of a besieged town, the Romans used a
battering-ram. It consisted of a beam of wood with a mass of bronze or
iron on the end resembling a ram's head. In its earliest form, the
battering-ram was beaten against the wall by the soldiers; later it was
suspended in a frame and made to swing with ropes. Another kind moved
on rollers, the swinging movement being given to it also by means of
ropes. The beam of the ram was from sixty to one hundred and twenty
feet long, the head sometimes weighed more than a ton, and as many as a
hundred men were necessary to swing it. For the protection of the
soldiers using it, a wooden roof covered it, and the whole was mounted
on wheels. Scarcely any wall could resist the continued blows of the
battering-ram. The Romans were the most effective in the use of this
engine, though they borrowed it from the Greeks.

The first cannon were clumsy and comparatively inefficient. They were
made of wooden bars held together with iron hoops, and they shot balls
of stone. Cannon of bronze were next made, and in the latter part of
the fifteenth century iron cannon came into use. The next improvement
was the production of cannon of steel, and for some years past the best
artillery has been made of this material. After stone balls ceased to
be used, round balls of iron were utilized. These in time gave way to
cylindrical projectiles of steel. Originally cannon were loaded at the
muzzle, but in recent years breech-loading devices have been developed,
so that now all of the best modern guns are loaded from the rear.

Within the last twenty-five years, rapid-fire guns have been developed.
These have a mechanism by which the breech is opened and closed again
by a single motion of a lever. The loading with projectile and powder
is also done with one motion. The rapidity of firing varies from two
hundred shots per minute in the smallest guns to one shot in two
minutes in the largest. The largest British cannon are nearly eighteen
inches in calibre (diameter of bore), weigh a hundred tons, are
thirty-five feet long, shoot a shell weighing nearly a ton, consume at
each charge 450 pounds of powder, and have the power of penetrating
solid iron armor plate to the depth of almost two feet, at a distance
of one thousand yards. At least a year and a quarter is required for
making one of the great, heavy guns, and often a longer time. The cost
of constructing one of the largest English cannon is about $117,000,
and it costs about $175 to fire the gun once. Some of the most powerful
cannon may be relied upon to hit an object ten feet high at a distance
of about nine thousand yards. In battle, however, owing to conditions
of atmosphere and the limitations of human vision, fire would rarely be
opened at a greater distance than three thousand yards, or not quite
two miles.

Guns discharged by machinery have been introduced within the last
half-century. The fire from machine guns is practically continuous.
Several kinds have been invented and improved by various persons. One
of the best types of this kind of ordnance is the Gatling gun, invented
in 1860 by Dr. R. J. Gatling, of Indianapolis. It consists of a number
of parallel barrels, usually ten, grouped around and fastened to a
central shaft. Each barrel has its own mechanism for firing. As the
barrels revolve, loaded cartridges are fed into them by machinery and
the empty cartridges are ejected. By means of an automatic mechanism,
the bullets may be scattered over such an arc in front as may be
desired, or concentrated upon a narrower range. The Gatling gun can
fire at the rate of 1200 shots per minute; it literally hails bullets.

The greatest name connected with the manufacture of modern cannon is
that of Herr Alfred Krupp, of Germany, who was born at Essen in 1812 in
humble circumstances. He erected the first Bessemer steel works in
Germany in the city of his birth, and was the pioneer in the
introduction of steel for the manufacture of heavy guns. He believed in
the utility of steel when the great governments of the earth had no
faith in it. The works at Essen cover in all about one thousand acres,
and in them twenty thousand persons find employment. To Krupp Germany
owed much, and was not negligent in paying him honor. His factory
supplied artillery to nearly all the nations of Europe. He died in
July, 1887, and was succeeded in the management of the works by his son
Alfred, who also died recently. The plant still continues in operation.

[Illustration: MUSKETEER AND PIKEMAN OF THE EARLY SEVENTEENTH CENTURY]

The first portable or hand gun consisted of a simple iron or brass tube
fastened to a straight stock of wood. Horsemen used the first guns, and
fired them by placing the end of the stock against the breast and
letting the barrel rest on a fork fastened to the saddle. The gun was
discharged by applying a lighted match to a touch-hole in the top of
the barrel. One kind of powder was used for priming; another for
firing. Before the invention of cartridges, the powder and bullets were
loaded separately at the muzzle, with some kind of packing between. The
colonial rifles in America were loaded in this way. In a fight at close
quarters, after a gun had been once discharged, the soldier had to
fight with his sword. About the middle of the seventeenth century, the
bayonet was invented, taking its name from the town of Bayonne, in
France, where the inventor lived.

The lighted match which soldiers originally carried for igniting their
guns gave way to the flint and steel; and in 1807 a Scotch clergyman
named Forsyth obtained a patent which led to the invention of the
percussion cap. This improvement revolutionized the mechanism of
firearms. Many improvements have been made recently in arms, so that
cartridges containing cap, powder, and projectile are fed automatically
into guns so delicately constructed that they have great carrying
power, precision, and rapidity.


From the dawn of human existence man has sought by some method or other
to overcome natural barriers of water. The idea of the ship is as old
almost as the race itself. The most primitive form of vessel was the
raft. In prehistoric ages men made vessels by hollowing out the trunks
of trees, either with fire or with such crude tools as they possessed.
The Latin poet Virgil mentions "hollowed alders" used for boats, and
indeed canoes were made from hollowed tree trunks as long ago as the
Stone Age. The next step forward in the art of shipbuilding was the
bark canoe. In countries where bark is scarce, small vessels were made
of skins, felt, or canvas covered with pitch. In process of time, boats
were made by fastening timbers together, and in this method the basic
principle of modern shipbuilding was reached.

It is the relation of ships to purposes of war that interests us here.
When the curtain rose for the drama of civilization in Egypt five
thousand years ago, men were fighting at sea. The oldest ships of which
we have knowledge were Egyptian. The vessels of war were then propelled
by oarsmen, who were protected from the missiles of the enemy by
planks. On the Egyptian war-galleys there was often a projecting bow to
which was attached a metal head for ramming the vessels of the enemy.

Our knowledge of Greek fighting ships--thanks to Greek literature--is
fairly full. In the time of Homer, about ten centuries before Christ,
Greek men-of-war carried crews of from fifty to one hundred and twenty
men, nearly all of whom took part in the labor of rowing. A military
boat called the "bireme" came into use in Greece about six or seven
centuries before Christ. The word means a vessel with two rows or banks
of oarsmen on each side, one row above the other. This disposition of
rowers was evidently for the purpose of securing the largest possible
number in the least possible space. It is probable that the Greeks did
not originate the bireme, but borrowed the idea from the Phoenicians
or possibly from Egypt. When Athens was at the zenith of her glory, the
principal war vessel was the "trireme," a ship with three rows of
oarsmen to the side, each rising above another. Larger ships were
subsequently constructed with four, five, and even sixteen banks of
rowers to a side, tier above tier.

The Romans, although they were so powerful in land warfare, were not
strong in naval achievement until after the First Punic War. In this
war they learned the art of naval construction from their enemies, the
Carthaginians. A Carthaginian "quinquereme," or boat with five banks of
oars, drifted to the Roman coast. The Romans copied it, set up frames
on dry land in which crews were taught to row, and in sixty days from
the time the trees were felled they had built and manned a fleet. Later
the Romans used grappling hooks with which they bound together their
own and an opposing ship. They then boarded the enemy's vessel and
carried on the fight at close quarters. These tactics gave the Romans
command of the sea, and their war galley came to be the supreme object
of terror in the naval history of Roman days.

Sails and wind superseded rowers as the motive force of ships. Then
came steam. But after gunpowder and steam had worked a revolution in
the modes of naval combat, vessels of war continued to be made of wood.

The first fight between iron ships in the history of the world was
fought on the ninth of March, 1862, in Hampton Roads, near Norfolk,
Virginia, during the Civil War in America. The battle was the combat
between the _Merrimac_ and the _Monitor_. This engagement marked the
end of wooden navies. Thenceforth the nations of earth were to make
their warships of iron and steel.

Among the largest battleships built for the United States navy are the
_Delaware_ and the _North Dakota_. Each of these battleships is five
hundred and ten feet long, a little more than eighty-five feet wide,
sinks to the depth of nearly twenty-seven feet in the water, and
travels at the rate of twenty-one knots per hour. Each vessel weighs
twenty thousand tons, and is armed with ten great guns a foot in
diameter at the mouth. The _North Dakota_ required 4688 tons of steel
armor at a cost of more than four hundred dollars per ton. Each of its
great twelve-inch guns cost nearly $110,000, weighs fifty-two tons,
and hurls a projectile weighing 850 pounds a distance of twelve miles.
Three hundred and eighty-five pounds of powder are consumed at a
single discharge. At a distance of more than a mile and a half the
projectiles of the _North Dakota_ will penetrate steel armor to a
depth of nearly twenty inches. When these projectiles leave the guns,
they fly through the air at the rate of 2,800 feet in a second. When
one hundred shots have been fired from one of these guns, it is worn
so that it will be useless until repaired. The cost of a single
discharge from one of these guns is about $350.

Sub-marine navigation has always been attended by the most woeful
catastrophes, but in spite of numerous accidents the development of the
submarine boat has progressed uninterruptedly. Each new model presents
new preventive devices. Flasks of oxylithic powder are carried for
purifying the air in the water-tight compartments in which the crews
live while the boat is below the surface of the water. There is also a
special apparatus for signalling other vessels or the shore, in case of
danger. In 1904 three vessels, designated X, Y, and Z, were completed,
which could achieve submersion in the short space of two minutes. The
boats were armed with six torpedoes each. France owns the largest fleet
of under-water warships in the world. England stands next, and the
United States government is third.




CHAPTER VIII

ASTRONOMICAL DISCOVERIES AND INVENTIONS


"When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the
stars, which thou hast ordained, what is man, that thou art mindful of
him?" The Hebrew psalmist feels the insignificance of man compared with
the infinitude of the heavens. Victor Hugo expresses the opposite
thought: "There is one spectacle grander than the sea--that is the sky;
there is one spectacle grander than the sky--that is the interior of
the soul."

There is nothing more dignified, more sublime, more awful, than a
contemplation of the heavens. In point of grandeur, astronomy may be
regarded as king of the sciences. It is also their patriarch. Thousands
of years before the birth of Christ the priests of Chaldea, from the
tops of their flat-roofed temples, studied the stars and laid the
foundations of the science of astronomy. The heavens, with their
teeming, whirling, circling congregation, obeying laws that have no
"variableness neither shadow of turning" do, indeed, "declare the glory
of God."

From the earliest times the stars were supposed to influence for good
and ill the lives of men. There were supposed to be stars of good luck
and of bad omen. The cool, calculating Cassius tells Brutus,

    "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
    But in ourselves, that we are underlings."

When you look up into the heavens at the flickering dots of light
which we call the stars, you are looking at worlds, many of them far
larger than our earth. They seem small because of vast distances from
us. Our own solar system, great as it is, in comparison with the
celestial universe is but a clod in an acre. At the center of our
system is the sun, a huge ball of fiery matter 93,000,000 miles from
the earth, and as large as 330,000 worlds like ours. Circling around
the sun like maddened horses around a race course are eight planets.
These planets, with the sun and some comets, constitute our solar
system; _our_ system, for how many solar systems there are in space no
one knows. These planets, in their order outward from the sun, are
Mercury, Venus, our Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
Of these, Mercury is the smallest and Jupiter is the largest. The
following table shows some interesting facts about the planets:

  --------+----------+------------+-------------+-------------+----------
          |          | Number of  |             |    Time     |
          |          |  planets   |  Distance   |   required  | Velocity
    Name  | Diameter |required to |  from sun   |   for one   | in orbit,
          | in miles | equal sun  | in millions | revolution  | miles per
          |          |  in size   |  of miles   |  around sun |   hour
          |          |            |             |   in days   |
  --------+----------+------------+-------------+-------------+----------
  Mercury |   3,008  | 5,000,000  |      36     |     88      | 107,012
  Venus   |   7,480  |   425,000  |      66     |    225      |  78,284
  Earth   |   7,926  |   332,260  |      92     |    365-1/4  |  66,579
  Mars    |   4,999  | 3,093,500  |     141     |    687      |  53,938
  Jupiter |  88,439  |     1,048  |     483     |  4,332      |  29,203
  Saturn  |  75,036  |     3,502  |     886     | 10,759      |  21,560
  Uranus  |  30,875  |    22,600  |   1,783     | 30,687      |  15,202
  Neptune |  37,205  |    19,400  |   2,794     | 60,127      |  12,156
  --------+----------+------------+-------------+-------------+----------

The moon is 240,000 miles from the earth, and it would require nearly
24,500,000 moons to equal the sun in size. Other planets have moons,
some of them several. If you lived on the planet Mercury, your annual
birthday would come around about once in three of our months. If you
had your home out on the border land of the solar system, on the planet
Neptune, you would have a birthday once in about 165 years, as we count
time on the earth. It will be observed that the closer the planet is to
the sun, the faster it travels in its orbit. This fact is due to the
power of gravitation toward the sun. This strange influence drives the
planets around the sun, and the nearer the planet is to the sun the
greater is the power and consequently the faster the revolution. The
law of gravitation was discovered by Sir Isaac Newton.

Newton was born in 1642 in Lincolnshire, England. His father was a
farmer, and the farmhouse in which the son was born is still preserved.
He was educated at a grammar school in Lincolnshire, and later entered
Trinity College, Cambridge, from which he was graduated in 1665. Early
in life he displayed a great liking for mathematics. Within a few years
after he entered college, he had mastered the leading mathematical
works of the day and had begun to make some progress in original
mathematical investigation.

Newton's great life work--the achievement which insured to his name a
place among the immortals--was suggested to him by accident. As the
story goes, while he was walking one day in a garden, he saw an apple
fall from a tree. He speculated upon the reasons for its falling, and
ultimately concluded that the same force which causes an apple to fall
from a tree holds the heavenly bodies in their places. Further
investigation brought him to the unfolding of this general law of
gravitation: "Every body in nature attracts every other body with a
force directly as its mass, and inversely as the square of its
distance." This law is the greatest law of nature. It is the central
fact of the physical universe, the cement of the material world, the
mighty, mystic shepherdess of space, that keeps the planets from
wandering off alone. It is this awful, silent power reaching out from
the enormous mass of the sun, that lashes the planets in their furious
race, and yet holds them tightly reined in their orbits.

Newton was one of the greatest mathematicians, scientists, and thinkers
in the history of the world. He died at Kensington, England, on March
20, 1727, and was buried in Westminster Abbey, with the illustrious
dead of Great Britain.

[Illustration: SIR ISAAC NEWTON]

The operation of this law of gravitation pointed the way to the
discovery of the planet Neptune, which is considered the greatest
triumph of mathematical astronomy since the days of Newton. Prior to
the discovery of Neptune, Uranus was the outermost known planet of the
solar system. It was noticed that Uranus was being pulled out of its
proper path. It was being tugged away by some strange force beyond the
edge of the known planetary system. As the result of a skilful and
laborious investigation, Leverrier, a young French astronomer, wrote in
substance to an assistant in the observatory at Berlin: "Direct your
telescope to a point on the ecliptic in the constellation of Aquarius
in longitude 326 deg., and you will find within a degree of that place
a new planet, looking like a star of the ninth magnitude, and having a
perceptible disk." Leverrier did not know of the existence of such a
planet. He calculated its existence, location, and mass from the fact
that some such body must be there, to account for the disturbance
caused to Uranus. The telescope in the Berlin Observatory was directed
to the place designated by Leverrier, and on the night of September 23,
1846, in exact accordance with his prediction and within half an hour
after the astronomers had begun looking, Neptune was discovered within
less than one degree from the exact spot where Leverrier had calculated
it must be. Such are the triumphs of the human mind. Such are the
failures of nature to hide her secrets from the inquiry of man, even
behind untold millions of miles.

According to the principles of gravitation as unfolded by Newton, the
power of attraction decreases directly as the square of the distance
between the sun and a planet. Neptune, being on the outer rim of the
system and hence farthest away from the sun, moves in its orbit around
the sun more sluggishly than any other planet. Life such as we know it
on the earth could not exist on Neptune; it would be too cold. The
light and heat from the sun on Neptune are only one nine hundredth part
of what we get on the earth. But even so, the sunlight falling upon
Neptune is equal in power to seven hundred of our full moons. It was
thought that Uranus was the last planet of the solar system until
Neptune was found. Whether Neptune is the last, or whether other worlds
are roaming around beyond it, is not known.

Ptolemy, who was one of the most celebrated astronomers of earlier
times, was born in Egypt about a century and a half after Christ.
According to the Ptolemaic system of astronomy, which Ptolemy expounded
but did not originate, the earth was considered the center of the
universe, and around it the other planets and the sun were believed to
revolve. A passage in the Bible in which Joshua commanded the sun to
stand still indicates that the old Hebrews believed the sun circled
around the earth. The Ptolemaic theory did not account for all the
facts observed by astronomers, but for nearly fifteen centuries it held
practically universal sway over the belief of men, until another
thinker set the matter right.

Nicholas Copernicus was born in Prussia, February 19, 1473. He studied
mathematics, medicine, theology, and painting, but his greatest
achievements were in astronomy. He made holes in the walls of his room,
through which he might observe the stars. Copernicus did not believe in
the theory of Ptolemy that the earth was the center of the universe,
but held that the solar system had for its center the sun, and that
around it the planets, including the earth, revolved. In working out
this belief, which science has subsequently shown to be correct, he
laid the foundations of the modern system of astronomy.

The book in which Copernicus expounded his theory was begun in 1507 and
was completed in 1530. He could not be induced to publish it, however,
until shortly before his death. On May 24, 1543, he lay dying in
Frauenburg. A few hours before his death, when reason, memory, and life
were slipping away from him, the first printed copy of his book was
borne to Frauenburg and placed in the great astronomer's hands. He
touched the book, looked at it for a time, and seemed conscious of what
it was. Quickly afterward he lapsed into insensibility and was gone.

Johann Kepler, who was born in Germany in 1571, contributed several
important facts to astronomy. He studied the motions and laws of the
celestial bodies. Copernicus taught that the planets revolved around
the sun in circular orbits, but Kepler discovered that their paths are
ellipses. He also found that the nearer the planets are to the sun the
faster they travel. Kepler's discoveries were embodied in three great
laws of astronomy known as Kepler's laws. These furnished the
foundation for Newton's discoveries and are the basis of modern
astronomy. Kepler died in November, 1630.

Many of the wonderful discoveries that have been made in the field of
astronomy could not have been possible without the telescope, the most
important instrument used by astronomers. The first part of the word
is the same Greek adverb meaning "afar," found in _telegraph_ and
_telephone_; the last part is derived from a Greek verb meaning "to
see." The telescope, therefore, is an instrument for seeing objects
that are far off. It is a long tube With lenses so arranged as to make
objects appear much larger than they would to the naked eye. The
telescope was invented by a Dutch optician named Hans Lippershey about
three hundred years ago. The Italian scientist Galileo, who was born
at Pisa in February, 1564, heard of the invention, began studying the
principles upon which it depends, and greatly improved it. Galileo was
the first to use the telescope for astronomical purposes. With it he
discovered the satellites of Jupiter, the spots on the sun, and the
hills and valleys of the moon.

[Illustration: GALILEO]

At the present time the largest telescopes in the world are made and
owned in America. The largest is the Yerkes telescope, belonging to the
University of Chicago and located on the shores of Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin. Microscopes, opera glasses, and other magnifying instruments
depend upon the same principles as the telescope.

One of the most astounding of man's tools is the spectroscope, an
instrument used for analyzing light. Through a knowledge of chemistry
scientists can establish scientific relations between different
substances and the light which they emit. By analyzing the light from
the heavenly bodies with the aid of the spectroscope, and comparing
this result with the light sent out from different known kinds of
matter, man can stand on this little flying speck of matter we call the
earth and discover of what substances the stars are made.

One of the most interesting questions arising in a study of the
heavenly bodies is whether or not any of them besides the earth are
inhabited. Is there any good reason for supposing that our pigmy
planet, so insignificant compared with many celestial bodies, is the
only one containing life? On the other hand, life such as we know it
could not exist on some of the other planets. Mercury would be too hot;
Neptune too cold. Climatic conditions on Mars are most nearly like
those of the earth. Within recent years the telescope has revealed on
the surface of Mars a number of peculiar, regular lines. Many
scientists hold that these are artificial canals or irrigation ditches,
and that the planet must be inhabited. The theory does not seem at all
unreasonable. But the most that can be safely said is that if any of
the other planets are inhabited, the most likely one is Mars.




CHAPTER IX

THE COTTON-GIN


Another great invention is the cotton-gin. It is great because of the
commercial prosperity which it brought to the Southern states; because
it cheapened and extended the use of an almost necessary article of
life; and because of its effect on American history. The inventor was
an American, Eli Whitney.

The word _gin_ is an abbreviation of _engine_, and in former days
was often used to denote a handy mechanical device of any kind. The
cotton-gin is a machine for removing the seed from the fiber of the
cotton-plant. Its essential parts are a number of saws which tear the
fiber from the seeds, some stiff brushes used to remove the fiber from
the saws, and a revolving fan which blows the lighter substance of the
cotton away from the saws and brushes. The original cotton-gin has
been little changed by improvement since its invention. It seems to be
one of those inventions which have been perfected by the inventor
himself.

Eli Whitney was born in Westborough, Worcester County, Massachusetts,
December 8, 1765. His father was a thrifty farmer. Nature bestowed upon
the son marked ability in the use of tools. While he was yet a child,
his inventive genius manifested itself. Before he was ten years old, he
could use every tool in the farm workshop with the ease and skill of an
old workman. He made a violin before he was twelve and later he came to
be noted in the neighborhood as a skilful mender of fiddles. He also
turned his attention to making nails, which in Revolutionary days were
made by hand, and became the best nail-maker in Worcester County. When
he was twenty-four years of age, a desire for a college education
possessed him. His father agreed to furnish the money to pay for his
schooling, with the stipulation that the son should pay it back. He
entered Yale, where he was graduated in 1792.

After graduation Whitney went South to act as tutor in a private
family. Upon arrival at his destination, he found that the position was
already filled. At that time the widow of General Nathanael Greene, who
fought in the Revolutionary War, lived near Savannah, Georgia. She had
become interested in young Whitney and invited him to make her
plantation his home. She noted his inventive skill, and one day when a
group of Georgia planters was discussing at her home the desirability
of a machine for removing cotton-seeds from the fiber, Mrs. Greene
said: "Gentlemen, apply to my friend, Mr. Whitney; he can make
anything." Whitney was called in and the planters laid the matter of
the machine before him. At this time he had never even seen cotton
fiber. But he made up his mind to try what he could do toward solving
the problem.

He went to Savannah and searched among the warehouses and flat-boats
for samples of cotton. Mrs. Greene encouraged him in his undertaking
and gave him a room in the basement of her house for his workshop. Here
he shut himself up with his task, and was heard early and late
hammering, sawing, and filing. No one was admitted to the room but Mrs.
Greene and Phineas Miller, the tutor of Mrs. Greene's children. At the
outset Whitney had neither money nor tools. The money was supplied by
an old college friend; the tools Whitney made himself. He could procure
no wire in Savannah for constructing his machine, and was compelled to
make his own, which he did with much perseverance and skill.

In 1793 the gin was sufficiently completed to convince the inventor
that it would be a complete success. Mrs. Greene invited a number of
distinguished planters and merchants to witness the working of the
machine. The spectators were not slow in realizing the success and the
significance of the invention. They saw that with this little machine
one man could separate as much cotton from the seed in one day as he
could separate by hand in a whole winter. With the gin the cotton grown
on a large plantation could be separated in a few days; by hand, the
separation would require a hundred workmen for several months.

One dark night some unscrupulous persons broke open the shed in which
the unfinished machine had been placed and carried it away. Filled with
rage and despair at the wrong which had been done him, Whitney left
Georgia and went to Connecticut to complete his invention. But he had
scarcely left Savannah when two other claimants for the honor of the
invention appeared in Georgia. A few weeks later a gin very closely
resembling Whitney's came out. His stolen gin was doubtless used as a
model by these false claimants.

On March 14, 1794, Whitney received a patent on his gin. Phineas
Miller, who had become the husband of Mrs. Greene, entered into a
partnership with Whitney for managing the new invention. Whitney was to
manufacture the gins in the North and Miller was to furnish the capital
and attend to the interests of the business in the South. They planned
not to sell machines or patent rights, but to make and own the gins,
loaning them to planters for a rental of one pound in every three
pounds of cotton ginned. They would have been wiser if they had
manufactured and sold the machines outright. In the first place, it
required a larger capital than the firm had to manufacture the
necessary number of machines. In the second place, no one firm could
make gins fast enough to supply the rapidly increasing demand, and
consequently great encouragement was given to infringements on the
patent rights. Unending troubles beset the new firm. Whitney himself
was a victim to severe illness in the winter of 1794. Scarlet fever
raged that year in New Haven, Connecticut, where the manufacturing was
being done, and many of the workmen in the gin factory were unable to
work. In 1795 Whitney was again seized with severe sickness, and to add
to the vexations of the business, the books, papers, and machinery were
destroyed by fire. Besides all this, rival claimants circulated a
report that Whitney's gin ruined the fiber of the cotton, and that for
this reason cotton ginned by the patent process was discriminated
against in the markets of England. Another gin which did its work by
crushing the seeds between rollers and leaving the crushed seeds in the
fiber was represented as superior to Whitney's machine.

[Illustration: ELI WHITNEY]

In speaking of his troubles Whitney said: "The difficulties with which
I have had to contend have originated principally in the want of a
disposition in mankind to do justice. My invention was new and distinct
from every other; it stood alone. It was not interwoven with anything
before known; and it can seldom happen that an invention or improvement
is so strongly marked, and can be so clearly and specifically
identified; and I have always believed that I should have had no
difficulty in causing my rights to be respected, if it had been less
valuable and been used only by a small portion of the community. But
the use of this machine being immensely profitable to almost every
planter in the cotton districts, all were interested in trespassing on
the patent right, and each kept the other in countenance.... At one
time but few men in Georgia dared to come into court and testify to the
most simple facts within their knowledge relative to the use of the
machine. In one instance I had great difficulty in proving that the
machine had been used in Georgia, although at the same moment there
were three separate sets of this machinery in motion within fifty yards
of the building in which the court sat, and all so near that the rattle
of the wheels was distinctly heard on the steps of the court house."

Whitney never received fair and proper compensation for his invention.
The machine itself was stolen; others sought to rob him of his honor;
he was opposed by an unlimited train of vexations; and after the
expiration of his patent he was never able to secure a renewal.

The effect of the invention of the cotton-gin was far-reaching,
industrially and historically. In 1807, at a session of the United
States District Court held in Savannah, Georgia, the inventor finally
obtained judgment against the persons who had stolen his invention. In
the opinion rendered in favor of Whitney, Judge Johnson said of the
cotton-gin: "Is there a man who hears us who has not experienced its
utility? The whole interior of the, Southern states was languishing,
and its inhabitants were emigrating for the want of some object to
engage their attention and employ their industry, when the invention of
this machine at once opened new views to them which set the whole
country in active motion. Individuals who were depressed with poverty
and sunk in idleness have suddenly risen to wealth and respectability.
Our debts have been paid off, our capitals have increased, and our
lands have trebled themselves in value. We cannot express the weight of
the obligation the country owes to this invention. The extent of it
cannot now be seen. Some faint presentiment may be formed from the
reflection that cotton is rapidly supplanting wool, flax, silk, and
even furs, in manufactures, and may one day profitably supply the use
of specie in our East India trade. Our sister states also participate
in the benefits of this invention; for besides affording the raw
material for their manufactures, the bulkiness and quantity of the
article afford a valuable employment for their shipping."

In the South "Cotton is king." The rise of the cotton industry dates
from the invention of Eli Whitney's cotton-gin. Before its invention
the labor of removing the seed from the fiber was so tedious that the
growth of the cotton was not profitable. Partly because of this fact
and partly because the Revolutionary War was just over, the South lay
dormant; its plantations were heavily mortgaged, its people were moving
away in streams. Then came a little machine that awoke the South from
its sleep and made it rouse itself. It brought energy, hope, and
prosperity, where before were languor, indifference, and stagnation. It
increased the exportation of American cotton from less than 190,000
pounds in 1791 to 41,000,000 pounds in 1803.

From the historical point of view the invention of the cotton-gin was
tremendous in its influence. This machine multiplied by many times the
demand in the South for slave labor and made slaves far more
profitable. One writer has said of Whitney: "He was, through his
invention, probably one of the most potent agencies for the extension
of slavery and the terrible struggle that marked the first half-century
of our nation's existence. While he was quietly sleeping in his grave,
the very earth was shaken with the tread of contending armies that he
had done more than any other one man to call forth to battle; for there
is little doubt that but for the invention of the cotton-gin slavery
would not have lived out the century of the Revolution." Macaulay says:
"What Peter the Great did to make Russia dominant, Eli Whitney's
invention of the cotton-gin has more than equaled in its relation to
the power and progress of the United States." In the light of the
wonderful, widespread material growth and prosperity that have come to
the whole of our country in recent years, Macaulay's statement is
overdrawn. But as matters were when it was written by the great
Englishman, it was probably true.

Whitney achieved much success as the inventor of improved methods of
manufacturing firearms. He was the first to conceive the plan of making
the different parts of firearms by machinery, so that any part of a
weapon would fit any other like weapon equally well. This principle has
made possible the production of cheap watches, clocks, and sewing
machines. He died in New Haven, Connecticut, January 8, 1825.




CHAPTER X

ANAESTHETICS


If those inventions and discoveries out of which have come widespread
safety, happiness, or prosperity to mankind are to be considered great,
then Dr. Morton's discovery of anaesthetics and its application to
surgery is entitled to a high place among the world's discoveries and
inventions. The pain that has been destroyed, the lives that have been
saved, the sorrow that has been averted, give their testimony to the
value of this discovery to humanity.

An anaesthetic is administered to produce temporary insensibility to
pain. At least something of anaesthetics was known to the ancients.
Homer mentions nepenthe, a potion which was said to make persons forget
their pains and sorrows. The word appears occasionally in literature.
In "Evangeline" Longfellow refers to it in this line:

    "Crown us with asphodel flowers, that are wet with the dews of
    nepenthe."

Virgil and other classical writers mention a mythical river Lethe which
was supposed to surround Hades. Souls passing over to the happy fields
of Elysium first drank from this river, whose waters caused them to
forget their sorrows. Milton speaks of the mythical stream in the
following passage from "Paradise Lost:"

    "Far off from these a slow and silent stream,
    Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls her watery labyrinth."

Herodotus wrote that it was the practice of the Scythians to inhale the
vapors of a certain kind of hemp to produce intoxication. The use of
the mandrake plant as an anaesthetic is spoken of as far back as Pliny,
the Roman historian. The sleep-producing effects of the mandragora or
mandrake are alluded to by Shakespeare. He also frequently mentions in
a general way draughts that act as anaesthetics, without making clear
their specific natures. An old Chinese manuscript indicates that a
physician of that country named Hoa-tho in the third century after
Christ used a preparation of hemp as an anaesthetic in surgical
operations. Although the ancients had knowledge of anaesthetics of one
kind or other, the practice of anaesthesia never became general, and
surgeons of the ancient world appear to have looked upon it with
disfavor.

When in modern times Joseph Priestley, the English scientist (born in
1733, died 1804) gave great impetus to chemical research by his
discoveries in that science, the nature of gases and vapors was more
and more closely studied. The belief soon sprang up that many gases and
vapors would ultimately become of great value in medicine and surgery.
In 1800 Sir Humphry Davy experimented with nitrous oxide gas, called
"laughing gas," and discovered its anaesthetic qualities. He suggested
its use in surgery, but for practically half a century his suggestion
passed unheeded. Other scientists experimented with greater or less
success, seeking to find something that would alleviate physical pain;
but to Dr. William T. G. Morton, an American, belongs the credit for
the practical introduction of anaesthetics into modern surgery.

Dr. Morton was born in Charlton, Massachusetts, August 9, 1819. His
ancestors were of Scotch extraction. He passed his early years in farm
work. At the age of thirteen he entered an academy at Oxford,
Massachusetts, where he remained only a few months, attending school
thereafter at Northfield and Leicester. His father's financial
condition caused him to leave school in 1836 and enter the employ of a
publishing firm in Boston. Deciding to engage in the practice of
dentistry, in 1840 he took a course in the Baltimore College of Dental
Surgery. Two years afterward he began the practice of his profession in
Boston. As dentistry at that time was in its beginnings as a distinct
profession, Dr. Morton took up, in addition to it, the study of general
medicine and surgery in the Harvard Medical School.

In the days prior to the use of anaesthetics, the operations of dental
surgery were attended by much pain. Dr. Morton began seeking some means
for alleviating it. In the course of his investigations he became
acquainted with the effects of sulphuric ether as a local anaesthetic,
and frequently used this drug in minor operations. On one occasion he
applied it with unusual freedom in the treatment of a very sensitive
tooth. Observing how completely the tissues were benumbed by the ether,
he conceived the idea of bringing the entire system under its
influence, thereby producing temporary insensibility in all the sensory
nerves. The most serious problem with which he had to deal was the
manner of applying the ether. Although the soporific tendencies of both
ether and nitrous oxide gas were well known, it had not been proved
that they could be inhaled in sufficiently large quantities, or, if so,
that they would produce perfect insensibility. After a long series of
experiments with various animals, Dr. Morton succeeded in fully
establishing the narcotic power of ether.

On October 16, 1846, he made his first public demonstration of the new
discovery in the operating room of the Massachusetts General Hospital,
in Boston, when he painlessly removed a tumor from the jaw of a
patient. This operation was wholly convincing to the medical
profession, and created profound public interest. Dr. Morton was
brought into immediate prominence. A meeting of the leading physicians
of Boston was held to choose an appropriate name for the new process.
A long list of words was presented, from which Dr. Morton selected the
term _letheon_, related to the Lethe of Virgil and the classical
writers. The words _anaesthetic_ and _anaesthesia_ were coined from the
Greek by Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, the American poet and physician,
who was then living in Boston. The words proposed by Dr. Holmes have
become the established terms of the subject, superseding the _letheon_
of the discoverer.

[Illustration: DR. WILLIAM T. G. MORTON]

Dr. Morton secured a patent on his discovery, but derived little
pecuniary profit from it. Although he permitted the free use of his
anaesthetic in charitable institutions, his patent was frequently
infringed. He vainly applied to Congress for compensation in 1846 and
1849. A bill to give him one hundred thousand dollars as a national
testimonial of his contribution to the welfare of the race was
introduced into Congress in 1852 and defeated. Measures in his behalf
at sessions of Congress in 1853 and 1854 were likewise voted down. The
only money that ever came to Dr. Morton for his discovery was a small
prize from the French Academy of Sciences and the sum of one thousand
dollars from the trustees of the Massachusetts General Hospital. The
governments of Russia and of Norway and Sweden conferred upon him
certain awards of honor in recognition of his great contribution to
science.

He died in New York City, July 15, 1868, and was buried in Mount Auburn
Cemetery, Cambridge, Massachusetts, perhaps the most beautiful and
illustrious of American burial places.

The monument of Dr. Morton in Mount Auburn bears this inscription:
"William T. G. Morton, inventor and revealer of anaesthetic inhalation,
by whom pain in surgery was averted and annulled; before whom, in all
time, surgery was agony; since whom, science has control of pain." He
is included among the fifty-three illustrious sons of Massachusetts
whose names are inscribed upon the dome of the new Hall of
Representatives in the State House at Boston; and is among the five
hundred noted men whose names adorn the facade of the Boston Public
Library.

The news of Morton's discovery reached England December 17, 1846.
Within five days ether was in use as an anaesthetic by the English
dentists and surgeons. A year later Sir J. Y. Simpson, of Edinburgh
discovered the anaesthetic properties of chloroform, which has since
that time been the preferred anaesthetic in Europe. Ether has continued
in general use in America.




CHAPTER XI

STEEL AND RUBBER


It has been shown already in this volume that the materials from which
man has made his tools, and those tools themselves, are the best means
of determining his advance in civilization. Man passed from the Stone
Age with its few, crude implements into the Bronze Age, and from this
into the Iron Age, with each succeeding step increasing the number and
efficiency of his tools. The race has lately passed into an age which
might well be named the Age of Steel. The discovery or invention of
this metal--for there is in it the nature of both invention and
discovery--is sufficiently important to mark a distinct era in human
progress.

Steel is not found native, but is a compound of iron and carbon and is
produced artificially. The great value of steel lies in the fact that
it can be made so hard that it can cut and shape almost every other
substance known to man, and yet this very quality of hardness can be so
modified as to make the metal capable of cutting and otherwise shaping
itself. Steel can be made nearly as hard as the diamond, or so soft
that it can be cut, bent, or hammered into this shape or that, rolled
into sheets, or drawn out into the finest wire. Nearly the whole of the
compound is iron, the carbon ranging from one-fourth of one per cent to
two and one half per cent. Ordinary steel contains certain other
chemicals, such as silicon, manganese, sulphur, and phosphorus, but
these are mere natural impurities existing in the metal. The essential
ingredients are iron and carbon. Steel is hardened by being heated to a
high temperature and then suddenly cooled by contact with cold water,
or in other like ways. Fixing the degree of hardness in a piece of
steel is called tempering. The degree of hardness is dependent upon the
suddenness of cooling.

The widespread use of steel and its importance in the life of to-day
are due to Sir Henry Bessemer, an English inventor, who was born
January 19, 1813, and died March 15, 1898. The substance was known,
made, and used before the time of Bessemer, but its production was so
costly that it was little used. By his process of production the cost
was greatly reduced and steel consequently came into much wider usage.
By the Bessemer process molten iron is poured into a vessel with holes
in the bottom. Air at a powerful pressure is forced through these
openings, so that the pressure of the air prevents the melted metal
from running out. The air removes the carbon from the molten iron.
Afterward the required amount of carbon is admitted to the iron, and
the result of the union is a piece of steel. The process of Bessemer
was patented in 1856.

Steel is used in the construction of great modern buildings, bridges,
and battleships; and in making cannon, railroad cars and rails, pipe,
wire, bolts and nails, swords, knives, saws, watch-springs, needles,
and innumerable tools and articles of every-day usage. Manifestly a
material that is used in the manufacture of articles ranging from a
needle to a great city sky-scraper or a battleship must be of prime
importance to the human race.

[Illustration: STEEL FRAMEWORK OF THE FLATIRON BUILDING, NEW YORK
CITY]

The United States Steel Corporation is the largest combination of
capital in the world. It was organized in March, 1901, under the laws
of New Jersey, for the manufacture and sale of steel products. This
giant corporation was formed by the union of ten large corporations,
each of which was, in turn, made up of smaller companies. Its total
capitalization is $1,404,000,000, or one half of all the money in the
United States. Its property consists of 149 steel works, with an annual
capacity of 9,000,000 tons; 18,000 coke furnaces; over 100,000 acres of
land; and 125 lake vessels and several small railroads. The Corporation
employs over 150,000 men, to whom it pays in Wages annually over
$120,000,000.


When on a wet morning one puts on rubbers and a rain coat, one scarcely
wonders about the history of the articles that give so much protection
and comfort. The story of rubber is an interesting one. The substance
at first was called "elastic gum." About 1770 it was discovered that
the gum would rub out lead pencil marks. It was imported into Great
Britain and sold for this purpose, and because of this property its
name was changed to rubber. The correct name of the material now is
caoutchouc, though its common name is India-rubber or simply rubber. It
is obtained from the sap of certain tropical trees and shrubs. The best
quality of rubber comes from Brazil, though supplies are procured from
other parts of South America, from Central America, the West Indies,
Africa, and parts of tropical Asia.

The details of collecting the sap and preparing it for market vary
somewhat according to locality and the nature of the trees or shrubs
from which it comes. In the region of the Amazon, when the sap is to be
obtained from a tree, cuts are made each morning in the bark. The milky
sap that exudes is collected in little tin or clay cups fastened to the
trunk. At the end of about ten hours these cups are emptied into larger
ones, and on the morning of the following day new incisions are made in
each tree, about eight inches below the old ones. This process is
continued until incisions have been made in the bark from a height of
about six feet down to the ground; the lower down on the trunk of the
tree, the better is the quality of the sap. For the evaporation of the
sap, a fire is built of material yielding dense volumes of smoke.
Workmen dip wooden paddles into the liquid and hold them in the smoke
until the sap solidifies and acquires a slightly yellow tinge. They
repeat the process of dipping the paddle into the sap and holding it in
the smoke, until the paddle is covered with a layer of the dried gum
about an inch and a half in thickness. This layer is then removed from
the paddle and hung up to dry; and the process of evaporation is
commenced anew. The raw material, which is an elastic, yellowish,
gum-like substance, is sent away to be vulcanized. From the vulcanized
product are made the rubber goods of commerce.

As far back as 1615 A.D. the Spaniards used rubber for waxing canvas
cloaks so as to make them water-proof. But it was not until two
centuries later that caoutchouc began to attract general attention.
Charles Goodyear, an American inventor, found a way for making it
commonly useful, and brought about its practical and widespread
utility.

The story of Goodyear's life is pathetically interesting. He was born
in New Haven, Connecticut, December 29, 1800. His father was Amasa
Goodyear, a pioneer hardware manufacturer, from whom the son inherited
much of his inventive ability. Charles Goodyear was educated in the
schools of New Haven, and spent much of his time on his father's farm
and in the factory, where the father manufactured steel implements and
pearl buttons, the first ever made in America. The son intended to
become a preacher, but obstacles arose and he abandoned his purpose.
Though he was not to minister to man's spiritual needs, yet he was to
bring to the race a material blessing of great value.

Goodyear entered into the hardware business with his father in
Connecticut and at Philadelphia, but their business failed. During the
ten years extending from 1830 to 1840 he was frequently imprisoned for
debt. All this time he was working to perfect unfinished inventions in
order that his creditors might be paid.

While a boy on his father's farm, he one day picked up a scale of
rubber peeled from a bottle, and conceived the notion that this
substance could be turned into a most useful material if it were made
uniformly thin and prepared in such way as to prevent its melting and
sticking together in a solid mass. When he was first imprisoned for
debt, the use of rubber was attracting general attention. He became
strongly interested in finding a way for making the article more
useful. The chief difficulty in treating rubber lay in its
susceptibility to extremes of temperature; it melted in summer and
became stiffened in winter. Strenuous effort had been expended in
attempting to overcome this difficulty, but without success. Goodyear
dedicated his energies to a solution of the problem. His experiments
were conducted in Philadelphia, in New York, and in Massachusetts
towns.

During this period he and his family lived literally from hand to
mouth, and more than once subsisted upon what was virtually the charity
of friends. Sometimes it was necessary to sell the children's books and
articles of household furniture to drive the wolf of hunger from the
door. Much of his experimentation was carried on in prison, with no
encouragement from any source to cheer him on. At times his hopes arose
as victory seemed near; they soon fell, as what he had mistaken for
triumph proved to be defeat. He became the butt of those who did not
share his own constant faith in the ultimate success of his labors. He
was calm in defeat, patient in ridicule, and always bore himself with
magnificent fortitude.

[Illustration: CHARLES GOODYEAR]

In the early months of 1839 Goodyear could shout with the old Syracusan
mathematician, "Eureka!"--"I have found it!" He had discovered that
rubber coated with sulphur and then heated to a high degree of heat is
rendered uniformly elastic in all temperatures. He had solved the
problem, but it was two long years before he could convince any one of
the fact. William Rider, of New York, finally furnished capital for
carrying on the business of manufacturing rubber goods according to the
new process. The firm was successful and Goodyear had soon paid off
thirty-five thousand dollars of indebtedness owed to creditors of his
old business that had failed ten or fifteen years before.

The new process was called vulcanizing. Vulcan was the old Roman god
of fire and metal working, and was patron of handicrafts generally.
The word _volcano_ is derived from _vulcan_, and melted sulphur is
associated with volcanoes. The term _vulcanize_, therefore, is
traceable either directly or indirectly, through the fire or the
sulphur employed in the process, to the name of the Roman god.
According to the relative amount of sulphur used and the temperature
to which the compound is raised, either soft or hard rubber may be
produced. Hard rubber contains a greater quantity of sulphur and is
heated to a higher temperature. The heat used in vulcanization reaches
as much as three hundred degrees Fahrenheit.

Goodyear's first patent was taken out in 1844, the year in which Samuel
F. B. Morse invented the telegraph. About this time he was imprisoned
for debt for the last time in the United States, though he suffered a
jail sentence for debt in France later. His patents were repeatedly
infringed in this country, and he could not secure any patents in Great
Britain or France. The United States Commissioner of Patents said of
Goodyear, "No inventor, probably, has ever been so harassed, so
trampled upon, so plundered by pirates as he, their spoliations upon
him having unquestionably amounted to millions of dollars." Daniel
Webster was the lawyer employed in the trial in which Goodyear's legal
right to the honor and profits of his invention was established. For
his services in this case Webster received a fee of twenty-five
thousand dollars.

Goodyear himself made no very large sum of money from his invention,
though he added to life not merely a new material but a new class of
materials, applicable to many cases. Before his death he had seen
rubber put to more than five hundred different uses, and thousands of
persons engaged in manufacturing the various articles fashioned from
it. Goodyear died in New York City, July 1, 1860.




CHAPTER XII

STENOGRAPHY AND THE TYPEWRITER


It is difficult to see how man could now dispense with any of the great
inventions and discoveries that give him power over time and space. Not
one of them could be sacrificed without corresponding loss of power.
Among the great devices that economize time are stenography and the
typewriter. Stenography is the world's business alphabet; the
typewriter, its commercial printing press.

The word _stenography_ is derived from the Greek adjective _stenos_
meaning "narrow" or "close," and the Greek verb _graphein_ signifying
"to write." Stenography, therefore, is the art of close or narrow
writing, so named, perhaps, from the great amount of meaning that by
its use is packed into a narrow compass. It is a phonetic system in
which brief signs are used to represent single sounds, groups of
sounds, whole words, or groups of words.

The idea of stenography or shorthand writing originated in ancient
times. Antiquarians have tried to show, with more or less plausibility,
that it was practised more than a thousand years before the birth of
Christ by the Persians, Egyptians, and Hebrews. Abbreviated writing,
for taking down lectures and preserving poems recited at the Olympic
and other games, was used by the Greeks. The first known practitioner
of the art of shorthand writing was Tiro, who lived in Rome 63 B.C.,
and who was the stenographer of the great orator Cicero. He took down
in shorthand the speeches of his master, by whom they were afterward
revised. Plutarch says that when the Roman Senate was voting on the
charge which Cicero had preferred against Catiline, Cicero distributed
shorthand reporters throughout the Senate House for the purpose of
taking down the speeches of some of the leading Senators. At the close
of St. Paul's letter to the Colossians there is a note to the effect
that the Epistle was written from Rome by Tychicus and Onesimus. It has
been supposed that Tychicus acted as shorthand writer and Onesimus as
transcriber. Certain it is that the early Christian fathers employed a
system of shorthand writing. Saint Augustine refers to a church meeting
held at Carthage in the fourth century of the Christian era, at which
eight shorthand writers were employed, two working at a time.
Charlemagne, the great king of the Franks, who died in 814 A.D., delved
deep into the art of shorthand writing as practised by Tiro, Cicero's
stenographer.

In Chapter xxxviii of _David Copperfield_, Charles Dickens describes
his own experience with shorthand thus: "I bought an approved scheme
of the noble art and mystery of stenography (which cost me ten and
sixpence), and plunged into a sea of perplexity that brought me, in a
few weeks, to the confines of distraction. The changes that were rung
upon dots, which in such a position meant such a thing, and in such
another position something else, entirely different; the wonderful
vagaries that were played by circles; the unaccountable consequences
that resulted from marks like flies' legs; the tremendous effects of a
curve in a wrong place--not only troubled my waking hours, but
reappeared before me in my sleep. When I had groped my way, blindly,
through these difficulties, and had mastered the alphabet, which was
an Egyptian temple in itself, there then appeared a procession of new
horrors, called arbitrary characters, the most despotic characters I
have ever known; who insisted, for instance, that a thing like the
beginning of a cobweb meant _expectation_, and that a pen-and-ink
sky-rocket stood for _disadvantageous_. When I had fixed these
wretches in my mind, I found that they had driven everything else out
of it; then, beginning again, I forgot them; while I was picking them
up, I dropped the other fragments of the system; in short, it was
almost heart-breaking."

Till near the middle of the last century all systems of shorthand
writing were more or less crude and illogical. About 1837 Isaac Pitman,
an Englishman, put stenography upon a phonetic basis and therefore a
scientific basis. As there are in the English language forty-three
different sounds represented by twenty-six letters, Pitman adopted a
shorthand alphabet in which consonants were represented by simple
straight or curved strokes, the light sounds denoted by light strokes
and the heavy sounds by heavy strokes. "The leading heavy vowels are
represented by six heavy dots and a like number of heavy dashes, placed
at the beginning, middle, or end of the strokes, and before or after as
they precede or follow the consonants. The same course is followed with
the light vowels. Diphthongs are provided for by a combination of dash
forms, and by a small semicircle, differently formed and placed in
different positions. Circles, hooks, and loops are employed in distinct
offices."

Pitman's invention of a phonographic alphabet for shorthand was the
beginning of verbatim reporting that has spread to every land which
Anglo-Saxon civilization has touched. There is scarcely a legislative
body, a court of importance, or a great convention of any kind, whose
proceedings are not taken down on the spot in shorthand, accurately and
at once, to say nothing of the very wide use of stenography in private
business. In this bewildering commercial whirl of the twentieth century
time is money, and stenography is time.

The typewriter, invented about forty years ago, is parallel to
stenography in importance. The daily volume of the world's business
could not be accomplished without it. And, as in the case of all the
great inventions, men do not see how they got on before it came. The
world owes the typewriter to two Americans, John Pratt and Christopher
L. Sholes. Pratt was born in Unionville, South Carolina, April 14,
1831. In 1867, while in England, he produced the first working
typewriter that ever secured a sale. A description of his machine in
one of the English periodicals attracted the attention of Sholes, who
was born in Pennsylvania in 1819, but who at that time was living in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He began working at the idea of the typewriter
borrowed from Pratt, and in the same year that Pratt's machine was
first made, Sholes produced a typewriter that was practically
successful and started the manufacture of a machine that was to become
increasingly useful, and finally indispensable.

No business in recent years has grown more rapidly than the typewriter
industry. From nothing forty years ago, it has grown into an industry
producing nearly a quarter of a million machines a year and employing
thousands of workmen. American manufacturers not only supply the home
trade with their output, but export machines to every part of the
civilized world, making this country the home and center of the world's
typewriter industry.




CHAPTER XIII

THE FRICTION MATCH


The biggest things are not always the most important. A little article,
used many times in the course of every day and familiar to every
person, is one of the world's great inventions. It is the friction
match.

Fire is one of man's absolute necessities. Without it civilization
would have been impossible, and life could scarcely continue. The story
of man's power to produce and use fire is practically the story of
civilization itself. So far as history can reveal there has never been
in any time a people who were without the knowledge and use of fire;
which, on its beneficent side, is man's indispensable friend; and in
its wrath, a terrible destroyer.

A mass of mythological stories has come down from the days of antiquity
regarding the origin of fire. The Persian tradition is that fire was
discovered by one of the hero dragon-fighters. He hurled a huge stone
at a dragon, but missed his aim. The stone struck another rock.
According to the story, "the heart of the rock flashed out in glory,
and fire was seen for the first time in the world." The Dakota Indians
of North America believed that their ancestors produced fire from the
sparks which a friendly panther struck with its claws in scampering
over a stony hill. Finnish poems describe how "fire, the child of the
sun, came down from heaven, where it was rocked in a tube of yellow
copper, in a large pail of gold." Some of the Australian tribes have a
myth that fire came from the breaking of a staff held in the hands of
an old man's daughter. In another Australian legend fire was stolen by
a hawk and given to man; in still another a man held his spear to the
sun and thus procured fire.

According to Greek mythology, fire was stolen from heaven by
Prometheus, friend of men, and brought to them in a hollow stalk of
fennel. As the legend runs, he took away from mankind the evil gift of
foreseeing the future, and gave them instead the better gifts of hope
and fire. For the bestowing of these gifts upon the human race,
Prometheus was sorely punished by Zeus, king of the gods. The myth that
fire was stolen from heaven by a hero is not confined to the Greeks; it
is scattered among the traditions of all nations. It is not strange
that primitive man should ascribe the origin of fire to supernatural
causes. Before he learned how to use and control it, he must have been
strangely impressed with its various manifestations--the flash of the
lightning, the hissing eruption of the volcano, the burning heat of the
sun, and perhaps the wild devastation of forest and prairie fires
caused by spontaneous combustion.

Because of its mysterious origin and its uncontrollable power for good
or ill, fire was supposed from the earliest times to be divine. The
Bible tells us that the Lord went before the children of Israel in
their journey from Egypt to the Promised Land in a pillar of fire by
night. From the earliest hours of religious history the sun has been
worshiped as a god. All the tribes of antiquity had a fire god. It was
Agni in ancient India; Moloch among the Phoenicians; Hephaestus in
Greece; Vulcan among the Romans; Osiris in Egypt; and Loki among the
Scandinavians. In ancient religious belief fire and the human soul were
supposed to be one and the same in substance. In some instances fire
was held to be the very soul of nature, the essence of everything that
had shape. "From Jupiter to the fly, from the wandering star to the
tiniest blade of grass, all beings owed existence to the fiery
element." This theory was believed by the Aztecs, who invoked in their
prayers "fire the most ancient divinity, the father and mother of all
gods." Of these ancient fire-divinities some were good and some evil;
just as fire itself is both beneficent and malignant.

Among some peoples fire was used for purification from sin and the cure
of disease. It also burned upon the tombs of the dead to dispel evil
spirits. Greek colonists, in setting out from the mother country for
the purpose of founding new homes, took fire from the home altar with
which to kindle fires in their new homes. Upon some altars fires were
kept constantly burning, and their extinguishment was considered a
matter of great alarm. If by chance the fire that burned in the Roman
temple of Vesta went out, all tribunals, all authority, all public and
private business had to stop immediately until the fire should be
relighted. The Greeks and the Aztecs received ambassadors of foreign
countries in their temples of fire, where at the national hearth they
prepared feasts for their guests. In some cases ambassadors were not
received until they had stood close to fire in order that any
impurities they might have brought should be singed away. No Greek or
Roman army crossed a frontier without taking an altar whereon burned
night and day fire brought from the public council hall and temple at
home. The Egyptians had a fire burning night and day in every temple,
and the Greeks, Romans, and Persians had such a fire in every town and
village.

Among our Anglo-Saxon ancestors the ordeal by fire was one of the modes
of trying cases of law. The accused was compelled to walk blindfolded
over red-hot plowshares. If these burned him, he was adjudged guilty;
if not, he was acquitted, for it was supposed that the purity of fire
would not permit an innocent man to suffer. The custom of the North
American Indians was to discuss important tribal affairs around the
council fire. Each sachem marched around it thrice, turning to it all
sides of his person. Among peoples in both hemispheres it has been the
practice to free fields from the demons of barrenness by lighting huge
fires. The fields were supposed to be made fertile as far as the flames
could be seen. In Bavaria seeds were passed through fire before they
were sown to insure fertility. In some places children were held over
the flame of an altar fire for purposes of purification.

Nothing has played a more important part in the history of the race
than fire. Human culture began with the use of it, and increased in
proportion as its use increased. For ages man felt his helplessness
before fire; he did not know how to produce it, or to turn it to good
account. By and by the secret was discovered; mind began to gain the
mastery over this great force.

The most primitive method of producing fire artificially was by rubbing
two sticks together. This method was probably discovered by accident.
Fire from friction was caused also by pushing the end of a stick along
a groove in another piece of wood, or by twirling rapidly a stick which
had its end placed perpendicularly in a hole made in another piece of
wood. Focusing the rays of the sun powerfully upon a given point by
means of a lens or concave mirror, was another method used for starting
fire. The story is told that when the ancient city of Syracuse in
Sicily was being besieged, the great mathematician Archimedes, who was
a resident of that city, set on fire the enemy's ships by focusing the
sun's rays upon them with a mirror. In China the burning-glass was
widely used not very long ago. When iron came into use, it was employed
for making fire. A piece of flint was struck against an iron object.
The concussion produced a spark, which fell into a box containing
charred cotton called tinder. The tinder took fire but did not burst
into flame. The flame came by touching the burning tinder with a strip
of wood tipped with sulphur. This flint-and-steel method was used for
producing fire until less than a century ago.

No attempt was made to produce fire by chemical means until 1805. In
that year M. Chancel, a Paris professor, invented an apparatus
consisting of a small bottle containing asbestos, saturated with
sulphuric acid, and wooden splints or matches coated with sulphur,
chlorate of potash, and sugar. The wooden splint, when dipped into the
bottle, was ignited. The first really successful friction matches were
made in 1827 by John Walker, an English druggist. They consisted of
wooden splints coated with sulphur and tipped with antimony, chlorate
of potash, and gum. They were sold at a shilling or twenty-four cents
per box, each box containing eighty-four matches.

The modern phosphorus friction match came into use about 1833. It is
not possible to ascertain precisely who the inventor was. But in that
year Preschel had a factory in Vienna, Austria, for the manufacture of
friction matches with phosphorus as the chief chemical. For years
Austria and the States in the south of Germany were the center of the
match industry. Phosphorus is still used as the principal chemical
ingredient in the manufacture of matches. The first patent in the
United States for a friction match was issued October 24, 1836, to
Alonzo D. Phillips, of Springfield, Massachusetts. The "safety match,"
which will not ignite unless brought into contact with the side of the
box in which it is packed, was invented by Lundstrom of Sweden, in
1855. The match industry in Norway and Sweden has developed during the
last few years with great rapidity. About sixty factories are in
operation in these countries. One town alone contains six thousand
matchmakers. In France the government has the sole right to manufacture
matches.

Phosphorus is very poisonous, and the early manufacture of phosphorus
matches was attended with loss of life and great suffering. Inhalation
of phosphorus fumes produced necrosis, or decay of the bone, usually of
the lower jaw. In the first years of phosphorus match making, the
business was chiefly carried on by the poorer people in large cities.
The work was done in damp, foul cellars; and the peculiar disease of
the bone caused by the phosphorus fumes became so widespread that the
different governments drove the match factories out of the cellars and
ordered that the business be conducted in better ventilated buildings.
But the discovery of red phosphorus, which never produces the disease,
the use of lessened quantities of the ordinary phosphorus, and better
ventilation have all combined to make the malady now very rare.

The first matches were made by hand, one by one, and were of necessity
few and costly. Matches are now made and boxed by machinery. One
million splints can be cut in an hour with the machinery in use. Some
single manufacturing firms make as many as one hundred millions of
matches in a day. With diminished cost of production have come
decreased prices, so that now a large box can be purchased for a very
few cents. Until about 1860 railroads in the United States would not
receive matches for transportation, owing to the danger involved. The
distribution before that year was mainly by canal or wagon. A match is
a little thing, but it is one of the world's really great inventions.




CHAPTER XIV

PHOTOGRAPHY


Photography is one of the many triumphs of the human mind over time and
space. Thousands of miles are between you and the wonderful Taj Mahal.
You may never be able to go to it. But as the mountain would not go to
Mohammed and Mohammed therefore went to the mountain, so photography
brings the Taj Mahal to you. The chief struggle for civilization is
with these two abstract antagonists--time and space. In this struggle
the achievements of photography are such as to win it a place among the
world's great inventions and discoveries.

Here, again, we borrow words from the Greeks. _Photography_ comes from
the Greek noun _phos_ meaning "light" and the Greek verb _graphein_
signifying "to write," already referred to several times in this
volume. Photography is therefore the science and the art of writing or
reproducing objects by means of light. The science of photography
depends upon the action of light on certain chemicals, usually
compounds of silver. These chemicals are spread upon a delicately
sensitized metallic plate, which is exposed to light. The action of
light fixes the object desired upon this plate, from which copies of
the picture are made on paper of suitable kind.

Like most of the great discoveries and inventions, photography is not
old. It had its beginning in 1777, when the Swedish chemist Scheele
began to inquire scientifically into the reason and effect of the
darkening of silver chloride by the rays of the sun. The first picture
ever made by the use of light on a sensitive surface was made in 1791
by Thomas Wedgewood, an Englishman. The principle of the photographer's
camera was discovered in 1569 by Della Porta, of Naples. To Nicephore
Niepce, a Frenchman, belongs the honor of producing the first camera
picture. This was in 1827 after thirteen years of experimenting. He
called his process "heliography," _helios_ being the Greek word for
_sun_. His process consisted of coating a piece of plated silver or
glass with asphaltum or bitumen, and exposing the plate in the camera
for a time varying in length from four to six hours. The light acted on
the asphaltum in such a way as to leave the image on the plate.

The predecessor of the modern photograph was the daguerreotype. It was
named for its inventor, Louis Daguerre, a French scene-painter, who was
born in 1789. In 1829 he formed a partnership with Niepce, and together
they labored to advance the art of photography. The discovery of the
daguerreotyping process was announced in January, 1839. The process of
Daguerre consisted in "exposing a metal plate covered with iodide of
silver for a suitable time in a photographic camera, the plate being
afterwards transferred to a dark room, and exposed to the vapor of
mercury, which develops the latent image, it being afterwards fixed.
Although this process has become almost obsolete, it was really the
first which was of any practical value, and experts all agree that no
other known process reproduces some subjects--for example, the human
face--with such fidelity and beauty."

A little while before the daguerreotyping process was announced, Fox
Talbot, a British investigator, discovered a method of making pictures
by means of the action of light on chemically prepared paper instead
of metal, as in the case of Daguerre. Talbot originated the terms
_negative_ and _positive_ which are still used in photography.
Daguerre in France and Talbot in Great Britain had independently
achieved success in producing pictures, but neither had discovered a
way to make photographs permanent. In the course of time the pictures
faded. In 1839 Sir John Herschel of England found a chemical process
for making photographs permanent, by removing the cause for their
fading. The first sunlight photograph of a human face was that of Miss
Dorothy Catherine Draper, made by her brother, Prof. John William
Draper, of the University of the City of New York, early in 1840.

Various chemical discoveries for improving photographs have been made
by different persons from time to time, until the art of photography
has now reached a high state of development. An important improvement
is in the lessening of the time of exposure to light necessary for
producing a photograph. Formerly hours were required, but under
improved conditions only the shortest instant of time is requisite.

In 1906 a photographic paper for producing prints in color from an
ordinary negative was placed on the market. This paper is coated with
three layers of pigmented gelatin, colored respectively red, yellow,
and blue. After being exposed to the daylight in the usual way, the
paper is placed in hot water, where the image is developed. The grays
and blacks of the negative are translated into the colors they
represent in the object.

The brothers Lumiere of Paris have found a method of producing a
photograph on a sensitive plate which, viewed as a transparency, shows
the object in its original colors. No prints can be taken from this
plate, and the picture cannot be viewed by reflected light, but the
colors are true and brilliant.

The cinematograph is an instrument by which about fifteen photographs
per second can be received on a film, each representing the
photographed group at a different instant from the others. The
advantages of this mode of photographing and of throwing pictures on a
screen over the older methods are obvious. By controlling the rate at
which the pictures are represented on the screen, movements too rapid
to be analyzed by the eye may be made slow enough to permit
observation; and, similarly, movements too slow for comprehension or
rapid observation may often be quickened. The busy life of a city
street, the progress of races or other competitions, many scenes in
nature, and even the growth of a plant from seed to maturity, may be
shown by means of a "moving picture."

Photography is a noble servant of mind and soul. It brings to us
likenesses of eminent persons and objects of nature and art which
perhaps we should never be able to see otherwise. It has been used in
measuring the velocity of bullets and in showing the true positions of
animals in motion. Photography has created the "new astronomy."
Immediately after its discovery, photography was applied to the science
of the stars, and it has been ever since of incalculable service in
this field of inquiry. Photographs of the moon were made as early as
1840, and much that is known to-day of the sun has been revealed by
photography. So sensitive is the modern photographic plate to the
influence of light, that photography has discovered and located stars
which are invisible through a strong telescope. Astronomers are now
engaged in making a photographic chart of the sky.




CHAPTER XV

CLOCKS


The matters of every-day life, much less the affairs of a complex
civilization, could scarcely be carried on without some accurate and
uniform system of measuring time. Nature herself furnishes measurements
for certain divisions of time. The "two great lights" that God made, as
the Bible tells us, were designed "for signs, and for seasons, and for
days and for years." The revolution of the earth around the sun marks
the year; the revolution of the moon around the earth determines the
month; the rotation of the earth on its axis causes and measures day
and night. But no object of nature distinguishes the hours of the day
or the divisions of the hour.

Man requires a smaller unit of time than the day. He must divide the
day into hours; the hours into minutes; the minutes into seconds. The
division of the day into twenty-four hours is as old as authentic
history. But the means for determining the hours and their subdivisions
were at first quite crude and inefficient.

[Illustration: A SUN DIAL]

Perhaps the most primitive of all time-measuring devices was a stick or
pole planted upright in a sunny place. The position of the shadow which
it cast marked time. The sun-dial was a development of this simple
device. It consisted essentially of two parts: a flat plate of metal
marked off much like the dial of a modern clock or watch, and an
upright piece, usually also of metal, fastened to the center of the
dial. To make the direction of the shadow uniform for any given hour
throughout the year, the upright piece was made parallel to the axis of
the earth. As the earth rotated on its axis the shadow cast by the
upright piece moved from point to point on the dial, measuring the
flight of time. The sun-dial was in use among the earliest nations.
Herodotus is authority for the statement that the Greeks borrowed it
from the Babylonians. The sun-dial was obviously of no use on cloudy
days or dark nights, and even in sunny weather it could not accurately
or delicately indicate the passage of time. However, it continued in
use so long that to the end of the seventeenth century the art of
dialling was considered a necessary element of every course in
mathematics.

Another ancient invention for measuring time was the water-clock. Water
was permitted to drop from a small orifice in a containing vessel. The
period required for emptying the vessel marked a unit of time. Its
principle was the same as the common hour-glass, according to which
time is measured by the slow dropping of sand from one receptacle into
another. The water-clock was used by the ancient Chaldeans and the
Hindoos, and also by the Greeks and Romans. Demosthenes mentions its
use in the courts of justice at Athens.

In order to mark the hours of the day, the Saxon King Alfred the Great
is said to have made wax candles twelve inches in length, each marked
at equal distances. The burning of six of these candles in succession
consumed, roughly, just twenty-four hours. To prevent the wind from
extinguishing them they were inclosed in cases of thin, white,
transparent horn. The candles thus inclosed were the ancestors of the
modern lantern.

Our word _clock_ comes from the Anglo-Saxon verb _clocean_ meaning "to
strike," "to give out a sound." It is impossible to ascertain by whom
clocks were invented, or when or where. It is fairly clear, however,
that a Benedictine Monk named Gerbert, who afterward became Pope
Sylvester II, made a clock for the German city of Magdeburg a little
before the year 1000 A.D. Clocks may have been made before this, but
if so it would be hard to establish the fact. In Gerbert's clock
weights were the motive power for the mechanism. Weight clocks were
used in the monasteries of Europe in the eleventh century, but it is
probable that these early clocks struck a bell at certain intervals as
a call to prayer, and did not have dials for showing the time of day.

[Illustration: A "GRANDFATHER'S CLOCK," BELONGING TO WILLIAM PENN]

The first clocks were comparatively by large and were stationary.
Portable ones appeared about the beginning of the fourteenth century,
though the inventor is not known, nor the exact time or place of
invention. When portable clocks were invented, the motive power must
have been changed from weights to main-springs, and this change in
motive force marks an era in the development of the clock. The
introduction of the pendulum as a regulating agent was, however, the
greatest event in clock development. This invention has been credited
to Huygens, a Dutch philosopher, who was certainly, if not the
discoverer of the pendulum, the first to bring it into practical use,
about 1657. Credit for inventing the pendulum is also claimed for
Harris, a London clockmaker; for Hooke, the great English philosopher;
for a son of Galileo, the celebrated Italian scientist; and for others.

The modern watch is in reality but a developed type of the clock.
Watches were made possible by the introduction of the coiled spring as
motive power, instead of the weight. The coiled spring came into use
near the end of the fifteenth century, though it is not known where or
by whom it was invented. Watches were not introduced into general use
in England until the reign of Elizabeth, and then on account of the
cost they were confined to the wealthy. At first watches were
comparatively large and struck the hours like clocks. After the
striking mechanism was abandoned, they were reduced in size and for a
time were considered ornamental rather than useful. They were richly
adorned with pictures in enamel and with costly jewels. They were set
in the heads of canes, in bracelets, and in finger-rings.

Watches and clocks had originally only one hand, which indicated the
hour. Minute and second hands were added later. Devices have been
introduced to counteract the effect of temperature on the mechanism of
time-pieces, so that they run uniformly in all kinds of weather. Within
recent years clocks operated with electricity have been invented. With
the advent of clock and watch manufacture by machinery, the cost has
been so reduced that practically any one may own an accurate
time-piece. The United States is one of the foremost countries of the
world in the manufacture and sale of clocks and watches.




CHAPTER XVI

SOME MACHINES


THE SEWING MACHINE

Civilization owes the invention of the sewing machine to Elias Howe,
an American. Howe was born at Spencer, Massachusetts, July 9, 1819.
His father was a miller, and work in the mills gave the son's mind a
bent toward machinery. One day in 1839 while Howe was working in a
machine-shop in Boston, he overheard a conversation among some men
regarding the invention of a knitting machine. "What are you bothering
yourselves with a knitting machine for? Why don't you make a sewing
machine?" asked one. "I wish I could," was the reply, "but it can't be
done." "Oh, yes it can," said the first, "I can make a sewing machine
myself." "Well, you do it," replied the second, "and I'll insure you
an independent fortune."

This conversation impressed Howe with the idea of producing a sewing
machine. The hope of relieving his extreme poverty set him to work on
the invention in earnest in the year 1843. George Fisher, a coal and
wood dealer of Cambridge, Massachusetts, who was a former schoolmate of
Howe, formed a partnership with him for producing the invention. In
December, 1844, Howe moved into Fisher's house, set up his shop in the
garret, and went to work. In the following April he sewed the first
seam with his new machine, and by the middle of May he had sewed all
the seams of two suits of clothes, one for himself and one for his
partner.

On September 10, 1846, a patent on the sewing machine was issued to
Howe from the United States Patent Office at Washington.

The tailors of Boston, believing that a sewing machine would destroy
their business, waged fierce warfare against it. In the spring of 1846,
seeing no prospect of revenue from his invention, Howe took employment
as a railroad engineer on one of the roads entering Boston, but this
labor proved too hard for him and he soon gave it up. Howe's partner,
Fisher, could see no profit in the machine and became wholly
discouraged. Howe then determined to try to market his invention in
England, and sent a machine to London. An English machinist examined
it, approved it, and paid $250 for it, together with the right to use
as many others in his own business as he might desire. Howe was
afterward of the opinion that the investment of this $250 by the
English machinist brought ultimately to that man a profit of one
million dollars.

[Illustration: ELIAS HOWE]

During all this time Howe was extremely poor. He and his wife and
children had gone to England, but on account of poverty he was
compelled to send his family back to America. His fourth machine, which
he had constructed in England, he was obliged to sell for 5 pounds
(about $25), although it was worth ten times as much, in order to
procure money enough to pay his return passage to America. He also
pawned his first-made machine and his patent on the invention. In
April, 1849, he landed at New York with only an English half-crown in
his pocket. Procuring employment in a machine-shop, the inventor took
up his abode in one of the cheapest emigrant boarding-houses. At this
time his wife lay dying in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and his father had
to send him ten dollars to enable him to go to her.

Finally the sewing machine began to succeed commercially. The
inventor's long night of discouragement was breaking on a day of
assured prosperity. In 1850 Howe was in New York superintending the
manufacture of fourteen sewing machines. His office was equipped with a
five-dollar desk and two fifty-cent chairs. A few years later he was
rich. Isaac Merritt Singer became acquainted with his machine, and
submitted to him the sketch of an improved one. It was Singer who first
forced the sewing machine upon the attention of the United States. Howe
charged that Singer was infringing his patent rights. Litigation
ensued. Judge Sprague of Massachusetts decided in favor of Howe. In his
opinion he stated that "there is no evidence in this case that leaves a
shadow of doubt that, for all the benefit conferred upon the public by
the introduction of a sewing machine the public are indebted to Mr.
Howe." From this time Howe began to reap the financial reward of his
labors. His revenues from the sewing machine amounted ultimately to
more than $200,000 a year. He spent vast sums, however, in defending
his patent rights, and many others of the "sewing machine kings" were
wealthier than he. Howe died at Brooklyn, New York, October 3, 1867.

The sewing machine is used not only for sewing cloth into all kinds of
garments, but for making leather into boots, shoes, harness, and other
necessary articles of daily life. Great improvements have been made in
the sewing machine since its invention, but its essential principles
to-day are for the most part those that the inventor discovered and
brought into successful operation in his first machine. It is agreed by
disinterested and competent persons that "Howe carried the invention of
the sewing machine further toward its complete and final utility than
any other inventor before him had ever brought a first-rate invention
at the first trial."


THE REAPER

In the Louvre at Paris is one of the noblest and most famous paintings
of modern art, purchased some years ago at a cost of three hundred
thousand francs. It is "The Gleaners" from the brush of the French
artist Jean Francois Millet. It pictures three peasant women who have
gone out into the fields to glean at the end of the harvest. They are
picking up the grain left by the reapers, seeking the little that is
left on the ground. In the background are the field, the groups of
reapers, the loaded wagons and the horses bringing the garnered sheaves
to the rick, the farmer on horseback among his men, and the homestead
among the trees. The transparent atmosphere of the summer day, the
burning rays of the sun, and the short yellow stubble are all as if
they were nature and not art. In the foreground are the three gleaners,
"heroic types of labor fulfilling its task until 'the night cometh when
no man can work.'"

One of the most beautiful stories of the Bible is the tale of Ruth, the
Moabitess, who went out into the fields of Palestine to glean. "And she
went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers; and her hap
was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz, who was of the
kindred of Elimilech."

According to the old English law, gleaners had the right to go into the
fields and glean. And those needy ones who went for the leavings of the
reapers could not be sued for trespass.

But it is not with reaping in art, literature, or law that we are here
concerned, but with the reaper as a machine, a concrete thing, a tool,
an instrument of civilization.

From the earliest times until nearly the middle of the last century
the cutting of grain was done by means of a hand sickle or curved
reaping-hook. The sickles used by the ancient Jews, Egyptians, and
Chinese differed very little from those of our own ancestors. This tool
was only slightly improved as the centuries went by, and to this day
the sickle may be seen in use. In many parts of the British Isles the
reaping-hook gave place to the scythe in the earlier part of the
nineteenth century. An attempt to trace the idea of a machine for
reaping would carry us far back into the early stages of agriculture;
Pliny, the Roman writer, born early in the first century of the
Christian era, found a crude kind of reaper in the fields of Gaul. For
the great modern invention of the reaping machine, civilization is
indebted to Cyrus Hall McCormick, an American.

McCormick was born in Rockbridge County, Virginia, February 15, 1809.
His father, Robert McCormick, a farmer of inventive mind, worked long
to produce a reaper. In 1831 he put a reaping machine in the field for
trial, but it failed to work and its inventor was completely
discouraged. Against the counsel of his father, Cyrus McCormick began a
study of the machine that had failed, to determine and to overcome the
causes of failure. He produced another reaper, and in the late harvest
of 1831 he tested it in the wheat fields of his father's farm and in
some fields of oats belonging to a neighbor. The machine was a success.

McCormick's invention, soon destined to revolutionize agriculture, was
combated for the alleged reason that it would destroy the occupation of
farm laborers during the harvest season. It was some years before
McCormick himself realized the importance of his invention, and he did
not take out a patent on it until June 21, 1834. It was not until 1840
that he began manufacturing reapers for the market. In that year he
constructed one and sold it to a neighbor. For the harvest of 1843 he
made and sold twenty-nine machines. These had all been built upon the
home farm by hand, the workmen being himself, his father, and his
brothers. In 1844 he traveled with his reaper from Virginia to New York
State, and from there through the wheat fields of Wisconsin, Illinois,
Ohio, and Missouri, showing the machine at work in the grain and
enlisting the interest of agricultural men.

[Illustration: A MODERN REAPER This machine cuts, threshes, winnows,
and sacks the wheat]

In 1847 and 1848 Chicago was but a trading village. McCormick,
foreseeing its future growth, located his reaper factory there. In that
factory he constructed about nine hundred reapers for the harvest of
1848.

In 1851 he exhibited his invention at the World's Fair in London. The
London _Times_ facetiously called it "a cross between a wheel-barrow
and a flying machine." Later the same paper said of the reaper that it
was "the most valuable contribution to the Exposition, and worth to
the farmers of England more than the entire cost of the Exposition."

In 1848 McCormick's patent on the reaper expired. Although his claim as
the inventor was clearly established, and the commissioner of patents
paid him the highest compliments in words for his invention, a renewal
of the patent was denied. Other reapers had been made in the meantime,
and others have been brought out subsequently. It is an historical
fact, however, and one now seldom questioned, that every harvesting
machine which has ever been constructed is in its essential parts the
invention of Cyrus Hall McCormick.

Besides being a great inventor and successful business man, McCormick
was a liberal philanthropist. He gave freely to educational and
religious institutions. He died at his home in Chicago, May 13, 1884.

An improved type of the ordinary reaper of McCormick is the
self-binder, now in common use, a machine which not only reaps the
stalks of grain but binds them together in sheaves.

The most primitive method of threshing grain from the straw was
doubtless by beating it with a stick. The ancient Egyptians and
Israelites spread out their loosened sheaves upon a circular plot of
earth and threshed out the grain by driving oxen back and forth over
it. Later a threshing-sledge was dragged over the sheaves. The Greeks
and the Romans beat out grain with a stick, trod it out with men or
horses, or used the threshing-sledge. The primitive implement for
threshing in northern Europe was the stick. A modification of this was
the flail, made of two sticks loosely fastened together at one end by
means of stout thongs. This implement was used by our ancestors in
America and has not yet entirely disappeared from all parts of the
world. The threshing machine was invented in 1787 by Andrew Meikle, a
Scotchman. Only a few years ago threshing machines were drawn by
horses, but of late years they have been moved with self-propelling
steam engines, commonly called traction engines.

A remarkable combination machine has come into use recently,
particularly in the vast wheat fields of California, eastern
Washington, and the West. This machine is drawn by as many as
thirty-two horses. At one operation it cuts the grain, threshes it,
winnows it, and puts it into bags ready for the market.


SPINNING AND WEAVING MACHINES

The low, monotonous hum of the spinning-wheel in the old farmhouse on
winter evenings, as the housewife spun the yarn which she was afterward
to knit into warm stockings for the family, has not entirely passed
away from the memory of the older generation of to-day. Thomas Buchanan
Read has a pathetic allusion to the old spinning-wheel in one of his
best poems, "The Closing Scene." And who has not felt the charm of the
spinning-wheel scene in Longfellow's "The Courtship of Miles Standish,"
which pictures John Alden as he sits clumsily holding on his hands the
skein which Priscilla winds for knitting.

There are two essential principles in the art of spinning: first, the
drawing out of uniform quantities of fiber in a continuous manner; and
second, the twisting of the fiber so as to give it coherency and
strength. The earliest spinning apparatus, and for ages the only one,
was the distaff and spindle. The former was a staff upon which was
loosely bound a bundle of the fiber to be spun. It was held in the left
hand or was fastened in the belt. The spindle, a tapering rod smaller
than the distaff, was held in the right hand. The rotation of the
spindle gave the necessary twist to the thread, and around the spindle
the thread was wound as it was twisted. The next development in
spinning machinery was the spinning-wheel, which has continued in use
in some rural parts of the world practically to the present day.

The series of inventions that overthrew hand spinning, and made this
industry possible on a large scale, really began in 1738 when Lewis
Paul, an English inventor, discovered a process for drawing out and
attenuating threads of wool or cotton by passing the fiber through
successive pairs of rollers. To-day this principle forms a fundamental
feature of all spinning machinery. In 1764 James Hargreaves, an
illiterate weaver and carpenter of Lancashire, England, invented the
spinning-jenny, a device by which eight threads could be spun at once.
With a little improvement in this invention, eighty threads were
produced as easily as eight. The idea of the spinning-jenny is said to
have been accidentally suggested to its inventor by watching the
motions of a common spinning-wheel which one of his children had
unintentionally upset.

Hargreaves is another in the long list of those who have suffered
persecution because of having done something to make the world better.
His fellow-spinners, filled with prejudice toward his invention because
they feared it might rob them of employment, broke into his house and
destroyed his machine. He then moved to Nottingham, where he erected a
spinning mill. In 1770 Hargreaves took out a patent on his invention,
but the patent was subsequently annulled on the ground that he had sold
a few machines before patenting the invention.

Valuable as was the spinning-jenny of Hargreaves, it was adapted only
to producing the transverse threads, or the woof. It could not produce
sufficient firmness and hardness for the longitudinal threads, or the
warp. In 1767 Richard Arkwright, another native of Lancashire, invented
the spinning-frame, which was able to yield a thread fine enough and
firm enough to make the warp. At the time of his invention Arkwright
was so poor that he had to be furnished with a suit of clothes before
he looked respectable enough to appear at an election. Like Hargreaves,
he also was persecuted. Both were driven out of Lancashire to
Nottingham to escape popular rage. Arkwright's patent was annulled, and
at one time his factory was destroyed by the populace in the presence
of a powerful military and police force, who did nothing to restrain
it. And why were Hargreaves and Arkwright driven out of Lancashire?
They had invented machines that would produce more and cheaper
clothing; that would give powerful impetus to the cotton and the woolen
industries; that would lift the race higher in the path-way of
civilization. What was the reason? Misunderstanding, prejudice, and
selfishness. The interests of the few were shutting out the interests
of the world. And these interests of the few were imaginary.

In spite of all opposition, however, Arkwright succeeded, and may be
regarded as the founder of the modern factory system.

In 1779 Samuel Crompton, another Lancashire inventor, produced an
improved spinning machine called the spinning-mule. This invention
combined the good qualities of the spinning-jenny of Hargreaves and the
spinning-frame of Arkwright. Its chief point of excellence lay in the
fineness of the threads which it spun; from this kind of thread could
be made finer fabrics than were possible with the machines of
Hargreaves and of Arkwright.

Crompton was very poor. By day he worked at the loom or on the farm to
earn bread for himself, his mother, and his two sisters, and at night
he toiled away on his invention. No sooner had he perfected his machine
than he was beset by persons seeking to rob him of its benefits. All
kinds of devices were employed for learning the secret. Ladders were
placed against his windows in order that unscrupulous spectators might
get a view of the machine. He did not dare to leave the house, lest his
secret be stolen from him. He had spent his last farthing upon the
invention and had no funds for securing a patent. A manufacturer
persuaded him to disclose to the trade the nature of his invention
under promise of a liberal subscription; but Crompton received only a
paltry sum amounting to less than $350. He finally saved up enough
money to begin manufacturing on a small scale, but his rivals had
already out-distanced him. He died in June, 1827, disspirited at the
ill treatment he had received, but not until he had seen his invention
a powerful agency in British cloth manufacturing.

An interesting glimpse of the days when weaving was done by hand in
England may be found in the first chapter of George Eliot's _Silas
Marner, the Weaver of Raveloe_. The hand-loom in weaving was
superseded by the power-loom early in the nineteenth century. The loom
was the invention of the Rev. Edmund Cartwright, an English clergyman,
poet, and inventor. The date of the invention was 1785. Cartwright's
first loom was very crude, but he subsequently improved it. The idea
for the invention of his power-loom came to Cartwright after a visit
to the spinning mills of Arkwright. He too was subjected to opposition
from the weavers on account of his invention. At one time he was
associated with Robert Fulton in his experiments in applying steam to
navigation.




CHAPTER XVII

AERONAUTICS


To fly in the air has been the dream of all peoples in all ages. "Oh
that I had wings like a dove! Then would I fly away and be at rest!"
sang the Psalmist. It would seem from the recent inventions in the
science of aeronautics that this dream is to become in the near future
a practical experience of our every-day lives.

A balloon is an apparatus with an envelope filled with gas, the
specific gravity of which is less than that of the atmosphere near the
surface of the earth. It is practically at the mercy of air-currents.
The science of balloon aeronautics dates definitely from 1783, when the
Montgolfier brothers at Angonay in France constructed their first
balloons. These Frenchmen and their successors developed the spherical
balloons to a state of efficiency which has scarcely been improved upon
to this day. The balloon in time came to be adopted throughout Europe
for military uses, mainly for the purpose of spying out the enemy's
position and defenses.

A dirigible balloon usually has an elongated envelope and is equipped
with a motor and a rudder by which it can be steered at will against a
moderate wind. Balloon aeronautics became popular in 1898, when
Santos-Dumont, a wealthy young Brazilian, performed a series of
spectacular feats with his dirigible balloon. Immediately ballooning
became the sporting fad in France and the craze spread rapidly over the
Continent and to England. Numerous airships of the dirigible type made
their appearance and many balloon factories were established.

[Illustration: A WRIGHT BIPLANE By Courtesy of Brooks Brothers]

In Germany every community has its aero club. In the United States
there are about 300,000 club members scattered throughout the land who
individually or collectively own over 200 balloons. All of the great
nations own one or more aerial warships of the dirigible type, as well
as numerous spherical balloons.

An aeroplane, as commonly known, is a machine which is sustained in the
air by one, two, or three sets of rigid surfaces or planes. Unlike the
balloon, it is heavier than air, and it must therefore maintain its
position in the air by some form of mechanical propulsion. It must, in
other words, fly like a bird.

[Illustration: A BLERIOT MONOPLANE]

The first aeroplane was invented by Henson, an Englishman, who in 1843
flew his machine, using a two-horse-power steam engine. In 1888 and in
1900 two other practically successful models appeared, one made by a
French and the other by an English inventor. Langley, an American, who
began experimenting in 1885, managed to fly over the Potomac in 1896.
The Wright brothers made their initial flights under motor power in
1903.

During the years since 1903 innumerable types of aeroplanes have been
developed, all based upon the lines laid down by Langley, Henson,
Maxim, and other pioneers. Among the most successful experimenters have
been Farman, Delagrange, Bleriot, Curtiss, and the Voisins.

The flapping-wing machine is called an orthopter (_orthos_, straight,
+ _ptera_, wing) and is supposed to copy bird flight. Screw-flyers,
called helicopters, lift themselves from the ground by the thrust of
varying numbers of rapidly moving propellers, revolving horizontally.

Some startling feats have been performed in the field of aeronautics.
On August 7, 1910, John B. Moisant, an American, flew in a Bleriot
monoplane across the English Channel, a distance of about twenty-five
miles, in thirty-two minutes. He carried one passenger. On September
12, 1910, Claude Grahame-White, an Englishman, flew in a Farman biplane
thirty-three miles in thirty-four minutes, near Boston, winning a prize
of ten thousand dollars.


Every day new ideas take shape and are developed in some form that
promotes the pleasure, comfort, or safety of mankind. There seems to
be literally no limit to man's inventive power. His brain teems with
thoughts and his hands labor incessantly to force his thoughts into
material forms. He mounts higher and higher on the scale of
civilization, casting away old ideas, inefficient methods, and
worn-out machines, and substituting the new and wonderful things which
he has achieved.




Graded Supplementary Reading Series


  Classic Fables. For First and Second Grades. Selected and edited by
  Edna Henry Lee Turpin. 127 pages, 12mo, cloth              30 cents

  Grimm's Fairy Tales. For Second and Third Grades. Selected and
  edited by Edna Henry Lee Turpin. 207 pages, 12mo, cloth    40 cents

  Andersen's Fairy Tales. For Third and Fourth Grades. Selected and
  edited by Edna Henry Lee Turpin. 253 pages, cloth          40 cents

  Stories from American History. For Fourth and Fifth Grades.
   Selected and edited by Edna Henry Lee Turpin. 191 pages, 12mo,
   cloth                                                     40 cents

  Stories from Greek History. For Fourth and Fifth Grades. By Louise
  Diman. 239 pages, 12mo, cloth                              40 cents

  Heroes of History. For Fifth and Sixth Grades. By Ida Prentice
  Whitcomb. 448 pages, 12mo, cloth                           60 cents

  Brief Biographies from American History. For Fifth and Sixth Grades.
  By Edna Henry Lee Turpin. 299 pages, 12mo, cloth           50 cents

      Part I. For Fifth Grade. 142 pages, 12mo, cloth        35 cents

      Part II. For Sixth Grade. 163 pages, 12mo, cloth       35 cents

  English History Stories. For Sixth and Seventh Grades. 320 pages,
  12mo, cloth                                                50 cents

  The Young American. A Civic Reader. For Sixth, Seventh and Eight
  Grades. Pratt Judson, LL.D. 259 pages, 12mo, cloth         50 cents



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT INVENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES***


******* This file should be named 37574.txt or 37574.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/7/5/7/37574



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

