Project Gutenberg's The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, March 1835, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, March 1835

Author: Various

Editor: George  Wightman

Release Date: October 1, 2011 [EBook #37583]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAPTIST MAGAZINE, VOL. ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)





[Transcriber's Notes:

The typesetting on this was poor, especially with respect to
punctuation. I have reconciled all of the mismatched single and double
quotes with the images. I chose to leave the quotations hanging as
printed, rather than forcing personal opinion on placement.

Due to the number of tables, this file would read better in a monospaced
font.]




                              THE
                        BAPTIST MAGAZINE.

                          MARCH, 1835.


      MEMOIR OF THE LATE MR. BOSWELL BEDDOME, OF WEYMOUTH.

The highly respected subject of this memoir was the youngest son of Mr.
Boswell Brandon Beddome, who for many years filled the office of a
deacon at Maze Pond; and grandson of the Rev. Benjamin Beddome, of
Bourton-on-the-Water, whose sermons and hymns are still the admiration
of the churches. The talents and amiability of Mr. Boswell Beddome began
very early to develope themselves. He is described by his surviving
relatives as having been a most interesting boy; his intelligence,
generosity, vivacity, and principle, inducing them to conclude that he
would prove no common character in after life. The testimony given to
his spirit and deportment at this early period, by his maternal
guardian, is worthy of record, as it points to a striking and lovely
example of filial obedience: "_He_ never gave me a moment's uneasiness;
whatever perplexity was sometimes occasioned by the rest, I had no
trouble with him; affection and a sense of duty invariably induced his
cheerful obedience; and if childish disputes arose between any of the
other juvenile members of the family, Boswell was sure to be the
peace-maker." He was educated at a school under the superintendence of
the Rev. S. Palmer, of Hackney, where he was distinguished for the
readiness and accuracy with which he accomplished the exercises of his
class, and for that general activity of mind which afterwards became one
of his leading characteristics.

When he was about fourteen years of age, a situation which promised well
for his secular interests offering itself at a highly respectable
mercantile establishment at Dorchester, he was removed from school
somewhat sooner than his friends had anticipated. His employers speedily
became sensible of the worth of his talents and integrity, and as a
reward for his services and a proof of their esteem, introduced him to a
valuable business at Weymouth, which happened to be at their command,
two years before the legal term of his connexion with them would have
expired. This movement had the most important bearing on his spiritual
interests; and had he not been generous almost to a fault, would, in a
few years, have been the means of procuring him a retiring competency.

The family, to the full companionship of which he was thus early
introduced at Dorchester, was distinguished by its very zealous
profession of Unitarianism. There he saw the system under its most
specious and delusive aspect: the sabbath was observed with the
strictest decorum; family worship maintained with invariable regularity;
habits of private devotion were strongly encouraged; and opportunities
frequently occurred of association with some of the most intelligent and
influential members of the party. Under these circumstances, although
matter of regret to the more judicious of his friends, it was none of
surprise, that he espoused and became the ardent advocate of sentiments
at total variance with those in which he had been previously trained.

Under the preaching of Mr. Rowe, the first pastor of the Baptist church
at Weymouth, and afterwards under that of Mr. Flint, its second
minister, he was gradually restored to the presumed scriptural faith of
his venerated ancestors. The exercises of his mind on this important
subject were often deeply distressing and protracted. After his
suspicions respecting the correctness of his opinions were awakened, he
became a most diligent, anxious, and prayerful student of the word of
God; determined, by divine assistance, to follow conviction wherever it
might conduct him; and profess, at whatever cost, what should eventually
appear to be the truth. Desirous of doing the will of God, after many
painful mental conflicts he was permitted to know it; he made a public
profession, by baptism, of his newly-adopted faith during the pastorship
of Mr. Hawkins, now of Derby; and about four years afterwards was
invested with the office of a deacon, during the ministry of Mr. Hoby,
at present of Birmingham.

That the sentiments of Mr. Beddome in after life, on some abstruse
points, were not slightly modified by his previous notions, is not
pretended; but that he decidedly embraced all that is fundamental in the
Calvinistic system, no doubt is entertained by those who had the most
ample means of obtaining an accurate knowledge of his creed. He
contemplated himself as a depraved, guilty, perishing, and helpless
creature; the grand doctrine of justification by grace, through faith in
the propitiation of Christ, was his refuge and his solace; in the sense
in which we should employ the words, he was "looking for the mercy of
God unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord."

  [This article--as will be remembered by those who heard
  it--contains part of the funeral sermon preached for Mr. B. at
  the Baptist chapel, Weymouth, by the minister of the place.
  Hitherto the form of the discourse has not been adhered to;
  through the remainder of the article that form will be preserved.]

Psalm xxvi. 8, "Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, &c."
That our invaluable, but now, alas! departed, brother Beddome cherished
for this house of God an attachment peculiarly strong, unwavering, and
devoted, is a fact too generally and distinctly known by you to require
announcement from me. Long before his religious sentiments underwent a
decided alteration, he interested himself most seasonably in its
welfare; and after his views of divine truth became, for the most part,
consonant to those which are here professed, he was ever ready to engage
in any practicable undertaking, and make any possible sacrifice, for its
benefit. Simply to affirm that he manifested his attachment in an
ordinary way, by the regularity of his attendance, by the spirituality
of his worship, and by contributing the general amount of pecuniary aid,
would be but a feeble statement of the truth: he threw his whole soul
into every department to which his influence could extend; every thing
connected with the cause engaged his attention, solicitude, and
activity; the interest of the chapel was the first and the last object
of his thoughts. His solicitude for the _spiritual prosperity_ of the
church and congregation was not that of a deacon only, but a pastor; on
this behalf he constantly wrestled with God in private; and you know,
brethren, how solemnly, how earnestly, how affectionately, he pleaded
for it in your meetings for social prayer. You know also his readiness,
as opportunity allowed, to prove himself a friend, a brother, a father
to you all. He was ever disposed to hear, to sympathize, to advise, to
aid; and even for those who, mistaking his motives, sometimes appeared
to think of him unkindly, he was prepared, in the exercise of a truly
Christian spirit, to perform any act of generosity by which their
well-being might be advanced. Over the interests of your Sabbath-school
he watched with a tender solicitude. For many years he was its
superintendent. During this period he prepared, with great diligence and
judgment, a series of Scripture questions for the use of the teachers,
several volumes of which are still in existence; and after his official
duties as a deacon, and the attention required by his family, compelled
him to relinquish the direct superintendence of the school, he still
contrived to make himself acquainted with all its movements, and
promote, by his wise suggestions and decisions, the efficiency of its
operations. The poor and the afflicted connected with this sanctuary
feel that in losing him they have lost a tender benefactor, who was not
only willing to relieve them in proportion to his means, but who knew
how to render assistance doubly grateful by the considerate delicacy
with which it was bestowed. Many and fervent were the blessings which
the sons and daughters of distress poured upon his head; and many and
deep are the lamentations of the widow and fatherless now. By his
removal the minister of this place has lost a counsellor eminent for his
knowledge and prudence; a friend, truly generous and devoted, who was
accustomed to assist him in many of his labours, to sympathize with him
under all his trials, to anticipate, in a thousand ways, his wishes and
his wants, and on every occasion of difficulty to consult his feelings,
in a manner which proved him to possess an extensive acquaintance with
human nature, and an amiability of disposition still more commendable.

Although the cause of Christ in connexion with this sanctuary enjoyed
the best affection and engaged the best energies of our departed
brother, his walks of usefulness were not restricted to this
circumscribed beat, but embraced a wider, a more ample range. He was, it
is well known, the manager, the life, of almost every institution
connected with the dissenting interest in this town and neighbourhood;
and in various other societies, formed for civil, literary, and
benevolent objects, he took an active part. Such were his knowledge,
diligence, and prudence, that, in general, our committees had to do
little more than hear his report of the past, and assent to his plans
for the future. With the utmost modesty he made his suggestions; with
the utmost courtesy he invited discussion; but his suggestions were, in
general, too wise to be improved; and discussion, after he had evidently
examined the subject in all its bearings, appeared completely useless.
How far such careful anticipations may in general be really serviceable
to those who are thus saved the trouble of thinking and acting, may be
questionable; but, certainly, the mind which is sufficiently benevolent
and energetic to perform the part of our late invaluable friend, is
worthy of no ordinary share of admiration.

The pecuniary affairs of this place of worship were entirely committed
to his management, which has been long and deservedly held as
invaluable. He regularly attended the committees of the Branch Bible
Society, the Dispensary, The Young Men's Improvement Society, and other
local institutions of a general nature, where the weight of his talents
and character were always felt. He was the President of one of the
Benefit societies, and the most valuable honorary member of another. To
all this it must be added, that hundreds in this town and neighbourhood
were accustomed to make him acquainted with their trials, and seek his
prompt and valuable advice in difficulty. In general he wished to forego
a very prominent part in politics; but in cases of emergency his
opponents soon became sensible that he was in the field. During the
contest on the Reform question, he displayed powers, both of writing and
speaking, of a superior order; nor have his most decided political
enemies been backward in expressing their high respect for his
commanding talents and unbending integrity.

But we have not yet reached the limits of Mr. Beddome's sphere of
usefulness. You are aware that he engaged as an occasional preacher. For
a considerable period he lectured on alternate Sabbath evenings at the
neighbouring village of Wyke, where his labours were highly acceptable.
I never had the gratification of hearing him on such occasions; but
judging, as well from the testimony of some of his friends, as from his
mental capabilities, his extensive acquaintance with the word of God,
his clear conceptions and consequently lucid statements on other
subjects, in connexion with his fervent piety and habitual solicitude
for the salvation of souls, I should conjecture that his addresses were
characterized by their perspicuity, their judiciousness, their deep
seriousness, and their manifest tendency to usefulness. Respecting these
and similar qualities, he was accustomed to express warm approbation
whenever he witnessed their discovery by the stated ministers of truth;
a class of men, for whom, on account of their sacred office, he
cherished a deep respect. He magnified their office; obeying the
apostolic injunction, he "esteemed them very highly, in love for their
work's sake." In his conduct towards his own minister he was a model of
excellence; the whole of that conduct being studiously regulated by the
most Christian principle and benevolence.

His inclination, especially during the last few years of his life, to be
wholly devoted to the work of the ministry, was sometimes exceedingly
strong. Had he been permitted to select his own employment, doubtless he
would have chosen that of an ambassador of peace. But while he possessed
many qualifications suited to the preacher and the pastor, and which
would have secured him great respectability in the sacred profession,
Providence had richly endowed him also with certain other qualities, and
had placed him in a sphere of action, which enabled him to be useful in
a great variety of ways, not quite within the province of the stated
minister. As it was, for some time he was contemplated by many as a kind
of second pastor to this church and congregation; and his minister ever
found in him a brother who, in many respects, could labour as well as
sympathize with him, in conducting the oversight of this people in the
Lord. If, with the exception of Wyke, and one or two similarly-situated
places, he did not preach publicly, he most literally taught "from house
to house." He appeared to seize every favourable opportunity of speaking
for religion: the inquiring found in him a wise and kind director; he
was a faithful reprover of sin; and when consolation was requisite, none
knew better how it should be administered.

While home engaged the first, it did not engross all, the energies of
our departed friend. Of the enviable power of producing charming
epistles of friendship, with ease and rapidity, he possessed a
remarkable share. This power he habitually made subservient to
the interests of religion; considering a talent for epistolary
correspondence as involving serious responsibility. Could his numerous
letters of remonstrance, advice, and Christian sympathy be collected, I
am persuaded they would constitute a volume of no ordinary interest and
usefulness. As in common conversation he was accustomed to throw out
useful hints to those around him; so in letters of business, he often
took occasion to remind his friends that they were only probationers in
a world "which passeth away," the inordinate love of which must ruin the
soul inevitably and for ever.

To his friends it has always been a mystery how he could discharge, with
his proverbial correctness, the numerous and onerous duties which he
imposed on himself; the management of his private concerns being always
sufficient to engross the attention of any ordinary mind. His habits of
extreme regularity doubtless afforded him great assistance; but had he
not possessed an incessantly active and a master mind, no such habits
could have enabled him to attempt one half of what he accomplished. As a
man of business his motto was "dispatch;" and whatever he undertook for
the interests of benevolence, he attempted with all his might,
exemplifying that beautiful and comprehensive injunction of Scripture:
"Be diligent in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord."

That a life so valuable should have been suddenly terminated, in the
midst of usefulness, at the vigorous age of forty, is a providence, in
many respects, deeply painful, and mysterious; especially when,
surveying society at large, we behold the useless and the injurious
permitted to prolong their earthly existence. There are, however, in
this case, various modifying circumstances which demand observation and
gratitude. If the days of our departed brother on earth were short, they
were singularly _vigorous_ and useful. He had already acted his part
both in civil and religious society: scarcely had the dew of his youth
passed away when he performed many of the duties, and was invested with
many of the honours, of age; and although the continuance of a judgment
so mature, a disposition so benevolent, and habits of usefulness so
self-denying and energetic, would have been an invaluable favour,
comparing the amount of his speedily accomplished work, with what is
ordinarily allotted to the servants of God, we ought not, perhaps, to be
greatly surprised that he has been thus early admitted to his rest.

Yet who was prepared for the severe, the complicated trial which we are
now summoned to sustain? Who could have anticipated that the
comparatively young, the vigorous, the active Beddome, would have been
so speedily and so suddenly called to go the way of all the earth?
Notwithstanding his occasional physical infirmities, we seemed to forget
that he was mortal; so completely was he identified with our interests,
so necessary did he appear to our welfare, that we never calculated that
he could die! Even after his medical attendants had repeatedly announced
the impossibility of his recovery, many of you could not surrender the
hope, that God would yet spare him, for the sake of his family and the
church. But, alas! the stroke has come suddenly and irresistibly. We
have buried our brother; we have heard the lamentations of all classes
at his death; we are now paying our last public token of respect to his
universally admitted worth; and yet, his removal appears like a dream.

This day three weeks he came for a few minutes in the morning to witness
the ordinance of baptism, but was too much indisposed to render his
usual assistance. We conjectured, during that and the three following
days, that he was suffering from a severe cold; but on the Thursday it
was manifest that a formidable disease had taken full possession of his
frame. During the whole of Thursday night he was very delirious, and so
continued, under the influence of the fever which preyed upon his
vitals, with scarcely an intermission, until death released him from his
sufferings on the following Thursday morning; when, at half-past one,
his spirit departed to be with Christ. From the moment he was thought to
be dangerously ill, he had no opportunity of making statements
respecting his spiritual prospects. Such statements, however, were
unnecessary to our sure and certain hope of his salvation. He had
previously witnessed a good profession. His character had already been
stamped for a happy immortality; and pleasing as might have been his
dying testimony to the religion of the cross, it is not to be forgotten,
that while he was called to forego the delight of giving, and we of
receiving, such a testimony, he was spared the pang of separation from
his beloved partner, and four interesting babes, for whose welfare he
felt all the tender solicitude which the husband and the father could
feel.

During the former part of his illness, before it had assumed a dangerous
aspect, I conversed with him respecting the importance of not leaving
the concerns of religion to a moment when disease unfits the mind for
reflection, and congratulated him on the fact of his having been
enabled, through grace, to prepare in health for the solemnities of
eternity. He devoutly acknowledged the mercy which, in this respect, he
had received; but neither then, nor on the following day, when our
respected independent brother, with whom he had long been on terms of
closest intimacy, prayed with him, did he appear to have the conviction
that his "sickness was unto death." About a week before this period,
having occasion to consult him respecting some important business
connected with the church, our conversation assumed a more than commonly
serious tone. I was led to ask him several questions respecting his own
experience in religion, and the motives by which he had been actuated in
his singular devotedness to this particular interest; and such were his
replies, and in so affecting a manner were they given, that I left him
with the deepest conviction that he was eminently a man of God: and
since his departure, I have considered the statements which he then made
as an anticipatory dying testimony to the genuineness and vigour of his
personal piety.

There were public as well as private circumstances of a somewhat similar
nature, which are now cherished in the memories of his friends. At the
last monthly prayer-meeting at which he was permitted to attend, he
manifested a most solemn and intense devotional spirit. When praying for
the prosperity of the church, he was so greatly affected as to be
scarcely able, for several minutes, to proceed, while sympathy made the
exercise one of general weeping as well as of supplication. At the last
Sunday-school Union prayer-meeting also, many of the teachers remarked
at the time, how very earnestly he wrestled on their behalf; and since
that period, they have very naturally dwelt much on the fact, that he
concluded the engagement by giving out and setting the tune to the
following expressive lines:--

  "Come, Christian brethren! ere we part,
  Join every voice and every heart," &c.

Having laboured for us ardently and efficiently, instead of repining at
his removal, let us, by divine assistance, be grateful that a still more
speedy termination was not put to his probationary career; and rejoice
in his blissful possession of the "recompence of reward;" our loss being
his imperishable gain.


              THE TRIUMPH OF PRINCIPLE OVER INTOLERANCE,
     ILLUSTRATED IN THE LIFE OF THE LATE MR. BERRIDGE, OF EVERTON

               _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

The following letter was written by the late Mr. Sutcliff of Olney, and
not having been extensively circulated, may perhaps be acceptable to
some of the readers of the Baptist Magazine.

It was published under Mr. Sutcliff's signature in a small collection of
Mr. Berridge's letters, which I have in my possession, under the title
of "Cheerful Piety, or Religion without Gloom," in the year 1797. And
if its insertion meets your approbation, I will give it in Mr.
Sutcliff's own words.

                                                      A CONSTANT READER.

_Harley Place, Bow._

About two years ago a friend of mine, wishing to enjoy an hour or two of
Mr. Berridge's company, rode over to Everton for that purpose. He was
introduced by a dissenting minister in the neighbourhood, with whom Mr.
B. lived upon terms of friendship. When seated, my friend requested Mr.
B. if agreeable, to favour them with a few outlines of his life. The
venerable old man began, and related several things as narrated in the
first number of the Evangelical Magazine. But as some are there
unnoticed, I have selected the following, which I think will not be
uninteresting.

Soon after I began, said he, to preach the gospel of Christ at Everton,
the church was filled from the villages around us, and the neighbouring
clergy felt themselves hurt at their churches being deserted. The
esquire of my parish, too, was much offended. He did not like to see so
many strangers, and be so incommoded. Between them both, it was
resolved, if possible, to turn me out of my living. For this purpose
they complained of me to the bishop of the diocese, that I had preached
out of my own parish. I was soon after sent for by the bishop. I did not
much like my errand, but I went. When I arrived, the bishop accosted me
in a very abrupt manner: "Well, Berridge, they tell me you go about
preaching out of your own parish; did I institute you to the livings of
A----y, or E----n, or P----n?" No, my lord, said I, neither do I
claim any of these livings, the clergymen enjoy them undisturbed by me.
"Well, but you go and preach there, which you have no right to do." It
is true, my lord, I was one day at E----n, and there were a few poor
people assembled together, and I admonished them to repent of their
sins, and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for the salvation of their
souls; and I remember seeing five or six clergymen that day, my lord,
all out of their own parishes, upon E----n bowling-green. "Poh!" said
his lordship, "I tell you, you have no right to preach out of your own
parish; and if you do not desist from it, you will very likely be sent
to Huntingdon." As to that, my lord, said I, I have no greater liking to
Huntingdon gaol than other people; but I had rather go there with a good
conscience, than live at my liberty without one. Here his lordship
looked very hard at me, and very gravely assured me that I was beside
myself, and that in a few months I should either be better or worse.
Then, said I, my lord, you may make yourself quite happy in this
business; for if I should be better, you suppose that I shall desist
from this practice of my own accord; and if worse, you need not send me
to Huntingdon gaol, as I shall be provided with an accommodation in
Bedlam.

His lordship now changed his mode of attack: instead of threatening, he
began to entreat: "Berridge," said he, "you know I have been your
friend, and I wish to be so still. I am continually teazed with the
complaints of the clergymen around you; only assure me, that you will
keep to your own parish; you may do as you please there. I have but
little time to live; do not bring my grey hairs with sorrow to the
grave." At this instant two gentlemen were announced, who desired to
speak with his lordship. "Berridge," said he, "go to your inn, and come
again at such an hour, and dine with me." I went, and, on entering a
private room, fell immediately upon my knees. I could bear threatening,
but knew not how to withstand entreaty, especially the entreaty of a
respectable old man. At the appointed time I returned. At dinner I was
treated with great respect. The two gentlemen also dined with us. I
found they had been informed who I was, as they sometimes cast their
eyes towards me in some such manner as one would glance at a monster.
After dinner, his lordship took me into the garden. "Well, Berridge,"
said he, "have you considered of my request?" I have, my lord, said I,
and have been upon my knees concerning it. "Well, will you promise me
that you will preach no more out of your own parish?" It would afford me
great pleasure, said I, to comply with your lordship's request, if I
could do it with a good conscience. I am satisfied the Lord has blessed
my labours of this kind, and I dare not desist. "A good conscience!"
said his lordship, "do you not know that it is contrary to the canons of
the church?" There is one canon, my Lord, I replied, which saith, "Go,
preach the gospel to every creature." "But why should you wish to
interfere with the charge of other men? one man cannot preach the gospel
to all men." If they would preach the gospel themselves, said I, there
would be no need of my preaching it to their people; but as they do not,
I cannot desist. His lordship then parted with me in some displeasure;
and I returned home not knowing what would befall me, but thankful to
God that I had preserved a conscience void of offence.

I took no measures for my own preservation; but Divine Providence
wrought for me in a way that I never expected. When I was at Clare Hall,
I was particularly acquainted with a fellow of that college, and we were
both upon terms of intimacy with Mr. Pitt, the late Lord Chatham, who
was at one time also at the university. This fellow of Clare Hall, when
I began to preach the gospel, became my enemy, and did me some injury in
some ecclesiastical privileges which beforetime I had enjoyed. At
length, however, when he heard I was likely to come into trouble, and to
be turned out of my living at Everton, his heart relented. He began to
think, it seems, within himself, "We shall ruin this poor fellow among
us." This was just about the time that I was sent for by the bishop. Of
his own accord he writes a letter to Mr. Pitt, saying nothing about my
Methodism, but to this effect: "Our old friend Berridge has got a living
in Bedfordshire, and I am informed he has an esquire in his parish that
gives him a deal of trouble; has accused him to the bishop of the
diocese; and, it is said, will turn him out of his living; I wish you
would contrive to put a stop to these proceedings." Mr. Pitt was at that
time a young man, and not choosing to apply to the bishop himself, spoke
to a certain nobleman to whom the bishop was indebted for his promotion.
This nobleman, within a few days, made it his business to see the
bishop, who was then in London. "My lord," said he, "I am informed you
have a very honest fellow, one Berridge, in your diocese, and that he
has been ill treated by a litigious esquire who lives in his parish; he
has accused him, I am told, to your lordship, and wishes to turn him out
of his living; you would oblige me, my lord, if you would take no
notice of that esquire, and not suffer the honest man to be interrupted
in his living." The bishop was astonished, and could not imagine in what
manner things could have thus got round: it would not do, however, to
object; he was obliged to bow compliance; and so I continued ever after
in my sphere of action.

The squire, having waited on the bishop to know the result of the
summons, had the mortification to learn that his purpose was defeated;
on his return home, his partisans in this prosecution fled to know what
was determined on, saying, "Well, have you got the old devil out?" He
replied, "No, nor do I think the very devil himself can get him out."
After this interesting narration was ended, which had alternately drawn
smiles and tears from my friend and his companion, they requested him to
pray with them one five minute's before they departed. "No," said the
good old man to my friend, you shall pray with me. "Well, but if I
begin, perhaps you will conclude." He consented: after my friend had
ended, he, without rising from his knees, took up his petitions, and
with such sweet solemnity, such holy familiarity with God, and such
ardent love to Christ, poured out his soul, that the like was seldom
seen. They parted, and my friend declares he thinks he shall never
forget the savour of this interview to his dying day.

                                                           J. SUTCLIFF.


                       RELIGIOUS REVIVAL MEETINGS.

                 _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

I have been surprised and pained by the appearance of the paper, headed
"On Revivals in America," in the number of your Magazine for the present
month. Though the paper is headed "Revivals in America," Mr. Clarke has
not confined his remarks to American revivals; he has animadverted with
considerable freedom on revival meetings in England. As I, and several of
my brethren in this part of the country, have sanctioned these meetings,
I trust you will in justice allow me a little space in your next number,
for a few remarks on his very singular production.

Mr. C. commences with some observations on revivals in America. On this
subject, I think, he does not write very consistently. It is scarcely
possible to give a more gloomy, disparaging description of the American
revivals than that which he presents. He represents them as exerting a
most pernicious influence on the churches, on the young, and on the
enemies of religion, rendering "the character of Christians undignified
and uninfluential," and reducing them to a state of "contempt and
ridicule." He says, "The good that they are occasionally the means of
effecting is secured at the expense of the dignity, influence, and
subsequent enjoyment of the church; and at the expense, too, of much
that is lovely and permanent in the character of pure religion." Now, if
this account of American revival meetings be correct, they must be a
very great evil, and ought to be entirely discountenanced by Christians.
Yet Mr. C. says, "Revival meetings may do for America." "The system is
their own, and is almost universally understood and recognized." He also
says, "The correctness of the reports which have reached this country
respecting their revivals, perhaps, ought not to be seriously
questioned." But if the reports of American revivals which have reached
this country be in general correct, I think the description of Mr. C.
must be very defective in that important quality; for there is a very
wide difference between his description and those reports. If we doubt
the correctness of his description, he has himself supplied us with an
apology; for he says, "Things are not always in reality what they appear
to be to the persons who describe them. Besides, truth is seldom naked,
and its dress frequently makes an erroneous impression."

Mr. C. says, "It is not my intention to degrade our American brethren;
indeed, I cannot." True. But I suppose they will not consider that he
passes a very high compliment on them, by first describing their
meetings as he has done, and then saying, "The system is their own, and
is there almost universally understood and recognized." His remarks on
the American revivals "are, no doubt well intended," but I believe it
would be difficult for any one to say what good end they are calculated
to answer.

But I hasten to a consideration of the latter part of Mr. Clarke's
paper, which contains some extraordinary strictures on "revival meetings
in England." He admits that the revival meetings in England may be well
intended, but says, "They appear to have originated in a wish to imitate
the Americans." I trust they originated in a sincere desire to glorify
God, and to promote the salvation of immortal souls. Mr. C. says,
"Religion cannot be imported." Indeed! Was not religion imported into
this country? Was it not imported into America? And has it not been
imported into other countries by our Missionaries? "Revival meetings,"
says Mr. C., "may do for America, but they will not do for England." How
does he know they will not do for England? Has he ever made the attempt?
Has he ever attended a revival meeting in England? If not, I think he
ought to have been less hasty in his conclusion. But they will not do
for England, "because the people here do not understand them, neither do
they heartily approve them." I am not much surprised that people do not
_heartily approve_ that which they do not _understand_. He says in
America the meetings are "almost universally understood and recognized."
Hence it appears where they _are_ understood they _are_ approved, and
that they are _not_ approved only where they are _not_ understood. This
surely cannot be a very powerful argument against such meetings. Another
of Mr. C.'s reasons why these meetings will not do for England is, "Our
country has long been inhabited, and distinguished for religious
institutions." As to the length of time our country has been inhabited,
that can have very little to do with the subject; and as to our being
distinguished for religious institutions, I do not know that we have
such a mighty advantage over the Americans. Some of our religious
institutions, instead of diminishing, greatly increase our need of
revival meetings. Mr. C. next attempts to draw from the Scriptures an
argument against revival meetings. "Besides," says he, "it is said,
'Six days shalt thou labour,' and necessity makes many in England keep
this commandment." And I should think necessity makes many in America
keep it too. I suppose he does not mean to say that this commandment
forbids persons from attending public worship on the "six days" if their
circumstances will allow them to do so. And if he do not mean this, for
what purpose can it be referred to? Once more. He says, "The unconverted
inhabitants of this country are far more likely to raise bitter
persecutions where revivals are attempted, than to feel willing to
engage in them." And suppose the wicked were to raise bitter
persecutions, are they to deter the Christian from doing that which he
believes is for the glory of God? Has not the Saviour said, "Blessed are
ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you," &c.? But experience
has proved to me that Mr. C.'s assertion is far from correct; several
revival meetings have been held in Lincolnshire, each of which was
attended by many unconverted persons, and at not one was there any
persecution. "The slothful man saith, There is a lion without, I shall
be slain in the streets." Prov. xxii. 13.

Mr. C.'s feelings warm as he advances; and, if I be not greatly
mistaken, they carry him very far beyond the bounds of Christian charity
in the following sentences: he says, "But, perhaps, the secret is this;
these meetings in England look like a burlesque; they appear like a body
without a soul, or like an orator without originality. We cannot,
therefore, expect people to be charmed and benefited by them; for the
mind cannot be wrought upon by what is felt to be a farce, nor will God
bless what is not perfectly sincere." Revival meetings in England, "not
perfectly sincere!" but are "a farce!!" and "a burlesque!!!" Really, Mr.
Editor, I think this is "set forth with a little too much sharpness of
invective," and I fancy all your readers, except Mr. Clarke, will think
the same.

As we proceed we find Mr. C. attempting to describe "the views and
feelings of our churches associated in the capacity of Revivalists." I
will not do our churches the injustice to believe that they would talk
such nonsense as that which he puts into their lips; the language is
much more befitting infidels than Christians. I am quite sure the views
and feelings of our churches in this country, respecting revival
meetings, are as different as possible from what Mr. C. states, and I
believe many of our members are in no small degree disgusted by what he
is pleased to say on the subject. If there be no more truth in what he
says of the American revivals, than there is in his descriptions of
revival meetings in England, he had better never given his "opinion" on
the subject.

Mr. C. says, "I would advise an adherence to _ordinary services_; for
these being evidently scriptural and reasonable," &c. It is a pity he
does not tell us what _are_ the "ordinary services that are scriptural
and reasonable." Our Lord "taught daily in the temple," Luke xix. 47.
The first converts at Jerusalem "continued daily with one accord in the
temple and breaking bread from house to house," Acts ii. 46. Paul told
the elders of the church at Ephesus, "that by the space of three years
he ceased not to warn every one night and day." Acts xx. 31. These are
scriptural services, and I suppose they are reasonable too. As to
"ordinary services," they differ in different churches; some having one,
and others having three or four, on the Sabbath; some having no service,
and others having several, during the "six days." It is frequently
mentioned to the honour of Whitefield and Wesley, that they preached
almost every day in the week. The services that were "ordinary" to these
good men would be extraordinary to most of our churches and ministers.
Mr. C.'s advice to the churches is virtually, "Continue to go on as you
do; quicken not your pace; devise no liberal scheme different from what
you have already in operation; if you hear of other churches doing a
great deal of good, by employing different means from those which you
employ, regard it not; 'no plan can prove serviceable that is learned
only from hearsay.' Above all things, carefully avoid whatever is
extraordinary in the service of God." Mr. C. would make an admirable
reformer!

A statement of a few facts will be the best reply to what Mr. C. says
about revival meetings in England. In this part of the country, six
revival meetings have been held within the last nine or ten months, at
four of which I have been present. None of the evils of which he speaks
occurred at any of these meetings; they were attended by ministers and
members of different denominations of Christians, most of whom
expressed, not merely their approbation of the services, but their
gratitude to God for the great spiritual delight they experienced in
attending them. I believe every church that has held one of these
meetings feels anxious that it should be repeated. Since they were held,
some have been added to our churches, who state that it was whilst
attending them that they first felt the importance of religion. Last
Sabbath, three were added to the church at Lincoln, to whom these
meetings were greatly blessed; and I hope in a few weeks to baptize
three others who can say the same. What are Mr. C.'s flippant remarks
when weighed in the balance with these facts?

                                                             JOHN CRAPS.

_Lincoln, February, 5th, 1835._


                            WIDOWS' FUND.

               _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

Observing in your Magazine for last month a notice of the annual sermon
to the Society for the Relief of the Widows of Protestant Dissenting
Ministers, as intended to be preached at Salters' Hall meeting-house,
Cannon-street, on Wednesday the 1st of April next, will you allow a
well-wisher to that institution to occupy a small part of your pages to
state a few particulars respecting that highly-valuable institution, as
I apprehend many of your readers are but little acquainted with its
origin and design. The proposed anniversary is the 102nd, it having been
established in the year 1733. It was founded on a broad and liberal
scale; no theological basis was intended; but the necessitous widows of
ministers of the denominations of Presbyterians, Independents, and
Baptists, were to be the recipients of its bounty. For these classes of
Protestant Dissenters it was their aim to provide; and as our ancestors
truly imagined that union was strength, their combined efforts were
exerted to form this society. It is, however, but justice to say that,
in the first instance, the interests of the society were greatly
promoted by the exertions of our Presbyterian friends. To Dr. Chandler,
a minister of that denomination, it was indebted for its rise. It has,
however, since that period, been liberally supported by the other
denominations of Dissenters, and diffused its blessings for more than a
century "to the fatherless and the widow." The annual sermon has been
preached alternately by a minister of each denomination; it was formerly
at the meeting-house in the Old Jewry, where the writer of this has
witnessed, with high satisfaction, a thronged assembly listening to the
urgent and sympathizing strains of a Fuller, a Hall, a Toller, and
various others of different denominations. In the present year it falls
to the Baptists to provide a place and a preacher; and may it not be
reasonably hoped that that denomination will give the meeting its
countenance and support, when they are informed that they have near
eighty widows in the English counties, who receive an annuity from its
funds, from one to twelve pounds each; besides more than twenty widows
in the principality of Wales, who receive from seven to nine pounds of
annual allowance.

How creditable, Mr. Editor, would it be to the dissenters to revive this
cause, which of late has been drooping! And the writer of this would
fain entertain a hope that, whilst exertions are making amongst the
friends of religion for so many important objects, ancient institutions
will not be overlooked and forgotten; but that a spirit of revival will
appear to the cause of the "widow and fatherless."

_Denmark Hill._                                           J. GUTTRIDGE.

  *.* We understand that the whole amount of subscriptions to this
  benevolent institution is under L120.


                     THE REV. L. S. E.'s PUBLICATION.

 (COPY OF A LETTER ADDRESSED TO A FRIEND, A MEMBER OF THE ESTABLISHMENT.)

_To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

  DEAR SIR,

As you were so kind as to favour me with the loan of a publication,
entitled "_Letters to a Dissenting Minister, by L. S. E., containing
Remarks on the Principles of the Sect_," &c., and to request my opinion
of its merits and tendency, I have put down what occurred to me on the
perusal of some parts of its contents: to have toiled through the whole
of it, was a task to which my patience was by no means equal.

The first impression produced on my mind was, the total absence of that
charity and forbearance so often enjoined in the holy Scriptures.
"_Judge not, that ye_ BE NOT JUDGED," was one of the precepts
delivered, in his first sermon, by our divine Lord and Master; and in
accordance with this direction, when his disciples, instigated by a
mistaken regard for his cause, came to him complaining that they had met
with some who followed not with them, and inquiring whether they should
forbid them, his reply was, "Forbid them not, for he that is not against
us is with us." The apostle Paul recommended the same line of conduct
towards weak and mistaken brethren, and in the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, which abounds with directions as to the conduct of
professing Christians one towards another, he sums up the whole by a
glowing description of _charity_, as superior to all other graces:
"Charity suffereth long, and is kind; thinketh no evil; hopeth all
things; endureth all things." To me it appears utterly impossible to
reconcile these expressions with the arrogant pretensions and sweeping
censures of this writer, not only with respect to the overt conduct, but
the _motives_, of those who differ from him, charging them with a
sin more heinous than drunkenness, and with being under the influence
of the devil, because they cannot see alike with him respecting some
of the circumstantials of Christianity, though they may agree as to
the essentials.

But the censorious language of the writer is not exhausted in the use of
the most opprobrious epithets, and such as have hitherto been only
appropriate to the vilest of characters; but it is diffused through the
pages of his publication, by raking together and detailing anecdotes,
with a view to degrade and vilify individuals, and the body of
dissenters at large. That there are imperfections and inconsistencies to
be found among the professors of religion, must be acknowledged; and has
in every age been a source of lamentation to truly pious and devoted
Christians; but how different their feelings from those of this
clergyman, who endeavours to expose to ridicule the failings of others;
who dwells upon them with a kind of malignant pleasure, and thus affords
a handle to the common enemies of Christianity!

As to many of the anecdotes contained in this publication, many are
garbled and distorted, and some of them are, in many of their
particulars, palpable falsehoods. The very quotations from the writings
of his opponents--though it must be conceded that at this period of
great excitement many unguarded expressions have been used by some
individuals--are, some of them, so garbled and mangled as scarcely to
bear any resemblance to the original, and calculated to convey a meaning
very different from what was intended by the writer.

Not to dwell any longer on these statements, which occupy a considerable
portion of the book, in the chapters on _the Authority of the Church_,
and _the Ordination of Christian Ministers_, much will be found so
extravagant in its assumptions, as to throw the pretensions of the
church of Rome into the shades (within whose pale, if he had any regard
for consistency, he ought certainly to have been), and calculated to
undermine and overthrow the grounds of the Protestant succession. They
are indeed so full of absurdity as to amuse rather than offend, and
exhibit in the clearest light the inability of L. S. E. to form a
correct judgment, either as to matters of faith or practice. With all
the consequence and arrogance which assumed infallibility can induce, he
maintains that none ought to be teachers of religion but those who are
_authorized_, or otherwise _specially inspired_ of God. According to his
definition, an _authorized_ minister is one who has passed through the
ordeal of episcopal ordination, and what constitutes that authority is,
the _regular succession_ from the times of the apostles to the present
period. In order to make this most important discovery of a regular
succession, on which, in his estimation, so much depends, I have been
employing myself for some time, in rummaging the different volumes of
ecclesiastical history within my reach, and endeavouring to trace the
succession, from the time of Peter downwards; and upwards from the time
of the Reformation. In the former case, there is great confusion in the
catalogue of bishops. Few of these are alike; some names of persons are
given, who, there is reason to believe, never existed; there are many
periods entirely without names; and it is well known, that for some time
there were rival popes, each claiming exclusive authority. In tracing
these tainted and impure currents, where shall we discover, either
before or after the Saxon invasion, the perennial stream which will
alone confer sanctity on the priestly office?

In attempting to make discoveries in a retrograde movement, from the
time of the Reformation, we find the names of Bonner, Gardiner, &c.;
those immaculate characters, who, of course, transmitted this divine
authority, and afterwards committed those to whom they had given it to
the flames. In this lack of information on so momentous a subject, L. S.
E.--_alias_ the Rev. Augustus Gathercole--will confer an invaluable
benefit on the church to which he belongs, if he can produce, from his
hidden stores, in the musty parchments which have been concealed for
ages, the direct and unbroken line of succession, and append it to the
next edition of his popular production. Of course the dissenters can
have no pretensions to be _authorized_ teachers on these grounds; and
not more so, as having _a special inspiration from God_ to become
teachers, which is represented by this writer as the only other ground
of a call to this office. It is true that some enthusiasts, with whom,
as a body, they have no connexion, have laid claim to this high
prerogative; but the avowed sentiment of the nonconformist body is, that
the supernatural powers connected with a _special inspiration_ from God
ceased with the first ages of Christianity. The Holy Spirit, in his
ordinary and gracious operations, is promised to all good men, and
especially to the ministers of the gospel, who, whether professing to be
authorized teachers in the way before described or not, are insufficient
in themselves for any good work, their sufficiency being of God, who
alone can make them able ministers of the New Testament. Destitute of
this, the hands of the bishop cannot confer any of the necessary
qualifications.

If none have any claim to the sacred office but those who have had
episcopal ordination, or are specially inspired, not only the present
race of teachers among different denominations, both Methodists and
regular Dissenters, must be degraded to the rank of intruders, whatever
success may have attended their labours; but the same will apply to the
2,000 ministers of whom the world was not worthy, the brightest
ornaments of the church to which the reverend gentleman belongs, who
were expelled from their situations by the act of uniformity. Also the
ministers of the Presbyterian church in Scotland, of which, as well as
of the church of England, the king, by his representative, is the head,
with many of the most eminent men who have flourished in these and
foreign lands. Whatever excellences the universal suffrage of the wisest
and best of men, both Churchmen and Dissenters, have attributed to the
writings and public labours of an Owen, a Howe, a Charnock, a Watts, a
Doddridge (the intimate friend of Archbishop Secker), a Henry, with a
long train of others that might be enumerated, they must now retire into
the shades, and pass into oblivion, because this infallible judge has
made it out that they were not _authorized teachers_. Like their
successors, they were incompetent to administer the ordinances aright;
like them, to use his own language, they could not lay _claim to be
considered as Christians. They were without the pale of the visible
church of God. As schismatics, who forsook the church, they ought to
have been the very first persons to whom the church should have refused
her burial service; the principles of independency, which they in
general maintained, being those of depraved human nature instilled into
man, and fostered in him by his great enemy the devil, who was the first
dissenter._

Whatever inconveniences or evils may attend the choice of their own
teachers by each respective congregation, the imposition of teachers is
far from being free from the most serious objections, and especially
when the patronage is in the hands of persons, as it often is,
regardless of the spiritual welfare of the flock, who are left in a
starving condition, and too often feel no interest either in the
preacher or his doctrine.

But I forbear, and shall leave it to a discerning public to determine
whether the contents of this unique publication--a specimen of which is
now given, can do any service to the church of which the Rev. A.
Gathercole prides himself as being a member, or do any credit to the
judgment of the reverend clergymen and the lordly bishop, who have
condescended to give it their sanction.

For myself (and I can without hesitation say the same of those with whom
I am connected), I have no wish to see the downfal of the venerable
fabric of the church, though in its patronage, often improperly used,
and in some of its formularies, particularly the baptismal service and
others connected with it, I think I see much that calls for alteration.
Many of its ministers and members I respect, and wish to consider them
as fellow-Christians. To this however, in the estimation of the Rev. A.
Gathercole, I have no right to lay a claim, and must not therefore
presume to subscribe myself by any other name than that with which he
designates every Dissenter,--

                                            A HEATHEN MAN AND A PUBLICAN.


    ON THE PROPRIETY OF INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN DISSENTING CHAPELS.

               _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

I trust your candour will permit me, through the medium of your
excellent publication, shortly to reply to some remarks that were made,
and I think rather hastily, in your last number, relative to the
introduction of instrumental music in dissenting places of worship. Your
correspondent, Mr. Wilkin, I am fearful, was not in the most composed
frame of mind when he sat down to pen the communication alluded to. The
sounds of the instrument which he states to have "greeted" him with its
"hideous tones," must have been vibrating in his ears at the time, or he
could not have expressed sentiments bearing so close an affity to
those _discordant_ notes with which he professes to have been so much
annoyed on his entering some Baptist chapel.

For my own part, I should deem no act inconsistent with the worship of
God, in its simplest and purest form, which has a tendency to create a
unison of voices which must tend so materially to produce a unity of
feeling in the minds of those engaged in one of the most sublime parts
of a religious service. I would only advocate the introduction of
instrumental music into dissenting chapels to assist the singing, not
when it merely offers an opportunity for the display of professional
skill. With regard to the parts of Scripture bearing upon the subject,
there are no direct commands in the New Testament, either for or against
the practice. We read in the Revelations of "the harpers harping with
their harps before the throne of God," while, in the Old Testament, we
also read of praising God on the high-sounding organ. Surely, if praise
was offered to God in this form with acceptance formerly, why shall it
not be so in the present day? Some of the Psalms have titles signifying
the author who was to set them to music, while others indicate the
instrument it was to be played upon; clearly denoting that the
accompaniment of music, when directed to God with pious feeling and
sincerity of purpose, cannot be unacceptable, and consequently not
inconsistent with the worship of the Divine Being; so that, so far from
its being a departure from Scripture, it appears to me to be an
adherence to it. Your correspondent states that, if he is wrong, he is
open to correction. I trust, also, he is open to conviction, and
sincerely hope he will not let early prejudices bias his mind to that
extent as to pervert his judgment, or gain the ascendancy of his nobler
and better feelings.

                                                                 MUSICUS.

_London, Feb. 7, 1835._


                                 POETRY.

                           PLEADING FOR MERCY.

  When at thy footstool, Lord, I bend,
    And plead with Thee for mercy there,
  Think of the sinner's dying Friend,
    And for His sake receive my prayer.
  O think not of my shame and guilt,
    My thousand stains of deepest dye:
  Think of the blood which Jesus spilt,
    And let that blood my pardon buy.

  Think, Lord, how I am still Thy own,
    The trembling creature of Thy hand;
  Think how my heart to sin is prone,
    And what temptations round me stand.
  O think how blind and weak am I;
    How strong and wily are my foes:
  They wrestled with Thy hosts on high,
    And can a worm their might oppose?

  O think upon Thy holy word,
    And every plighted promise there;
  How prayer should evermore be heard,
    And how Thy glory is to spare.
  O think not of my doubts and fears,
    My strivings with Thy grace divine:
  Think upon Jesus' woes and tears,
    And let his merits stand for mine.

  Thine eye, Thine ear--they are not dull;
    Thine arm can never shortened be:
  Behold me here!--my heart is full----
    Behold! and spare, and succour me.
  No claim, no merits, Lord, I plead:
    I come a humbled, helpless slave:
  But, ah! the more my guilty need,
    The more Thy O glory Lord, to save.


                                REVIEWS.

_Revealed Characteristics of God: in a Series of Essays._ By G. BARROW
    KIDD, Minister of Roe Street, Macclesfield.--Westley and Davis.


Who Mr. Kidd is we know not, but we have read his eighteen essays with
great satisfaction; and we shall be greatly surprised if they do not
contribute to make him far more widely known than he has been. The
subjects are as follow: "On the Divine nature--On the Eternity of God,
in contrast with the Duration of Man--On the Act of Concealment, as
containing the Divine Glory--On God, as the Dwelling-place of his
People--On Ezekiel's Vision of the Divine Glory--On the Equality of all
Periods in the Sight of God--On the Divinity [Deity] of Jesus Christ--On
the Revealed Representation of Jesus Christ's two Natures--On the
Incarnation of the Word of God--On the Design of the Death of Christ--On
the Atonement of Jesus Christ--On God, as the Original of Man's Love to
his Maker--On the Supremacy of Jesus Christ--On the Deity as in Jesus
Christ, and in him alone--On the Deity as in Jesus Christ, and in all
believers--On the Extent and Surrender of Jesus Christ's
Administration--On the Blessedness of Jesus Christ--On the Worship of
Heaven." All these subjects are, it is obvious, important, evangelical,
and interesting, in a very high degree, to those who believe in a divine
revelation.

The _spirit_ of these essays is eminently devotional; every essay is
full of Christ, and he is "all in all." The writer believes all the
great articles of the gospel system, as they are commonly held by
evangelical Christians. Nor does he make any affectation of novelty or
paradox, though, probably while unconscious of it himself, he has given
us many original and uncommon thoughts. There is no pompous announcement
of something to be expected very new, and recondite, and far removed
from the beaten track. A holy unction from above seems to have rested on
the writer; and though he is very grave and serious throughout, the
reader will find some lively and tender appeals to his conscience and to
his heart, mixed with long trains of elevated sentiment, and chains of
reasoning very close and compact.

The _method_ is admirable for its simplicity. The _lucidus ordo_, which
Horace prescribes, he has uniformly observed. Always anxious, first, to
investigate the true sense of the scripture which he has selected for
the foundation of his essay, some of his elucidations, without any
display of critical apparatus, are singularly happy.

As to _style_, we think his _forte_ is in strength and vigour. Some long
sentences (with parenthesis after parenthesis) involving thought within
thought, have reminded us of the essays of our celebrated friend John
Foster. We have observed many passages of great sublimity and splendour;
and there are many of great depth, in which he finds "fountains below
fountains," to borrow his own words, when traversing the ocean of "the
unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ."

Where Mr. Kidd studied, or to what school he belongs, we have never
heard; but he is evidently a profound, original, independent thinker,
writing out of his own mind. He has taken the thoughts, he says, "out of
the mine of revealed truth." At the same time, it is pleasant to observe
that he every where discovers a deep reverence for scripture authority.
He is penetrated too with a strong conviction of the limits of all
created minds. With chastened feelings he delights to soar aloft. He
spreads his wings, and pursues a well-sustained upward flight, gazing
with a strong and steady eye on the Sun of righteousness, as the proper
object of all human and all angelic contemplation.

A few words from the "advertisement" may be acceptable to our readers.
The author mentions "the fact, that no two persons in any world
entertain precisely the same intellectual views; and that, consequently,
every sincere contemplator of revealed beauty, whatever may be his
capacity, has it in his power to make broader the reflected light of
God's word; and that the utmost efforts of human beings on earth,
however diversified, and however harmonious in their diversity, will be
no more than an approximation to the revealed mind of God."

The volume is neatly got up, and printed with remarkable care and
accuracy. Our limits will permit only a few extracts.

  "If nothing were forgotten, if a distinct impression were
  retained of all the words which he had ever spoken; of all the
  deeds which he had ever done; of all the thoughts which he had
  ever entertained; of all the places in which he had ever been;
  of all the persons whom he had at any time seen and conversed
  with; of all the words which he had ever heard; of all the
  pleasures which he had ever tasted and enjoyed; of every
  remonstrance from conscience; of every warning or invitation
  from God or man; and could he, moreover, have continually in
  his view these things in the precise order in which they all
  occurred; could he behold every cause and every effect; and
  every thing which he had been invisibly operating so as to
  prevent a manifest cause from producing the effect which might
  have been looked for as the usual one; and every thing, on the
  other hand, which had secretly assisted a cause apparently
  inadequate to produce a greater effect than could have been
  anticipated; how very different a thing from what it is would
  be human life! Now, although this accurate remembrance from
  vivid impressions of the past is not man's prerogative on
  earth, yet it is easily conceivable that he might attain to
  this in a purer and brighter world. It cannot, indeed, be
  imagined that the angels do not remember every thing which has
  occurred during the whole of their wakeful being." pp. 28, 29.

In another place, when referring to the Messiah, he says,--

  "He has, in one word, adapted himself to your circumstances.
  It was in all the defective and sinful parts of your history
  that he was likely to be the least capable of affording to you
  succour or supply. It was in the pity that your misery
  demanded; in the forbearance that your propensity to crime
  required; in the minute example that your dulness called for;
  in the suffering which was necessary for your deliverance;
  that there was apparently the greatest occasion to the sinner
  for apprehension and fear. But all these parts of the
  condition of the human fallen, their Redeemer has met in a
  manner which bespeaks wisdom the most amazing, benevolence
  that defies adequate admiration. With the view that has been
  given of Jesus Christ, in this essay, we cannot reasonably
  allow ourselves to be subject to despondency; for finite,
  little, imperfect, diminutive, frail, occupying so small a
  portion of creation as we are, we cannot possibly despair of
  being complete in Him, in whom dwells all the fulness of the
  Godhead bodily. Oh, let us then unite ourselves to Him in the
  bond of a covenant which can never be dissolved." p. 321.

Towards the close of the 16th essay, he exclaims:

  "Oh, what honour is accumulating in the world above! We inform
  them of a morning which is not to be succeeded by night; of a
  subjection which is more illustrious than all the victories
  that the universe will have ever before beheld; of a finite
  nature which is clothed with eternal and uncreated light; of
  the very last of all the complicated actions belonging to the
  redemption of the world; when Jesus Christ shall bring before
  his Father the millions that He has saved from every species
  and degree of crime and degradation, for the purpose of
  introducing them to everlasting fellowship with Jehovah; and
  when _He_ shall become subject, to whom perpetual supremacy
  belongs, in order that He may show to saints and angels what
  has been the greatness of His humiliation, and how unutterable
  is the grandeur of God; since when He has risen from infancy
  in Bethlehem on earth, to a degree of strength, of lustre, of
  possession, and of renown, which all created capacity is
  inadequate to comprehend, the next degree of glory above this,
  is an act of voluntary subjection to his heavenly Father;
  which the honours of the supreme throne, and the laws of
  infinite existence, require." p. 365.


  _Dissent not Schism. A Discourse delivered in the Poultry Chapel,
        December 12th, 1834, at the Monthly Meeting, &c._
             By T. BINNEY--Robinson, 25, Ludgate Hill.

Very elaborate, acute, argumentative, instructive, and convincing.
The term _schism_, Mr. B. tells us, is literal, figurative, or
ecclesiastical; but query, is not the ecclesiastical figurative? If
so, the division is only twofold. Dr. Campbell's Dissertations (art,
heresy and schism) deserve to be consulted.

Mr. B., when referring to the three great forms of church
government--episcopacy, presbyterianism, and congregationalism, has
surprised us a little, by saying:--

  "There is something in the record in favour of all; but the
  book is not the exclusive property of any. There is more,
  perhaps, in support of each than the thorough-going advocates
  of the others will admit. There is more of episcopacy than is
  quite palatable to the presbyterian and the independent; there
  is more of presbyterianism than the independent and the
  episcopalian can easily digest; and there is more of
  congregationalism than either the priest or the presbyter can
  manage to get rid of." p. 69.

Is this to be understood _cum grano salis_, or are we left to infer that
the worthy author himself is not quite settled in his own mind as to the
interpretation of the record?

It might have been as well if Mr. B. had confined himself to Dissenters,
_as such_; however, his animadversions on the Methodists and the
strict-communion Baptists, pp. 81-83, will do them no harm.

His castigation of the present bishop of London, in the "notes," is not
more severe than just. The bishop will remember it as long as he lives.

We must make room for the concluding paragraph:--

  "Finally, let us all scrupulously attend to the nourishment
  and exercise of the catholic principle. Let us impress upon
  our minds the necessity of 'keeping the heart with all
  diligence, for out of it' arise 'schisms' and 'strifes.' Let
  us watch over ourselves, and guard against every circumstance
  that may diminish candour, pervert the judgment, or poison the
  affections. As Christians, let us war with what separates man
  from God; as dissenters, with what separates Christian from
  Christian. Let us seek the nearer approximation of church to
  church, and the ultimate recognition and union of all. Let
  each of us so enter into the spirit of our faith, and so feel
  the propriety and understand the reasons of our ecclesiastical
  position, as to be able to say with boldness and truth, 'I am
  a Dissenter, because I am a Catholic; I am a separatist,
  because I cannot be schismatical; I stand apart from some,
  because I love all; I oppose establishments, because I am not
  a sectarian; I think little of uniformity, because I long for
  union; I care not about subordinate differences with my
  brother, for CHRIST _has received him_, and so will _I_;
  thus, cultivating the spirit of universal love, I am hastening, I
  hope, that day when the world itself shall become the church,
  and preparing, I trust, for that world in which the church
  shall be ONE--one in faith, in feeling, and in worship; in a
  higher sense than can be witnessed here. While here, however,
  so far as the _spirit_ and _expression_ of affection is
  concerned, I am longing to witness and realize some approach
  to what I anticipate hereafter,--anticipate in that region
  where, amid the lustre and the loveliness of heaven, the jars
  and the jealousies of earth shall have passed away.' This,
  brethren, _ought_ to be the feeling and the consciousness of
  'all who profess and call themselves Christians.' It ought
  pre-eminently to be ours. May God make it to be so, and to be
  so universally, by pouring down upon his church the Spirit
  from on high; and by diffusing and sustaining in every part of
  it the strength of love, and the meekness of wisdom! Amen."


_A Memoir of the Rev. James Upton, late of Church Street, Blackfriars;
the Addresses delivered at the Interment, by the Rev. G. Pritchard and
    the Rev. W. B. Collyer, D.D., with the Funeral Sermons by the
     Rev. Dr. Newman and the Rev. J. Davis, the Present Pastor._

In the November number of our last volume--which contains a brief
memorial of this revered and beloved servant of Christ--it is intimated
as "probable, that some account of our departed friend will appear in
another form." This account is contained in the small volume now before
us. It has been prepared by the members of his family, by those who are
engaged in proclaiming the truths of that blessed gospel which was the
theme of his ministry, and the solace of his dying hour. Hence the
sorrows of the mourning relatives are alleviated by the most joyful
anticipations, even while "with tears they cast this wreath of filial
duty and affection on his tomb."

We can, however, assure our readers that this tribute of natural esteem
to the memory of a deceased parent--a feeling not always to be trusted
in sketches of this description--has not produced in this instance an
overcharged exhibition of his character. If filial affection has held
the pencil, modesty and fidelity have guided its delineations. In a
letter dated from St. Alban's, 1834, Mr. W. Upton thus writes:--

  "I would just remark, that neither my dear brother nor myself,
  I am sure, pretend to eulogize our father as a faultless man,
  or a faultless minister. In him the effects of a depraved
  nature were seen as well as in others, but in him also were
  seen, to a far greater degree than in most, the counteracting
  and restoring influences of the gospel and the grace of God.
  We feel therefore bound to say--not indeed with any design to
  attribute unmerited honour to him, much less with a view to
  borrow splendour from his rays, but with a desire to glorify
  God, to encourage others, and to excite a holy emulation--that
  "he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith;"
  while by his instrumentality "much people was added to the
  Lord." p. 100.

In accordance with this sentiment, the elder brother, the principal
writer of the memoir, observes:

  "Now the Head of the church has called him to his rest, it
  would be improper not to make the attempt to 'glorify God in
  him,' by gathering such facts respecting his early history and
  subsequent course, as our slender materials for such a purpose
  will furnish."

The scantiness of the materials which the life of this excellent man has
supplied to his biographer, though to his friends a matter of regret,
will be none of surprise to those who knew him. Modesty and diffidence
seem to have been the native elements of his character; and humility,
inducing a deep sense of his own unworthiness, constituted a
characteristic feature of his renewed nature. To our departed brother,
SELF had no attractions. It was not the idol of his idolatry; it was not
even an object of his complacency. It was therefore scarcely to be
expected that he should contribute much to perpetuate the memory of one
of whom he habitually entertained so lowly an estimate.

It appears, indeed, that Mr. Upton did at one time entertain the idea of
preparing "a short narrative of his own life," urged so to do by the
affectionate request of a friend; but the purpose was afterwards
abandoned, probably, in part at least, from the cause to which we have
adverted. Humility is a beautiful garment; it is a lovely and attractive
grace; but its tendency is to conceal from view the excellencies with
which it is associated. Hence men who are remarkably humble will be but
imperfectly known. These plants of righteousness, not less than others,
"have their fruit unto holiness;" but they are like those of the
vegetable kingdom, whose richest products are often concealed beneath
the broad foliage with which they are invested.

Mr. U. was, however, not only "a tree which the Lord had planted," but
he was like those "planted by the rivers of waters," he was eminently
fruitful. A brief history of his connexion with the church over which he
so long and so honourably presided, is modestly given by himself, in a
letter to his son, dated November 9th, 1826, to which we must refer our
readers. It appears that from the date of 1791 to 1800, including a
period of ten years, 293 persons were baptized and added to the church;
and from 1800 to 1820, 350 more; and after all the changes produced by
death and removals, the number of members at the time of his decease is
stated to be probably above 400: on his first connexion with this pious
people there were but 16 members, and from 50 to 60 hearers. He was
pastor of the church more than forty-eight years, and entered into his
rest in the seventy-fifth year of his age.

The contributions to the volume of the respected friends whose names are
given in the title-page, cannot fail to add to its value. While they
have attempted to magnify the grace of God in him, and to improve the
event for the benefit of survivors, their concurrent testimony in
relation to the deceased seems to have been, "Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom was no guile."


  _The Reciprocal Duties of Church Members. A Sermon before the London
    Baptist Association._ By the REV. EDWARD STEANE. pp. 44.--London:
    Thomas Ward and Co. 27, Paternoster Row.

We have read this sermon with considerable satisfaction, both on its own
account, and on that of the Association to which it is dedicated. An
Association must do good which calls for such clear, faithful, and
instructive expositions of Christian duty, as this sermon furnishes. Mr.
S. founds his discourse on John xiii. 34; and, as we think, wisely
selects as his chief topic of illustration, that mutual love which Jesus
Christ enjoins upon all disciples, and out of which the reciprocal
duties of Church members will naturally flow, as "so many practical
demonstrations of their obedience to the law of love."

The nature of the love which our Lord inculcates, as a new commandment,
is first explained in the sermon before us; though we doubt whether the
preacher has put all, or even the principal, reasons for its being so
denominated. _New_, in the text as well as in several other
passages--for instance, _new_ heavens and a _new_ earth--has always
appeared to us to indicate especial excellence or paramount importance.
This commandment is not, as Mr. S. very properly observes, merely a
revival, a vindication, or fresh enforcement of the spirit of the
original law.

"It is new," he says, "in relation to the parties commended to its
exercise, the peculiarity of its nature, and the motive by which it is
enforced. Under the second of these particulars the remarks of the
preacher are somewhat feeble. The discriminative differences of
Christian love are not clearly and forcibly drawn. We are told that it
is "a spiritual principle--a supernatural endowment,--a property
acquired in the process of that change by which Christians are born from
above." So is that love to our enemies which Christianity requires us to
cherish.

We learn, further, that Christian love is "something more than good
will; it is not simple humanity; it is brotherly love; an affection
having its seat, not in the sympathy of the feelings, but in the
sincerity of the heart." The distinction between "sympathy of the
feelings" and "sincerity of the heart" is not very obvious; but, passing
this, mere friendship, apart from Christianity, might be described in
the same terms. Mr. S. adds: Christian love is "stronger than death; if
needs be, it will lead a Christian to that last act of a devoted and
divine friendship, to lay down his life for the brethren." True: so also
is the love, not Christian, to which the apostle adverts, Rom. v. 7; and
that of which, now and then, the idea and the precept is given; nay, and
the example too, as Mr. S. must have known, by those to whom
Christianity utterly unknown.

Mr. S. appears to us, at pp. 11, 12, to have somewhat too sweepingly
intimated that an "exclusive principle in the constitution of our
churches" is indicative of a deficiency of the principle inculcated in
the text. He has gone out of his way for the observations introduced on
this point; and, as nineteen twentieths of the Christian world have
always been, and are now, thus exclusive, it is somewhat daring to
insinuate such a charge. If we take a narrower view of this subject, and
regard only what are called _strict_ Baptists, whom Mr. S. appears to
have had in his eye, we should be unwilling to pronounce judgment on the
amount of the Christian love of such men as Kiffin, of olden time;
Fuller, Kinghorn, and a host of others, of more modern date.

In the second division of the sermon before us, the occasions and modes
of fulfilling the new commandment of our Lord are exhibited. If all that
Mr. S. has remarked upon are not strictly modifications of that mutual
complacency in which he appears to think Christian love consists, each
is of such vast importance that it could be but ill spared. This
commandment, we are told, will be obeyed by affording _each other
mutual_ (redundant) countenance, in supporting the public means of
grace; by embracing opportunities for social devotion and spiritual
intercourse; by _mutual_ submission _to one another_, especially in
cases where a difference of opinion exists; by treating offenders
properly; by mutually sympathizing, interchanging kindly offices, and
watching over one another in the spirit of meekness; and by a hearty
co-operation with fellow-christians in whatever tends to promote the
prosperity of the church, and the general interests of Christianity in
the world. These topics are respectively remarked upon with considerable
propriety; as are also the motives enforcing this new commandment. These
are, Christ's love to us; our mutual love will afford one of the best
evidences of personal piety; it will make known our character to the
world; and it will exist for ever. We a little regret that Mr. S. has
fallen into the common error of supposing faith and hope excluded from
heaven. "Faith and hope," he says, "will expire; but love never dies."
We need not say that Scripture furnishes no ground for such a
representation; neither is such ground involved in the nature of faith
and hope, or in the views the Bible opens to us of heaven. Under some of
their present modifications faith and hope will indeed be unknown there;
but as much may be said of love. Do not the spirits of the just made
perfect now anticipate, with faith and hope, "the adoption; to wit, the
redemption of the body?" And will not the glorified assembly around the
throne of God be always anticipating large accessions to their
knowledge, holiness, and joy?

On the whole, however, notwithstanding these free remarks, we cordially
recommend this sermon to our readers; and shall be glad, at any time, to
meet with the author in a department of Christian instruction for which
his habits and experience have so well qualified him.


              BRIEF NOTICES OF RECENT PUBLICATIONS.

_The Soul's Independence of Death, and God's Sovereignty in Man's
Removal. A Sermon occasioned by the Decease of Mr. E. Bliss, aged 22,
delivered on Sunday, February 1st, at Shortwood, by Thomas Fox Newman.
London, Holdsworth and Ball, 1835._--This is a valuable sermon;
containing many striking reflections, conceived with vigour, and
expressed with much force. The circumstances under which it was preached
evidently exerted a powerful and solemn influence on the mind of the
preacher, and he speaks throughout under a deep impression of the
infinite importance of eternal things. The unexpected death of so
estimable a young man as Mr. Bliss appears to have been, was calculated
to excite the liveliest emotions of grief, although there was every
thing in his character to allay anxiety respecting himself, and to give
the assurance of his having entered, thus early, upon the joys of the
blessed. It will afford us sincere pleasure if our brief notice shall
aid the circulation of the sermon, and thus contribute to its
usefulness.

_A Discourse occasioned by the Decease of William Maynard, Esq.,
preached at the Meeting-house, Union Street, Southwark, Nov. 23rd, 1834.
By John Arundel. With the Address delivered at the Interment, Bunhill
Fields. Westley and Davis; Jackson and Walford._--A very serious,
suitable, evangelical discourse, which could not be heard without great
interest, and will not be read, we trust, without profit.

_The Parent's Book. A Series of Tales. By Rosa Edwena Gordon, Nos. 1 and
2. Baldwin and Cradock, Paternoster Row._--Very sensible, entertaining,
elegant and pathetic; but where is the Saviour, whom every parent should
place before the eyes of his children?

_The Mother's Magazine. Reprinted from the American Edition, No. 18. J.
Paul, Paternoster Row._

_Illustrations of the Bible from Original Paintings, by Westall and
Martin, with Descriptions by the Rev. Hobart Caunter, B. D. part 10.
Churton, 26, Holles Street._--An admirable work for all our young
readers.

_Primitive Christianity, &c. By William Cave, D.D. Hatchard._--The
introductory essay by Mr. Trollope is very respectable; but we lament to
say, that in Dr. Cave's popular work, now reprinted under the especial
patronage of her most gracious Majesty the Queen, there are many
traditions, fables, and idle ceremonies of human invention, which
"primitive Christianity," or the religion of the first Christians, was
not encumbered with. But, alas! "in the first ages of the gospel," her
fair form was corrupted and defiled.

_The Devotional Psalter._ "There is not a page of the book of Psalms in
which the pious reader will not find his Saviour, if he reads with a
view of finding him." Bishop Horsley.--Oliphant and Sons, Edinburgh.

_Bible Lives. By B. H. Draper, 2 Vols. Westley and Davis._--Mr. Draper's
entertaining pen could not be better employed than in such a work as
this, from which, we trust, hundreds and thousands of young persons will
derive both pleasure and profit.

_Common Scenes Improved by the Rev. James Smith, late of Ilford--Christ
Precious--The Temper of Jesus, by Dr. Grosvenor--Gilbert's Last
Birth-Day--Christ the only Foundation. Ward and Co._--All fit
instruments for much usefulness.

_The Condensed Commentary, &c. Ward and Co._--The commencement is
promising. We hope to be able to notice this cheap and valuable work
more at large in its progress.

_Bruce on Sympathy, 2nd Edition._--This respectable book we recommended
several years ago, and we heartily do so again.

_The British and Foreign Temperance Advocate and Herald. For January.
Price Threepence._

_On the Punishment of Death. By John Pell. Hamilton and Co._--This
letter to the Marquis of Northampton, dated from Yardley, Hastings, in
December last, is very powerfully written on Evangelical principles; and
deserves the most profound consideration on the part of our
legislators--and indeed of all our countrymen. The object is to prove
that the punishment of death is unlawful.

_Three Tracts on Public, Secret, and Social Prayer. Jackson and
Walford._--When the reader has heard that these tracts were written by
Mr. Sheppard, of Frome, he will not want any recommendation.

_Educational Magazine, No 1. Simpkin and Marshall._--If this work
proceeds as it has commenced, it will throw a flood of light upon the
darkness of our own beloved country and of others.

_The Scriptural Constitution of Christian Churches. A Discourse
delivered November 13th, 1834, at the Ordination of the Rev. J. Penman,
A.M., to the Pastorship of the Congregational Church, Tunbridge, Kent.
By Thomas James, Woolwich. Westley and Davis._--A very sensible, clear,
and candid discourse on a subject always interesting, and peculiarly so
at the present time. The author, when referring to 1 Tim. iii. 17, "Let
the _elders_ that rule well," &c., remarks: "That the term _elder_
comprehends the office of deacon, is manifest from this:" but we confess
it is not manifest to us. We have great satisfaction, however, in
copying the following sentence in reference to the deacons: "And they
should be sufficient in number to render unnecessary the many expedients
to which some churches have resorted, in the appointment of managers,
stewards, and committees, which are as unscriptural as the high sounding
titles which are given to the multiplied officers of the national
church."

_James's Anxious Inquirer--Morison's Morning Meditations--Anecdotes (The
Young)--Stephen Morell's Family Memorial--Case's Mount Pisgah._--Of
these it is sufficient recommendation to say that they are published or
republished by 'The Religious Tract Society.'


                                  OBITUARY.

                          MR. SAMUEL WARMINGTON.

Mr. Samuel Warmington was the youngest of a numerous family. He had
enjoyed many religious advantages from early childhood, and had grown up
in the society of persons many of whom were distinguished for their
prudence and piety. His early youth was strictly moral, and gave
promising indications of future worth. He had much simplicity of
purpose, with a remarkable freedom from those moral taints which many
youths imbibe as they rise into manhood. He enjoyed no particular
endowments of mind that might serve to distinguish or raise him above
his fellows; but he possessed those more useful characteristics which
attracted the respect and love of the circle by whom he was best known.
Naturally of a retiring disposition, he avoided many worldly dangers and
temptations, and acquired a salutary acquaintance with his own heart in
private. In due time, God, in infinite mercy, though by a very gradual
process, created him anew in Christ Jesus. This change was seen and felt
by himself and others, not so much in the outward conduct, as by the
flow of feeling and affection towards subjects of the highest
importance. He united himself to the church under the pastoral care of
the Rev. Dr. Newman, about three years since; and from that period has
constantly maintained an exemplary Christian deportment, though
circumstances over which he had no control prevented his fulfilling his
duties as a church member as he could have wished.

He was soon subjected to the discipline of his heavenly Father, who
correcteth every son whom he receiveth. A tender attachment he had
formed for a very accomplished and pious young lady was reciprocated and
mutually cherished, till it became interrupted by her illness and death.
The excitement consequent on the commencement and ripening of this
affection, under circumstances so mournful, gave the first development
of incipient disease. His friends observed its effects with concern, but
not with alarm. In the meantime his mind had been acquiring both
fortitude and dignity. The warmest sympathies of his heart had been
drawn forth on behalf of his fading, dying friend; but, at the same
time, he had been brought so near to the realities of the eternal world
as never to lose the impression afterwards. The beneficial effects this
trial had upon his character was evident to all who observed him. He
mingled again amidst the busy scenes of life with feelings of heartfelt
gratitude for the grace and mercy which had been manifested towards his
late friend, and with renewed devotion to the God who had mingled so
large a share of parental love with the affliction he had appointed him
to endure. He likewise mingled in scenes of family affliction with much
sensibility and a matured judgment. He did his part, with other
brothers, in solacing a mother's dying pillow by his prayers and by
other filial attentions.

And thus it was that he became gradually prepared for the dissolution of
the earthly house of his _own_ tabernacle. Symptoms of disease were
renewed and accumulated, so as to awaken apprehension as to their issue.
He retired from the avocations of business with graceful submission to
the divine will, and zealously applied himself to means for the recovery
of health. Testimonials of respect from his late employers, and his
companions, frequently followed him into retirement, either at his
father's house, or at some distant part of the country. The last journey
he undertook was to Dover, where his stay was short and distressing. He
returned home much worse, and with slight alternations of disease,
slowly sunk beneath its influence.

Under the paternal roof he enjoyed those soothing attentions his case
required; and often mentioned, with touching emotion, his gratitude to
God for giving him so kind a father, and such affectionate sisters, to
alleviate his last affliction. One of these sisters, herself the subject
of long affliction, was frequently detained with him from public
worship, and on such seasons of sacred tranquillity, would read and
converse with him. When too weak to bear either, he would lament his
want of energy; but regarding it as a part of his affliction, desired to
submit to it with acquiescence as the will of God. He would say, "I
depend on the quiet, though powerful, teaching of the Holy Spirit; who
will, himself, impress the truth on my mind." At other times he would
say, "Read one of those sublime chapters at the conclusion of the
Revelations, to draw my thoughts towards heaven." He was fond of the
Pilgrim's Progress, and said of it, "In my weak state, it is the only
book I can listen to with ease or profit, besides the Bible." When he
spoke of the providence of God, it was always with evident satisfaction:
he would say, "I am quite helpless, unable to do any thing for my own
maintenance, or for the benefit of others; but I am so perfectly
satisfied to cast all my care on the kindness and wisdom of God, that I
do not desire to have a choice if I might. If my health be restored, I
know he can direct my pursuits; and for the present, all is infinitely
better than I could have arranged." On another occasion, he said to one
of his sisters, "I should like to know Mr Beale's opinion (his medical
attendant) of my disorder: if he thinks it will terminate fatally, I
hope he will tell me: I am not alarmed at the thought of death." And
shortly afterwards, added, "What a mercy it is that I have not _now_ to
seek the Saviour, nor go to him now for the _first_ time: this is a
season when I need the comfort and support of religion." On the evening
of the same day, he enjoyed great composure of mind; and when referring
to his departure, he said, "He trusted, as a family, we should all meet
again: the separation would not be for long." He frequently requested to
hear the 23rd Psalm read, saying, "Though I can repeat it, I like to
hear it." A few days after confinement to his own room, he said to one
of his sisters, "I shall never go down into the parlour again; I feel I
am sinking; I can hardly describe my sensations of weakness." It was
replied, that should it be so, it would be gain to him. He was asked if
he felt any distress in the prospect, as to the actual pain of dying. He
said, "No, my thoughts go beyond that; I endeavour to keep them fixed on
the bright side--the glory that shall follow." On another occasion he
was assisted to walk to the window of his apartment, and, looking out
upon the garden, he said, "Ah! there is the garden I used to enjoy, it
looks very winterly now, and I shall never walk there again; but I am
quite satisfied." When alluding to his departure, he said, "He hoped it
might be like falling asleep. Oh! to fall asleep, and wake in the
likeness of Jesus!" His bodily sufferings were often very severe;
especially as he drew near his end. On one occasion, when suffering
extreme agony, he asked, "If it was proper to pray for an object
seemingly desirable to ourselves!" The answer implied, there was no
restriction; that we might call upon God in the day of trouble, asking
for any mercy in submission to his will. He rejoined, "Oh! yes; _in
submission to the will of God_, I do desire a little relief from pain;
but," he added, "can you remind me of a _scripture_ example, where this
has been done; for my mind seems so weak, I cannot think?" The words of
the apostle Paul were referred to: "For _this thing_ I besought the
Lord," &c. And also the words of Jesus himself: "If it be possible, let
_this cup_ pass from me; nevertheless, not my will, but thine, be done."
He seemed earnestly to adopt this language, and became more composed.
The same evening he requested his father to pray with him; and being
asked what he most desired, he said, "That I may have patience, and bear
this affliction to the glory of God." He appeared to spend much of his
time in mental aspirations after spiritual support, and the presence of
Jesus. His oft-repeated request to his pious attendants was, "Oh! pray
for complete acquiescence, and for the presence of Jesus." On one
occasion, appearing to be greatly depressed, it was said to him, "Though
flesh and heart fail, God will be your strength and portion for ever:"
he replied, "Yes, he will; that is a mercy." After a pause, he said, "I
am anxious to have the presence of Jesus to the last:" and added, "Does
not Bunyan describe Christian as leaving his garments of mortality
behind him, when he passed through the river? How delightful that will
be!" At another time, when his hand had been lanced and dressed, he
said, "I long to lay my poor hand in the dust; I long to be at rest."
After a minute, he added, "There is a rest purchased and ready for me;
and I shall be put in possession in God's own time." He was exceedingly
grateful to those who attended him and administered to his necessities;
telling them, he wished they might have the same support he felt, when
they should be placed in circumstances similar to his. On an occasion of
bodily infirmity, he very feelingly said, "The righteousness of Christ
will soon cover all our shame." He continued in a state of extreme
debility and suffering for many days, waiting his departure in a
condition of child-like dependance on the mercy and faithfulness of his
heavenly Father, reconciled to him, a guilty sinner, through the
atonement of his blessed Saviour. He longed to depart, and be with
Jesus; and would sometimes ask if it was wrong to pray for this
blessing, hoping he might not be impatient or presumptuous.

On his last sabbath on earth, his medical friend, having felt his pulse,
said to him, "Well, Sir, I think you will soon be where there will be no
more pain and suffering." He replied, "Not on account of anything of my
own; it is purchased by the blood of Christ."

Soon after this, through weakness, his articulation became indistinct,
and dissolution appeared hourly approaching. He lingered, however, till
the following Thursday morning, under the influence of much bodily
anguish, but having his mind calm--often apparently quite happy--as he
passed along the dark valley. It seemed as though a beam of heaven's
glory illuminated his path, to assure his soul of her coming bliss. He
had bid adieu to his affectionate relatives once before, deeming himself
in the last struggle; but again, on the last morning, the mourning
family were assembled around his bed, witnesses of his bodily distress;
and to receive, more by expressive looks than by words, his final adieu.
He faintly said, "Pray for me; pray for the presence of Jesus."
Afterwards, with more distinctness than he had spoken for several days,
he added; "Oh, blessed Jesus! _once more_, I implore thy love." One of
his sisters remarked, "You will soon _rest_ in his love," quoting an
appropriate promise; to which he rejoined, expressively, "That is no
mere speculation." He said no more, but apparently listened to that
verse, commencing--

"Jesus, I love thy charming name," and in a few minutes closed his eyes
on all terrestrial scenes. He died on the 18th of December, 1834, at his
father's house, at Plaistow, Essex, aged twenty-seven years.


                          RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.

                                 FOREIGN.

                                 CANADA.

                _To the Editor of the Baptist Magazine._

DEAR SIR,

I send you the two following letters, as they tend to throw some light
on the religious state of Canada. The details of the first are chiefly
statistical; and the extremely interesting communications in the other
are illustrative of the important facts alluded to in the previous one.
Your insertion of these in the Magazine as soon as possible, will much
oblige yours sincerely,                                    DOMESTICUS.

_Hamsterley, Feb. 9th, 1835._

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           _Montreal, 6th Nov. 1834._

MY DEAR BROTHER,

The receipt of yours gave me great pleasure. I was happy to learn that
you were so deeply interested in Canada. It does appear to me the duty
of our denomination to do something for it; and I have no doubt that, if
it were properly advocated, something would be done. I am deeply
convinced that to do good in this world, it is necessary to keep one
object chiefly in view. Now, my brother, suppose you keep Canada before
you, and introduce it frequently to the notice of our brethren on your
side of the water, much good might be done. I have written several
letters, this fall, to different individuals, soliciting their
attention, and have now sat down to answer some of your queries. My
remarks particularly apply to Lower Canada.

1. By the census in 1831, the population of Lower Canada was 511,000; of
these, more than 100,000, were Catholics. There are, at present, two
Catholic bishops in the province: the bishop of Quebec, who resides at
Quebec; and the bishop of Telemesse, who resides at Montreal. The number
of Catholic clergymen is about 150. The influence of these is very
great, and I hesitate not to say, very pernicious, both in a temporal
and spiritual point of view. Nothing has yet been done to evangelize
this people. Here and there, indeed, I have met with a person brought to
know the Lord, through reading the Scriptures. Be it observed, however,
that few of them can read, and those that can are chiefly females. I am,
happy, however, to state, that a missionary, Mr. Olivier, from the
Canton de Vaud, has arrived, I hope good will result from his labours.

2. The Episcopalians are, I suppose, the most numerous Protestant body
at present in the Lower province. The two Canadas compose one diocese,
under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Hon. and Right Rev. Charles
Stewart, D. D., Lord Bishop of Quebec. The number of Episcopal clergy in
the province is twenty-eight. With a few happy exceptions, I fear vital
godliness is not a prevailing article in this body.

3. Presbyterians, of the church of Scotland, by the census of 1831, were
about 15,000. The number of ministers twelve: of these, six are in the
cities of Quebec and Montreal. According to the report of this year,
1834, they have increased to forty churches, and forty ministers. These
are also said to be formed into five presbyteries. This, however,
relates to both provinces. In regard to what may be termed the
Dissenting Presbyterians, there are seven or eight churches, and five
ministers in this province; and in the Upper, there is a synod of the
secession: but the number of presbyteries in connexion with it, and the
number of churches and ministers in connexion with each of these, I have
not as yet been able to ascertain.

4. In respect to the Congregationalists, they have seven or eight
churches, and four ministers. I do not know precisely what they have in
the Upper province; perhaps four or five more.

5. The Methodists, in both provinces have 14,000 in society, and sixty
preachers. They also print a paper, called "The Christian Guardian."[A]

[Footnote A: This, I was told lately by Dr. Matheson, of Durham, is a
most efficient instrument of usefulness in America. Our people should
try to get one up.]

In fine, here, as to Protestants in general, in the Lower province, the
greater part are not gathered into regularly organized congregations, no
inconsiderable portion of them being scattered in the Catholic
settlements. To sum up, there are in the province about sixty ministers
to 100,000 people. You could easier, however, supply 500,000 in England
than 100,000 here, owing to bad roads, and the scattered state of the
people. I am sorry to add, that I fear only twenty out of the sixty are
efficient men.

I now come to our own denomination. There is, however, much difficulty
in collecting definite information concerning it. Seldom able to leave
my own church, personal observation is defective, and most of the
information I have is through report. I begin with what are called the
Eastern Townships. This is a district of country lying on the south of
the St. Lawrence, and bordering on the States. It is from 60 to 100
miles east of Montreal; 30 of which are occupied in passing what is
called the French Country. There are in it between 40 and 50,000
inhabitants. The land is good, but the people in general are poor. Most
of these have emigrated from the States, where the means of grace were
enjoyed by them. They are still disposed to have the gospel preached. I
am credibly informed that there are among them twenty or thirty little
Baptist churches. They would be styled General Baptists in England; here
they are denominated Free-will Baptists. They are ill supplied with
wholesome teaching. They are also rather wild in their meetings, being
more disposed to consult their own feelings than the word of God. Many
of them, however, are decidedly good people. Were our General Baptist
friends in England to send out a missionary or two into this district,
they would confer, under God, a lasting benefit on this people. I wish
very much the General Baptists at home would take the matter into deep
and serious consideration. It presents a fine field, for labour. But, in
addition to these, there are, perhaps, from fifteen to twenty churches
of our own denomination. These are miserably supplied with preachers, as
not above three or four of the churches have regular pastors; the others
have only occasional supplies. An itinerant here is much needed, would
be of great service, and could be maintained at small expense. Oh, my
brother, if you can, by any means, get a good, humble, prudent man, send
him into that field. I wish our denomination would take the subject into
immediate consideration. I have visited some of these churches, and the
people seemed exceedingly glad. Could an itinerant be supported for a
year or two, he would then, it is likely, not need further support.
There are some young persons of good natural abilities who, with a
little training, would be of immense service. I have met with such young
men, and longed to be able to point out a seminary to them, whither they
might have gone for a season.[B] I purpose, God willing, two months
hence, to spend a week or two in this district, and shall transmit the
result to you. Itinerants are much wanted in this country, on account of
the scattered population, bad roads, &c. I know one township in which
there had not been preaching for seven years: a missionary paid them a
visit, and the whole township turned out to hear. He visited them a year
afterwards; but during the interval they had not heard a sermon. The
main efforts have been made by a very pious and zealous young man of the
name of Hayt, who has been very active in establishing Sunday-schools,
and supplying families with copies of the Scriptures. Without
missionaries, however, these schools will most assuredly languish and
die.

[Footnote B: Who, on the perusal of this, does not feel a desire to
assist these young men to a seminary? And who that knows our brother
Gilmore, but will be led to conclude that he is the man who is most
likely to become their tutor? I intend immediately to write to him to
inquire how much it would require there to educate six young men; and
shall then, if spared, appeal to the public in their behalf.]

We shall now turn westward: and, proceeding up the Ottawa, on its
northern banks, about forty-five miles from Montreal, there is a Baptist
church of nearly thirty members: they speak Gallic, yet understand
English; and have a high character as it regards moral conduct. They are
without the regular ministrations of a pastor, but meet for mutual
edification: they are, however, anxious to have regular preaching. About
thirty miles from them, there is another Highland settlement. About two
years ago, a Mr. Fraser, a Baptist minister, paid them a visit. It was
the first sermon preached there, as supposed, from the foundation of
the world. The people themselves had not heard a sermon for the five
years they had been settled there. About seventy-five miles from
Montreal, in the same direction, is another Baptist church, of about
forty members: they have a good chapel, an excellent pastor, and, at
this very moment, God is visiting them with a most refreshing shower;
many are awakened to concern, and numbers have found peace, and are
rejoicing in God our Saviour. I have just been sent for to come and
help, and set off to-morrow morning. Again, twenty-five miles onward, in
the same direction, is a Baptist church of thirty members: they have a
pastor. We have sent a missionary about twenty miles farther; he left my
house yesterday morning: there are a few Baptist families where he has
gone, but no church has been organized; they have requested him to
labour among them. About forty miles farther, there is another little
Baptist church, and after this, in that direction, they become rather
plentiful; but they are then in the Upper province, and my information
respecting them is but scanty. A Baptist minister, in the Newcastle
district, writes me as follows, in consequence of some queries I had put
to him: "In the Upper province there are four Baptist associations,
about sixty churches, and forty ordained ministers. I am sorry to say we
labour under great disadvantages. Our preachers are generally unlearned
men, and destitute of useful books. There are many of them under the
necessity of attending to secular employments to support themselves and
families: this arises from our friends not feeling an inclination to
fulfil the duty taught by Paul, 'Let him that is taught in the word
communicate to him that teacheth in all good things.' I hope, however,
that things will not long continue in this sad state. We have recently
been endeavouring to form a convention, and appoint a minister in each
of the associations to visit the churches, for the purpose of raising
subscriptions to support itinerant preachers, and establish a printing
press: how far the attempt will be attended with success is as yet
uncertain." In addition to the statements of this gentleman, I may
mention, that they had also a seminary in view: this, as yet, has not
been carried into effect. As to academies, they are much wanted there,
and might be established at a very small expense on the self-supporting
principle. It is a little remarkable, that at the time you were writing
your letter for the Magazine, three of us, brother ministers, were
engaged in prayer and consultation on the very subject of academies on
the labour system. We have written to several influential gentlemen on
the subject, and purpose giving it a more serious investigation, and
will remit the result to you and others. One of our brethren was anxious
to proceed to England to lay the matter before the British public; but I
thought it would be better to say something about it first through the
Magazines. Urge it then, my dear brother, on the attention of the
public; do not let it sleep. I am glad to find, from a letter in the
September number of your Magazine, one hails yours of the preceding
month. As a church, at Montreal, we have been much favoured of God
during the present year: not less than forty have been added to the
number. Mrs. G. joins in love to you and yours, hoping to hear from you
soon.

                                   I remain yours in Christ,
                                                             JOHN GILMORE.

*.* _We are compelled to defer the second letter to our next number._


               THE DESPISER OF BAPTISM BAPTIZED.

The following is an extract of a letter from the Rev. N. Paul, of
Wilberforce Settlement, Upper Canada, to a friend in England:--

"MY DEAR SIR,

"Amongst all the numerous tracts and publications that have been printed
and circulated on the subject of Baptism, I think there is no one that
is more calculated to lead the honest inquirer after truth to a correct
and scriptural decision upon that subject, than Mr. Pengilly's
'Scripture Guide to Baptism.' It has been universally approved and
circulated by the Baptist churches in the United States of America, and
I believe it has been the means of doing much good. A particular
instance of this occurred under my own immediate observation, whilst
pastor of a Baptist church in the city of Albany, state of New York.

"A young lady, who was a member of an Independent church, but who
occasionally attended upon my ministry, was present with us one Sabbath
morning when I administered the ordinance in question. I endeavoured in
my address to adduce reasons for differing from my Paedobaptist brethren
upon this subject, and to show that believers in Christ were the only
proper subjects, and immersion the only scripture mode of baptism. The
young lady, who had taken her station close beside the baptistry,
instead of being convinced by my arguments, was excited to a high degree
of irritation, and allowed her temper so far to prevail over her better
feelings as, in retiring, to express her contempt of our practice in a
very unbecoming and offensive manner.

"Next day she called upon me in the same temper as when she left the
chapel, and required to know, why I aimed to wound the feelings of those
spectators who differed from myself upon the ordinance of baptism? I
replied that I did not intend to wound the feelings of any one; I only
aimed at the defence of the truth. After further conversation, I
requested her candid perusal of the pamphlet above mentioned, with a
copy of which I furnished her. She readily promised to comply with my
request, and we parted. The result was, the ensuing month I again
baptized twelve persons, _and this young lady was one of that number_!

"Yes, Sir; by the blessing of God, accompanying the perusal of that
pamphlet, she clearly saw the path that Jesus had opened before his
disciples--the path in which the apostles and primitive Christians
followed their Lord--the path in which she promptly resolved to walk,
without reluctance, fear, or shame. 'I do not,' said she, 'leave my
former connexion because they are not Christians, for as such I esteem
and love them; but the pattern and authority of Christ is more to me
than all the world. It is HIS to lead and command, and it is MINE to
follow and obey.' Truth, indeed, is mighty, and will prevail.

"May all the faithful defenders of the truth as it is in Jesus, be thus
abundantly owned and blessed of God, in every work of faith and labour
of love; and to His name be all the glory!"


                               DOMESTIC.

                       BAPTIST BUILDING FUND.

At a special meeting of the Board of Baptist Ministers, held at Fen
Court, Feb. 17th, to take into consideration a communication from the
Committee of the above Institution,

The Rev. W. H. MURCH in the chair,

It was resolved:

That the members who compose this Board, feeling the evils that attend
the system of making personal application for liquidating the debts on
country chapels, and the superior efficiency of the plan adopted in the
Building Fund, resolve to sign no more cases, but to recommend them all
in future to that Society.

That, in compliance with the request of the Committee of the London
Baptist Building Fund, the members of this Board do meet them at their
Rooms, No. 5, Paternoster Row, on Friday evening, the 6th of March, at
six o'clock precisely, to devise measures for increasing the efficiency
of their fund, and rendering it still more extensively beneficial to the
denomination.

                                               J. B. SHENSTON, SECRETARY.


                         DEPUTATION TO AMERICA.

On Thursday evening Feb. 19th, a very numerous and interesting meeting
was held in New Park-street chapel, Southwark, for special prayer,
preparatory to the departure of our brethren, the Rev. Dr. Cox and the
Rev. J. Hoby, to represent the British Baptists in the Triennial
Convention, at Richmond, Virginia, on the 27th of April next. The Rev.
C. Room presided. Addresses were delivered by the Rev. E. Steane, _On
the advantages arising from such a Deputation_; the Rev. C. Stovel, _On
the spirit which should distinguish the present undertaking_; and the
Rev. Dr. Cox, _On the manner in which the Deputation proposed to
discharge their duties_. Prayers were offered by the Rev. Messrs. Dyer,
Giles, Thomas, and Carey; and the hymns read by the Rev. Messrs. Davis,
Overbury, Shenston, Rothery, Room, and Belcher. Our brethren will sail
in the "Hibernia," from Liverpool, on the first of March.


                             BAPTIST UNION.

We are requested by the Secretaries of the Baptist Union, to entreat our
brethren in the country to forward, _during the present month_, their
circular letters, and whatever other documents may assist in the
preparation of the next Report, addresed to the Secretaries, at the
Missionary rooms, 6, Fen-court, Fenchurch-street.


                                NOTICE.

The Rev. Christopher Wollacott, late of Westminster, has accepted the
invitation of the church in Little Wild-street, to become their pastor.


                            RECENT DEATHS.

                          REV. DR. MORRISON.

  Extract from a letter written by his son to the Secretary of the
  London Missionary Society.

                                           _Canton, August 17th, 1834._

"MY DEAR SIR,--How shall I tell you that my beloved father--that the
father of the Chinese Mission--Dr. Morrison, is no more! Scarce can the
announcement come to you more suddenly than the event did to me. My dear
father had, indeed, been long unwell, and was greatly debilitated by
disease; but we had not, within an hour of his peaceful end, much
apprehension that he was likely to be so soon taken away from us. The
pallid cheek and glazed eye, quickly succeeded by failure of speech,
were the first intimations to us that he had heard his Saviour say,
'This night shalt thou be with me in paradise.' At about ten at night,
on the 1st of the present month,[A] while yet in the hands of the
physicians, who in vain endeavoured to restore warmth and pulsation, he
gently breathed out his spirit, without a struggle or a groan. And oh!
the recollection of the many preceding days, spent by him in pain and
extreme weakness, compels me to rejoice, even amidst my utmost grief,
that he has been released from sin and sorrow, has rested from his
labours, and shall henceforth be for ever with the Lord. In a letter,
written not long before his death, he spoke of his apprehension that his
work was finished, expressing his gratitude to God for what he had been
permitted to accomplish for the Redeemer's cause; adding, that he knew
but of two surviving missionary seniors, Drs. Carey and Marshman. I have
this morning learned, with great sorrow, that about the time he wrote
that letter, the venerable Carey also was called home.

[Footnote A: _The First of August, 1834_, that memorable day in the
annals of our country, when the sun neither set nor rose upon A SLAVE
throughout all her vast dominions.]


                      JOHN BROADLEY WILSON, ESQ.
                         (_From the Patriot._)

Died, on Monday evening, the 16th Feb., at his house on Clapham Common,
aged 70, John Broadley Wilson, Esq. well known and universally esteemed
as an eminently devout Christian, and most liberal supporter of the
cause of the Christian religion in every section of the church. His
illness was of very short duration; an attack of paralysis on Saturday,
the 14th, the effects of which no medical skill was permitted to remove,
being the appointed messenger to convey him into the presence of the
Saviour he ardently loved, and in whose service it was his supreme
delight to spend and be spent. Mr. Wilson was connected, more or less,
with a great number of religious and charitable institutions; to the
Religious Tract Society, and the Baptist Missionary Society, he stood in
the relation of Treasurer, and each of these valuable Societies will
have to mourn, not merely the loss of his munificent donations, but also
of his judicious counsels and holy example. We trust some authentic
account of this eminent philanthropist will be prepared, to edify the
world which has sustained so great a loss by his removal; but we could
not forbear inserting this hasty tribute of immediate respect to the
memory of a man, whom to know was to love, venerate, and admire.


                             REV. JOHN MASON.

At Exeter, on January 20th, after a protracted and painful illness of
twelve months' duration, the Rev. John Mason, for 17 years the beloved
and eminently devoted and useful pastor of the Baptist church in
Bartholomew-yard, in that city. His removal is felt throughout Exeter as
a public calamity. He died at the age of 45. We hope to be able to
furnish our readers with a memoir of this excellent servant of Christ.


                             MRS. ANN CARROLL.

Died on Thursday, Jan. 29th, in the 79th year of her age, at her
residence, Baalzephon-street, Long-lane, Bermondsey, Mrs. Ann Carroll,
after a protracted illness in which her exemplary piety and sterling
faith proved the efficacy of those doctrines of which, during a long
life, she had been the consistent and humble believer. Her remains were
interred in the family vault of St. John's, Southwark: and it may,
indeed, with truth be said, that in her the poor have lost a humane and
benevolent friend; the Baptist denomination, a consistent member; and
the various Christian charities of the metropolis, a worthy and generous
benefactor.


                             NEW PUBLICATIONS.

                             _Just Published._

Mr. Bagster has now ready for delivery the QUARTO EDITION of the
TREASURY BIBLE, which is elegantly printed on a fine writing paper of a
new manufacture, being prepared with lines in the fabric of the paper
for manuscript notes and remarks.

The Pocket edition was published in January.

                        _Preparing for Publication._

In a few days, Baptismal Immersion defended by Christians and Churches
of all Denominations. In a letter to a Paedobaptist. Second Edition. By
W. NEWMAN, D.D. Wightman, Paternoster-row. Price Threepence.




                              IRISH CHRONICLE.

                                MARCH, 1835.


The Committee would not be insensible to the many instances in which
kind attention has been paid to their appeals under the pecuniary burden
still resting upon the Society. Certainly, were it not for such
benevolent assistance, the difficulties and discouragements connected
with carrying on its operations, would be greatly increased. Yet the
arrear of debt, amounting to nearly, or quite, a _thousand pounds_,
cannot fail to excite a considerable measure of solicitude in the minds
of those who are principally concerned in the management of its affairs;
but it is recollected that the silver and the gold are the Lord's; and
in the history of this Society, many indeed have been the opportunities
afforded for gratefully acknowledging the remarkably seasonable relief
which He has been pleased to send, and in this time of exigence, it is
hoped He will again appear. The Rev. J. Allen returned to Ballina, after
collecting for the Chapel, the latter end of January. He wishes to
acknowledge the kindness he experienced during his tour, and hopes to
present, next month, an account of the contributions he has received.


                      _To the Rev._ JAS. ALLEN.

I have been employed during the last quarter in this neighbourhood
according to the ability that God hath given, in making known to my
fellow-sinners the unsearchable riches of Christ, the ignorance of which
is the cause of all the wickedness, delusion, and error, in this or any
other country.

_Oct. 5._--Visited a family in Brook Street, where I read the
twenty-first chapter of Job, and several other passages of Scripture, I
made some remarks as I read, the people frequently lifting up their eyes
when the name of Jesus was mentioned. Those people have a form of
religion, but they are destitute of the power.

12.--Visited an old woman in Bohunssup who is convinced of her sinful
state by nature, and pointed out the Saviour to her as plainly as I
could; I told her I feared she would prefer a priest to the Saviour in
her last hours, and if so, she might as well deny him altogether, and in
all his offices, as he alone is able to save from sin; and those who
believe on him shall not come into condemnation. She declared she had no
hope, no desire, to look to anything a priest could do for her. I prayed
with this poor woman.

19.--Visited a family this afternoon, named Whalin, where I read several
portions of God's word, and endeavoured to explain as I read. I prayed
with them also.

26.--I had a conversation with an old Roman Catholic lady on the folly
of those people who, she said, exposed their children to the fearful
doom, should they die unbaptized, of being shut out from the light of
heaven. I asked her if she did not read the New Testament. She said she
did. I asked her where she found any thing there that would lead her to
suppose or believe that those unbaptized children were thus exposed. I
said: I find no command to sprinkle infants; but the contrary, seeing no
persons were admitted to that ordinance but those who were able to make
a profession of faith, and this no infant could do; nor do we read of
any but adults being received into the church. I showed her, from the
New Testament, the practice of the Apostles, and our Lord's commission
to his Apostles. Then, why do Protestants baptize their infants? said
she. Because, said I, instead of abiding by what is written they have
thought proper to adopt the customs of those who teach the commandments
of men for those of God. You mean to say, said she, that the Church of
Rome do so? Certainly, I replied. Then she said she believed in the
Saviour alone, and through faith in him she hoped to be forgiven. You
are a Protestant then, said I. No; I detest your Calvinistic doctrines,
and I know no name sufficiently odious to brand them with. You may call
me any name you please, said I. She pledged her honour that she always
thought me an honest man and a good Christian. I told her I was glad to
hear her give another proof of her Protestant principles; seeing she was
more charitable than to believe all Protestants must be damned. She
said, no Catholics held such an opinion. I told her what the Council of
Trent said on that subject. She would not believe what I told her. She
said she did not believe that she received the body and blood
spiritually in the Eucharist. I said she believed more. No, said she.

I must not lengthen this subject, as the whole of our argument would
fill my sheet; nor would I have gone so far, were it not to show how
little Roman Catholics know what they believe. After running over most
of the absurdities of her religion, some things she denied, others she
never heard of before. This woman got a good education, if any can be so
while the Scriptures are left out. She is one of the strictest in this
town for the last fifty years.

_Nov. 2._--Visited a family in Garden Street, named Timlin, where I read
several portions of Scripture; but they would not hear of my praying
with them; such is their fear of being spoken of.

9.--I had several conversations with people this day, one with an old
man, named Dowd, for whom I read many portions which I thought suited to
his case, an old man on the verge of eternity, who never thought on
those things.

16.--Visited poor old F., with whom I read, conversed, and prayed. He is
near his rest. He thanks God for having afflicted him; for before he was
afflicted he went astray. I had a good opportunity to show some Roman
Catholics, who were in the house, what the believer rests his hopes upon
in the hour of trial. They listened with attention.

23.--Visited a family in Ardnaree, named Gardner, where I read a chapter
and prayed with the family: and I always make some remarks as I read,
and propose questions, in order to arrest their attention.

30.--Visited the Staff, where I found some children reading the
Scriptures; I read with, and turned this little company into a class, by
questioning them on what we read. I prayed with them, and promised to
visit them again.

_Dec. 14._--Visited a family in Hill Street, named McNautly, where I
attempted to read, but was interrupted by a woman who said she did not
want any thing out of Protestant books. I reasoned with her for some
time, when I referred to the Testament for the truth of what I said; and
as she seemed pleased with what I said, I continued to read, and
explained as I read, without any further interruption. So we parted good
friends.

21.--Conversed with a young man named Poots, who asked me my opinion of
almost every article of the Popish doctrines. He said, he was satisfied
with any thing written in the Scriptures, as he found very little
difference between _ours_, as he called it, and _his_ Testament. I need
not enter into particulars, as this subject lasted more than two hours,
without an angry feeling on either side. He at length exclaimed: There
is so much mystery in our religion, and those things known only to the
priests, that he did not know what to think; but, said he, if I could be
properly convinced on the subject of transubstantiation and confession,
I would not remain one day in the church of Rome.

28.--Visited an old woman in Brook Street, named Brennan, who is
confined to her bed. I read and conversed with her for about an hour: I
prayed with her also.

                                                        AUSTIN BRENNAN.

_Ballina, Jan. 3, 1835._

                         _To_ Rev. J. BATES.

I am happy to inform you, that the work of the blessed Redeemer is
prospering in this part of his vineyard, though the wicked one has his
secret agents in this place, as well as every other place, resisting the
work of Christ, and the gospel of the grace of God.

On the 20th of July I went to read to the house of one James McPartlin,
near the town of Drumahair. This poor man is ignorant and unlearned,
although a great devotee in the Church of Rome. I read for this poor man
and family several chapters in both English and Irish; and the poor man
was astonished to hear the words of eternal life in his native language.
He asked me several questions concerning the sacrifice of the mass, and
purgatory, and other doctrines taught by his church. I asked him: "What
sacrifice is the mass?" He answered, in the words of his catechism, "An
unbloody sacrifice." I then read for him the ninth and tenth chapters of
Hebrews, and showed him from the twenty-second verse of the ninth
chapter, that without shedding of blood there is no remission, and
consequently, as the mass was an unbloody sacrifice, there could be no
remission in it. I again referred him and family to the ninth and tenth
chapters of Hebrews, to show that when _He_, the _Lord_, by himself
purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
and that by one offering _He_ hath perfected for ever all them that are
sanctified. I read part of the Epistle to the Ephesians, and especially
the 1st chap. 7th ver., "In whom we have redemption through his blood,
even the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace." I
then read for him the 1st chapter of 1 John, to show them that it is the
blood of Christ alone that cleanseth us from all sin. All the family
seemed well satisfied to hear me read, and invited me to come and read
for them as often as I could. I have often read for this family since,
and I trust the Lord has made his word a blessing to them.

On the 15th of August, I read in the house of James McHugh the 9th and
10th chapters of John's Gospel; and poor McHugh was so delighted that he
said he had no greater comfort in the world than to hear his children
read the Testament. He said his daughter committed one hundred chapters
at the Drumahair female school; and he prayed for the prosperity and
long continuance of the Baptist Irish Society; "for," said he, "only for
them my children would never get a word of learning." Oh, that the word
of the Lord may run and be glorified! and may the boundaries of Christ's
fold be still more extended, until the whole number of his elect be
accomplished!

Few days pass but I read at some place. It is all the pleasure I have,
to be conversing with my poor neighbours about their eternal happiness.
I wish I could afford to spend all my time in this blessed employment;
but I thank God I would rather be a door-keeper in the house of the
Lord, than to dwell in the tents of the wicked.

There are many inquiring what they must do to be saved. We direct them
to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and strive to point them to the
Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world.

                                                         ADAM JOHNSON.

_Drumahair, September 26, 1834._

                         To Rev. J. BATES.

Since my last, I have visited more than twenty different places, and
some of them are about twenty miles asunder. This, together with my
occasional visits in this neighbourhood, has afforded me very many
interesting opportunities of directing sinners to the Saviour. In my
visits to the Night Schools, I have been highly gratified in observing
an increase of scriptural knowledge among those who attend. In J.
Monaghan's Night School, I found many adult persons assembled together,
some of them heads of families with their children, solely for the
purpose of reading the Scriptures and inquiring after their meaning,
some of these being Roman Catholics, asked me several very important
questions, to all which I endeavoured to give scriptural answers, with
which they were highly gratified and thankful, and wished that I might
soon visit them again.

November 24th, visited the house of a poor tradesman in Balli Murray,
read the 3rd of John, and pointed out the way of a sinner's acceptance
with God. All who were in the house quitted their several employments,
and drew around me. They all heard with eager attention, whilst I
pointed out the dreadful nature of sin, showing that nothing but the
blood of the Saviour cleanseth from it. One of them told me, that the
priest teaches that there is a purgatory, and that those who are not
guilty of mortal sins are cleansed from venial sins in purgatory. I told
them that there are no sins venial in the sight of God, for that it is
written, "Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things written
in the book of the law to do them;" that the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanseth believers from all sin, and that there is no other purgatory.
On the 4th inst. read the word near Ballymote. A poor man, named Rooney,
told me of a sermon which he had heard from the priest on the last
Sabbath; the priest, he said, preached on the General Judgment, and so
terrified him that he was almost in despair. He told his hearers that
not only for every evil action men must give an account, but also for
every idle thought; and oh, said he, if you had heard the Priest, you
would be terrified. I asked him, did the Priest tell him what he must do
to be saved? but he was totally ignorant of this. I then endeavoured to
bring to the understanding of this poor man the gospel plan of
salvation, which seemed to be the only thing calculated to give him
comfort and peace of mind.

On the 8th visited Killoran; met with a young man, a Roman Catholic, who
is a hired servant; he told me that he had been studying on the subject
of baptism; that when a school-boy he got a Testament, which he had
since kept very carefully; that in it he read that our Saviour was
baptized in the river Jordan; that from this he was led to believe that
immersion is the proper mode. I then read for him the account of the
baptism of the eunuch by Philip, also of Lydia, and the jailor, &c. He
heard with eager attention, and said that he was fully persuaded that
believers were the proper subjects for baptism, and that immersion was
the primitive mode. On the 12th March, travelled in company with several
people with a hearse going to a burial. I told them that it is appointed
unto all men once to die, and after death the judgment; and that it is
of the highest importance for us to be prepared for judgment. I was
sorry to learn that they did not know the Saviour, nor their need of
him. I made the best use I could of the short time I was with them. One
of them said he was sorry I was leaving them, &c.

                                                           ROBERT BEATY.
_Carintavy, Dec. 14, 1834._


                                CONTRIBUTIONS.

By Rev. J. DYER.

A Friend, Yorkshire                                           5  0  0
Mr. Holleck, by Rev. Dr. Fletcher                             5  0  0
J. Chippendale, Esq., Uxbridge, by Rev. A. G. Fuller          1  0  0
From profits of Youth's Magazine, per W. B. Gurney           20  0  0
From one who has tasted that the Lord is gracious
  (per General Post)                                          1  0  0

Collected by Rev. S. DAVIS.

Bristol                                                      41  2  6
  Mrs. Holland                                               50  0  0
Bath                                                          8  1  0
Bradford, Wilts                                               4  8  6
Trowbridge                                                   15 19  0
Bratten                                                       5 13  0
Westbury                                                      1 10  0
Frome                                                         8  4 10
Bridgwater                                                    4  4 10
Taunton                                                      13  5  8

Collected by Mr. LILLYCROP, Exeter.

Sir John Kennaway, Bart.                                      2  0  0
W. Rouse, Esq., Tor                                           1  0  0
Mrs. Rouse                                                    0 10  0
Rev. J. Mason                                                 0 10  0
Rev. E. H. Brewer                                             0 10  0
Miss Salter                                                   0 10  0
Mr. Lillycrop                                                 0 10  0
Miss Booth                                                    0  8  0
Miss Pates, collected by                                      0 16  6
Mr. Upham                                                     0  5  0
Mrs. Mason                                                    0  5  0
J. C. Wilcocks, Esq.                                          0  5  0
Mrs. Lillycrop                                                0  5  0
Mrs. Glyde                                                    0  5  0
Mr. Tanner                                                    0  5  0
Mr. Nichols                                                   0  5  0
Mr. Vinicombe                                                 0  5  0
Mr. Jeffery                                                   0  5  0
Mrs. Gregory                                                  0  5  0
Miss Beal                                                     0  5  0
Mrs. Cummin                                                   0  5  0
Mr. Wilson                                                    0  5  0
Miss Lee                                                      0  5  0
Mr. Rowse                                                     0  5  0
Miss Cole                                                     0  5  0
Mr. S. Davis                                                  0  5  0
Mr. Goodridge                                                 0  5  0
Mr. Mills                                                     0  5  0
Mrs. Higgs                                                    0  5  0
Mrs. Furze                                                    0  5  0
Sunday-school, Bartholomew Chapel                             0  5  2
Miss Bury                                                     0  4  0
Mrs. Ford                                                     0  4  0
Mr. Hooker                                                    0  2  6
Mrs. Maynard                                                  0  2  6
Mr. Wright                                                    0  2  6
Mrs. Tanner                                                   0  2  6
Ellen Bridgeman                                               0  2  6

By the TREASURER.

T. B., per Mr. W. Burls, jun.                                 2  0  0
D. P., per Mr. W. L. Smith                                    0 10  0
Charles Davis, Wallingford                                    1  0  0
Rev. E. West, Amersham Sub.                                   2  2  0
Rev. W. Nicholls, Collingham, Don.                            4  0  0
Do.       do.         Sub.                                    1  0  0
Mrs. Fernie, of Tottenham, and Friends, for Mary's
  Philanthropic  School, Mount Shannon, Galway               11  0  0

By the SECRETARY.

W. Burls, Esq., Edmonton                                      5  0  0
A. Bose        Ans. Sub.                                      2  0  0
From Mrs. Burls and Daughters,
  a valuable parcel for the poor children in the Society's Schools

Subscriptions received by S. Marshall, Esq., 181, High Holborn; Mr. P.
Millard, Bishopsgate Street; Messrs. Burls, 56, Lothbury; Rev. G.
Pritchard, 4, York Place, Pentonville, gratuitous Secretary; by Messrs.
Ladbrokes and Co., Bankers, Bank Buildings; by Mr. H. D. Dickie, 13,
Bank Street, and Rev. Mr. Innes, Frederick Street, Edinburgh; and P.
Brown, Esq., Cardigan.

        LONDON: J. MADDON, PRINTER, CASTLE-STREET, FINSBURY.




                            MISSIONARY HERALD.
                            CXCV. MARCH, 1835.


Subscriptions and Donations in aid of this Society will be thankfully
received at the Baptist Mission House, No. 6, Fen Court, Fenchurch
Street, London: or by any of the Ministers and Friends whose names are
inserted in the Cover of the Annual Report.

  With feelings of deep sorrow we have to announce the decease
  of the excellent Treasurer of this Society, JOHN BROADLEY
  WILSON, Esq., which took place, after a very short illness, at
  his house on Clapham Common, Monday evening, the 16th instant.
  His disease was palsy, rendering respiration difficult, and
  considerably affecting the organs of speech, but leaving his
  mental faculties in full vigour to the last. He died,
  rejoicing in the Saviour, whom he had long loved, and whose
  example, through divine grace, he had been enabled so
  eminently to follow. Never, perhaps, was there an individual
  of whom it might more justly be said, _When the ear heard him,
  then it blessed him; and when the eye saw him, it gave witness
  to him: because he delivered the poor that cried, and the
  fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of
  him that was ready to perish came upon him; and he caused the
  widow's heart to sing for joy. He was eyes to the blind, and
  feet was he to the lame: he was a father to the poor, and the
  cause that he knew not he searched out._

  "AND I HEARD A VOICE FROM HEAVEN SAYING UNTO ME, WRITE, BLESSED
  ARE THE DEAD WHICH DIE IN THE LORD FROM HENCEFORTH: YEA, SAITH
  THE SPIRIT, THAT THEY MAY REST FROM THEIR LABOURS; AND THEIR
  WORKS DO FOLLOW THEM."


                                 JAMAICA.

A number of letters from our various stations in this island have
reached us, containing information to the end of the year. We subjoin a
few of the leading particulars.

Mr. Tinson refers, with great satisfaction, to the growing thirst for
instruction among the negro population. He had been under the necessity
of opening an evening school, principally for adults, whose progress was
very rapid, and a large proportion of them had been reported able to
read the New Testament. He expresses an earnest desire to establish a
school at his country station at Yallahs, situate in a parish (St.
David's) containing 7,000 apprentices, without a single school of any
description. Twenty-three persons had been accepted for baptism at this
station.

"The brethren from the London Missionary Society (writes Mr. T.) have
arrived. They landed on Tuesday, the 23rd inst. Mr. and Mrs. Hodge
suffered much from sea-sickness; in other respects they are all well.
Mr. Woolridge brought a letter from Mr. Ellis, and one from yourself.
They all took tea with us the evening after they landed, in company with
brother and sister Gardner, and an interesting meeting it was. We sang,
before we knelt together around our domestic altar, I believe with
unfeigned sincerity of heart, the hymn beginning,

  "Kindred of Christ, for his dear sake
  A hearty welcome here receive;"

after which, brother Gardner presented to the kind and gracious Redeemer
our united thanksgiving for their safe arrival, and solicited the Divine
guidance in reference to their future steps. Brother Woolridge preached
a most delightful sermon in our chapel yesterday morning, and I expect
to be helped next Lord's-day by brother Hodge. They will probably
continue in town a week or two, and then proceed on a tour of
observation. Should one remain in Kingston there is plenty to do, and I
see no cause in the world for contention between us."

Mr. Gardner has been tried by personal indisposition and by the loss of
his eldest child, but has been enabled to resume his accustomed labours.

Mr. Clarke has furnished us with the following tabular account of the
stations under his superintendance:

                Members.  Inquirers.  Average  Sabb.
                                      Congreg. Schs.

Constant Spring   450        200     6 to 700    40
Lucky Valley       20         63          300    35
Retirement          6         30          300    40
Fairfield                     86          400
Guy's Hill                                250

Of these stations, Retirement is in the parish of St. John's, Fairfield
in St. Ann's, and the other three in St. Thomas-in-the-Vale. The scene
of violent outrage mentioned in our January number occurred at Guy's
Hill. Referring to that circumstance in a subsequent letter, Mr. C.
observes: "The persecution some of my people suffered there is at an
end. The hand of God appeared so plainly against them parties on the
following morning, that one of them declared we had been praying against
them. Their fear of us is such that their mistaken belief will prevent
them, we think, from annoying us a second time."

Although the parish of St. Ann's has formerly presented greater
obstacles than any other part of the island to the progress of gospel
truth, Mr. Coultart is favoured with great encouragement in his efforts.
He supplies St. Ann's Bay, Brown's Town, Ocho Rios, and the Pedroes, and
at all these places has large and increasing congregations. In the three
former, he is commencing to build places of worship in the room of those
which were destroyed; and in the last, ground has been offered him for a
similar purpose by parties who, a few weeks before, had shown the most
violent hostility. More help is urgently needed in this, as well as in
other parts of the island.

From Montego Bay Mr. Dendy writes, under date 30th December: "Our
Missionary friends, Messrs. Vine and Alloway, of the London Society,
arrived at Falmouth on the 24th instant, in pretty good health. On the
25th brother Knibb baptized 69 persons, and held public services in the
chapel; on the 26th a further addition was made by the baptism of 68
candidates; and on sabbath-day, the 28th, there were between 700 and 800
communicants sitting around the Lord's table. Mr. Vine preached in the
morning for brother Knibb, and Mr. Alloway in the evening; the services
of the day were peculiarly interesting."

By the arrival of Mr. Burchell, Mr. Dexter will be left at liberty to
visit Rio Bueno and Stewart's Town. For the present, however, some
intermission seems needful both for him and for Mr. Dendy, as both have
been labouring beyond their strength to supply the deficiencies
occasioned by the absence of Mr. Abbott. This last named brother, having
been released from confinement by the rising of the House of Assembly on
the 20th of December, had returned to his family; and through the mercy
of God his health, instead of being impaired, had been improved by his
temporary secession from active engagements. Previously to his arrest he
had enjoyed the pleasure of adding 59 members to the church at Montego
Bay, who were baptized on the 1st of November.

Of the return of Mr. Burchell to the people of his charge after so long
a separation, we must give our readers an account in his own words. His
letter is dated December 23rd:--

  I shall commence my present letter by giving you some account
  of my journey from Spanish Town, and my reception at this
  place.

  We left Spanish Town on Wednesday the 19th November, and
  reached Brother Coultart's the same evening, a distance of
  fifty miles; the following day we spent with our friends Mr.
  and Mrs. Coultart, from whom we received the most interesting
  and gratifying accounts of the progress of the Mission in the
  parish of St. Ann's. In the evening I preached at St. Ann's
  Bay, and although there were but a few hours' notice, still the
  principal part of the chapel house was full. It was to me
  unspeakably delightful to witness such an assembly in such a
  notorious place. Friday we proceeded on to Falmouth
  (thirty-four miles), which place we reached about two o'clock;
  in the evening I preached for brother Knibb to a very large
  congregation, the chapel was crowded, and one of the tents
  also, and many on the outside of the chapel-house. Saturday
  morning we left our old companions for the eventful town of
  Montego Bay; when we were three miles distant from the town, we
  had to pull up to shake hands with some who were come out to
  meet us; as we proceeded onwards, the numbers and frequency of
  the groups of friends increased. It was almost more than we
  could bear. The poor people looked at us as though they could
  scarcely believe their own eyes, and then they clasped their
  hands, blessed God, and burst into tears. When we entered the
  town, a crowd of recollections burst upon my mind as I looked
  upon the situation where the Blanche was anchored when I was
  first taken prisoner, &c.; but my attention was soon aroused
  from reflection, for as we passed along the streets, many of
  the inhabitants came to their doors and windows, congratulating
  us as we passed by. As we proceeded more into the town, the
  doors and windows became crowded, and many were the kind
  congratulations of our former townsfriends; some expressed
  their feelings by their remarks, some waved their
  handkerchiefs, and others their hats; as we entered the centre
  of the town we were recognised by one who had been a very
  staunch friend in our difficulties, he took off his hat and
  greeted us most cordially; this excited the attention of the
  negroes in the market, and one of them recognising us,
  exclaimed, "Bless God, and him come for true. Massa Burchell,
  him come for true." Others now joined him and began clapping
  their hands, when the whole multitude, consisting of three or
  four thousand, waving their hands and hats, set up their
  shouts, and made the whole town resound with their thundering
  huzzas. I now endeavoured to press on to our house, but the
  negroes leaving their baskets and the market followed us. I
  drove hastily forward, fearing they would surround us and take
  out our horse, which I have since found they would have done.
  When we reached the house we were immediately surrounded; the
  yard and the street were crowded. One of the friends took the
  child and carried her into the house, for she was completely
  frightened. It was a long time before we could get out of the
  gig (which had been lent us for the journey) for every one was
  trying to shake our hand, or lay hold of us in some way. When
  we alighted from the gig, Mrs. B., who was nearly overcome, was
  carried in by the friends, and then the throng crowded upon me,
  some taking one hand, some the other, some threw themselves on
  the ground. Indeed, the whole scene which followed was such
  that I cannot describe. It would not be possible to do it
  justice. The market square was almost vacated, except the
  baskets of provisions, &c., which were for sale; and yet many
  have since informed me, that when they returned to the market
  they found all as they had left it, nothing was lost.

  The whole of Saturday, the 22nd, was spent in receiving the
  congratulations of the people, whose remarks were frequently
  affecting. Many threw themselves down at my feet, and wept
  aloud. Some looked at me, and then said: "Hi, massa, and it you
  for true! and you for we, massa Burchell! and me see you with
  me own eye! blessed God!" and then they burst into tears. After
  speaking to a party and shaking hands, I was compelled to
  request them to leave in order to give place to others. When
  one said: "No massa, me no go--me no able to believe yet--and
  is it massa Burchell for true?" Another one said: "Now massa,
  me know dat God him true--him hear for we prayer--but him take
  him own time--and him work him own way--but him do every ting
  quite good." Indeed, I could fill a sheet with their
  interesting sayings. One poor afflicted negress came down from
  the country (a distance of twenty miles) the next Saturday, the
  29th; and when she saw me, looking upon me, as the tears rolled
  down her face, she said: "Massa, me hear you come--and me
  _hungry_ for see you--and me cry for see you--me take two day
  for walk for see you--and now me believe--God him too good--me
  now willing for die--for now me know me God him true."

  I had no idea whatever of such a reception, I knew my friends,
  and knew they would be truly glad to see me, but I had not the
  most distant idea of such a manifestation of feeling. It was
  far beyond any description that I can give.

  The following day, November 23, I again commenced my labours
  among my poor but dear people. There were at least 4000
  persons present at the 10 o'clock service. I preached out of
  doors. On Sunday, November 30, the attendance was still
  greater. At our morning prayer-meeting at 6 o'clock in the
  morning there were _full_ 2,700 present; and at 10 o'clock, not
  less than 5000; but you must not be misled by this statement of
  numbers, as there was a union of the churches of Montego Bay,
  Salter's Hill, and Gurney's Mount, &c.

We conclude our present article by an extract of a letter of somewhat
less recent date from Mr. Hutchins. It relates to the station at Lucea,
and was addressed to a friend of the writer, who has kindly furnished it
for our pages.

  A few sabbaths ago I had such a delightful day, that the
  recollection of it will, I have no doubt, be ever attended
  with feelings of peculiar pleasure. Early in the morning we
  proceeded to the place of baptizing from Lucea, where I
  baptized nine of my black brethren and sisters, nay nine of
  our black brethren and sisters in Christ. The place was two
  miles from the Bay. We arrived at break of day. It was not in
  the river Jordan, but in a beautiful winding river in a most
  retired situation. We were covered by the majestic and
  graceful boughs of the bamboo, which, for grandeur of
  appearance and loveliness of shade, excels every other tree in
  the island, and is beautiful beyond description.

  The congregation consisted of about 300 persons, all getting as
  near as possible to the banks of the river, while we arranged
  the candidates close to the border of the stream.

  The day now dawned upon us, and I felt as if compelled to
  commence by singing the verse:

    "Sweet is the work, my God, my King,
    To praise thy name, give thanks, and sing;
    To show thy love by morning light,
    And talk of all thy truth at night."

  And indeed, if one may speak for others, it was truly sweet. I
  then engaged in prayer, and delivered an address to the various
  classes present; and judging from appearances, we cannot but
  hope that at some future period good results will be brought to
  light.

  The Spirit of the Most High seemed to rest upon us. Persons
  whom I have seen trifling on other occasions, were overawed.
  Others, who were anticipating with pleasure the time when they
  shall have a name and a place among the people of God, were
  seen with the tear silently rolling dawn their cheeks. While
  others, with their hands clasped and pressed on their bosoms,
  with their eyes raised towards heaven, seemed to be fervently
  engaged in the interesting service, and to enjoy in their minds
  something of that feeling which is peculiar to the Christian,
  which the world can neither give nor take away. I then entered
  the stream and baptized them, singing two lines between each;
  after which I concluded, and thus ended one of the most
  interesting services I ever knew. We then repaired to Lucea,
  and commenced our morning prayer-meeting at seven instead of
  six o'clock; we had a good congregation. At half-past ten the
  next service was to commence. At ten I saw people going away to
  seek for sittings at the kirk, for not one could be found here.
  Our house is very commodious, being three stories high. The
  lower parts we use for the chapel, and in the top we reside.

  The whole of the chapel was crowded to excess. People coming
  from all parts of the bay with a chair from any person they
  could make their friend, filled the landings. The stairs
  leading up the whole of the three stories (which are carried up
  outside the buildings in this country) were occupied, by four
  persons on each. And then the poor creatures went into our
  hall, and laid their ears on the floor to listen from beneath.

  This is a congregation in Jamaica; and often we have them
  standing in the streets exposed to the rays of a vertical sun!
  Behind and before, on the right hand and on the left, we are
  surrounded, yea crowded, in every possible way.

  The result is, that on the evenings of the sabbath we wear a
  completely emaciated appearance. Oh, say you, this is not
  right, you ought not to do so. I am fully aware that we ought
  not to do so, but the remedy is not with us. You may try, and
  try again, to overcome such feelings, but you cannot. I should
  pity that man who professed to have the welfare of souls at
  heart who would not be aroused by such overwhelming scenes as
  we have here. When persons have come from two to twenty or
  thirty miles to hear the word of eternal life, to disappoint
  more than can possibly be helped, is what I cannot, what I dare
  not, do. For as I value my own immortal soul, as I prize the
  joys of heaven and dread the miseries of hell, so in proportion
  I consider it my duty to let all, as far as in me lies, hear
  the truths of that gospel which is able through Christ to raise
  poor perishing creatures from the degradation of sin to a life
  of righteousness and holiness by faith in him. Pardon me, my
  dear brother, pardon me for giving vent to the flowing tear
  while I am again considering that the remedy is not with us.
  Here is myself and there are my brethren with congregations
  which are enormous. We cannot refrain from shedding a tear
  again and again, because we are not able to do more for their
  thirsty souls. The remedy rests with friends at home.

  I often think that I must as I am now doing fall, very soon
  fall, a sacrifice to the cause in which I have embarked.
  Through mercy I fear it not. I am happy, truly happy, in my
  work, and feel confident that should I be a martyr to the
  cause, I shall receive a martyr's reward.


                              BAHAMAS.

Since our last article respecting this station, we have received a
variety of communications from our brethren Burton and Pearson. Up to
the date of the last, the tenor of these letters was uniformly pleasing.
They showed with what diligence our dear brethren were prosecuting the
work of God, not only at Nassau, but at Eleuthera, Andros Island, and
other places scattered through that extensive group of islands.
Additions to the number of converts were made every month, and there was
reason to hope that in a short time some of them would be found capable
of taking an efficient part in the instruction of their countrymen. But
the Society has more recently been called to the exercise of patient
submission under the loss of one who, though but recently entered on the
Missionary field, had afforded abundant evidence of holy devotedness to
the cause of his Saviour. We refer to Mr. Pearson, whose lamented
decease is reported by Mr. Burton under date of the 31st December. That
letter will close this article: as an appropriate introduction to it, we
insert extracts from the last written to the Secretary by Mr. Pearson
himself. It was dated Nassau, December 1, 1834:

  In the course of last September, I and my family were invited
  to St. Salvador, by Mr. John Armbrister. I rejoiced in so
  favourable an opportunity of communicating the glad tidings of
  salvation where they were so little known, and I felt grateful
  that on this occasion I could without aditional expense take
  my family with me, because our medical friend strongly
  recommended it, as the most likely means to renew my dear
  wife's health after her dangerous illness in August. We
  arrived at St. Salvador, Sabbath, Oct. 6th, were kindly
  welcomed, and soon surrounded by an interesting congregation
  of about 80 persons, to whom I preached twice on that day. On
  Monday and Tuesday I was fully engaged in the work of
  instruction among the children in the forenoon, and the adults
  in the evening. On Wednesday I was expected to preach upon two
  properties; but having preached to a few persons at one
  estate, I was afflicted with such a violent head-ache that it
  was with great difficulty I managed to ride to the house of
  our friend, where, finding myself the subject of fever, I was
  compelled at once to exchange the exercise of preaching, for
  the exercise of submission upon a bed of sickness, under
  indescribably agonizing and protracted pain, which entirely
  precluded rest by night or day: under these circumstances my
  second sabbath at St. Salvador was spent. My dear wife read
  the Scriptures to many who were gathered together, and also a
  few pages of Christian counsel which I had written for their
  benefit, and otherwise assisted them to worship God. On the
  following morning a conveyance offering to N. P., we availed
  ourselves of it, in order that I might obtain medical advice.
  We were glad to reach home on the following Thursday; but with
  change of scene, we experienced an increase of affliction. My
  dear wife, the child's wet nurse, and our servant boy, were
  immediately subjected to the fever; and unable as we were to
  provide for our disconsolate babe, it required the exercise of
  faith cheerfully to acquiesce in the divine disposal of our
  concerns. We _were troubled_, but _not distressed_; and our
  compassionate God, who knew how much we could bear, and
  delights to bind up the wounds which in mercy he inflicts,
  almost entirely independent of our agency, sent us, that very
  night, a suitable nurse for our child, who has since proved to
  us a blessing. My dear wife was speedily restored to her
  former state of convalescence, and after a week I was
  permitted to rise from my bed, much reduced in body, yet, I
  would hope, strengthened in my resolutions to love and serve
  the Saviour. My recovery was rapid, and on the 30th of October
  I again embarked with my family for St. Salvador. The health
  of all was much promoted by the passage, and when I landed,
  Monday, November 3, contrasting my bodily state with that
  under which I had left the island, I was filled with
  gratitude, my peace seemed like the beautiful canopy stretched
  over my head, unsullied with a cloud, and abundant as the
  waves of the sea. I was immediately put in possession of a
  house, unoccupied by its owner (Mr. Henry Armbrister), on an
  estate called "Freeman's Hall:" where, unmolested, I could
  hold meetings whenever I was able; I adored the goodness of
  God who thus disposed the planters to aid and encourage me in
  my work, and longed for their salvation as well as that of
  their dependents. During the first week I laboured to the
  utmost of my ability, teaching the children, preaching to all
  I could gather around me from evening to evening, and holding
  inquiry meetings whenever opportunity offered; but I seemed to
  labour in vain: my hearers were attentive, but their hearts
  were hardened. I did not merely tell them that there was a God
  who made and upheld them, who knew all their ways, and would
  bring them to judgment. I did not merely endeavour to expose
  the evil of fornication, drunkenness, lying, stealing, &c. I
  told them of Him who died for sinners. The doctrines of the
  total depravity of the human heart, the necessity of an
  atonement, the efficacy of the blood of Christ, the loveliness
  and suitableness of Jesus as an all-sufficient Saviour, the
  exceeding sinfulness and awful consequences of rejecting him,
  justification by faith, and the reward of eternal life, as the
  _free gift_ of God for the sake of his dear Son, were the
  themes which I most earnestly endeavoured to press home upon
  their consciences, but I could discover no evidences of
  relentings for sin, no meltings of heart at the recital of a
  Saviour's sufferings, no emotions of gratitude for a Saviour's
  love. Their hearts were inaccessible. Almost all were
  professed Baptists, but taught by a man who could not decipher
  a letter, who appeared wholly ignorant of the truth, and whose
  life was at variance with it. After many conversations with
  him, in which he seemed impervious to the light, I
  affectionately warned him to desist from preaching, lest he
  should entail the curse so solemnly denounced Gal. i. 8, 9.
  Meeting with little encouragement in this part of the island,
  on the first Friday after my arrival I rode to "Golden Grove,"
  seven miles distant, where I preached, and returned the same
  day. At this place I had an opportunity of addressing 100
  persons, and, deeming it an important field for labour, I
  again rode thither early on the following sabbath. Here I
  found some living sparks. An old man who had come over with
  his master at the American revolution, had been in the habit
  of reading his Bible to all who would hear him, which he could
  do tolerably well; he had taught them to sing many of Watts's
  Hymns; and was accustomed to read to them from a good book
  written by Guthrie, an old Scotch divine. Lydia, his
  daughter-in-law, at an inquiry meeting, answered the questions
  which were put to her very satisfactorily, and I thought her a
  suitable subject for baptism, when I found that her character
  was exemplary. The old man, I found, was overseer of the whole
  property, which was extensive, during his master's absence;
  and Lydia was intrusted with the care of the proprietor's
  house, and much valuable property. What a proof that God's
  servants are the best servants! At that time I regarded my
  health as established, I was animated in spirit, and among
  this people I laboured on the sabbath until the evening, when
  suddenly, whilst preaching, I was taken ill, and was obliged
  immediately to seek the open air, abruptly closing the service
  in which we were engaged. I soon discovered that I was once
  more under the influence of violent fever, and after a
  restless night, though treated with the utmost attention,
  agreeable to the instructions of the proprietor, H. Hunter,
  Esq., I made the best of my way to "Freeman's Hall," where I
  remained an invalid thirteen days. I had no medical aid; but
  the medicines I had with me, and Graham's popular work, proved
  invaluable. My stay at St. Salvador from this period was
  indeed a season of suffering; the fever was intermittent, but
  would come on again and again with chilliness, succeeded by
  ardent and continued heat, throbbing of the temple, continued
  restlessness, unquenchable thirst, a distressing oppression at
  the chest, difficulty in breathing, and nausea. My illness, I
  am convinced, was protracted by the stagnant water, gathered
  from among the bushes, which we were compelled to drink, and
  which was deeply impregnated with putrid vegetable matter:
  there was, indeed, a spring one mile distant; but of this we
  were not informed until the eve of our departure, although we
  daily complained of the water we were using. My affliction was
  greatly increased by finding that my dear wife's exertions on
  my behalf brought on a periodical fever, the paroxysms of
  which would remain with her six or eight hours. The vessel by
  which we were to return to N. P. sailed on Sunday, November
  23, much to my grief, as I was then a little recovering, and
  hoped to preach; and so indeed I did, in much weakness, on the
  sea beach, to thirty or forty persons, whilst waiting for the
  boat. Once more I exhorted them to repent and believe on the
  Saviour. We arrived here November 28, again improved in health
  by the passage, and yesterday I superintended and taught in
  the Sabbath-school two hours, and preached twice to our
  Nassau crowded congregations. In the evening I endeavoured to
  improve the death of our late esteemed brother Penney, who
  died of yellow fever, aged thirty-five years.[A] And now you
  will not be surprised when I assure you that I can adopt the
  language of David, "Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am
  weak." Our best thanks are due to Henry Armbrister, Esq., who
  has allowed us to make four passages in his vessel
  gratuitously, provided us with house, horses, &c., and
  afforded us every help in his power. How mysterious, that with
  such facilities coming from God, my lips should be sealed, and
  my repeated efforts for the good of these islanders apparently
  frustrated! But thus the great Sovereign shows that he has no
  need of me; and that if he ever employ me, he is conferring a
  great and undeserved favour. It is indeed to me a great
  affliction to be prevented from labouring for my Master. There
  is, I think, nothing which I so much dread, as the thought of
  being an unprofitable Missionary, an incumbrance to the
  society and to the church. I feel that I need affliction, and
  I hope in the midst of it ever to desire its improvement,
  rather than its removal. I am aware also, that my sufferings
  bear no comparison with those of Brainerd, Zeisberger, and
  many others, who in the midst of great tribulation cheerfully
  bore the cross and scorned the shame; but when month after
  month passes away, with nothing done for Christ, and no souls
  brought near to God by my instrumentality, I feel depressed in
  spirit. The Lord knows how much of self and pride there is in
  all this; may he pardon and purify me! I can give you no
  cheering accounts of usefulness, but I can most sincerely
  assure you, if I know myself, I only desire to live actively,
  faithfully, and perseveringly; to serve Christ with body,
  soul, and spirit. Oh, pray for me, that I may not live in
  vain, but that I may acquit myself as a good soldier until
  death remove me from the field.

[Footnote A: Our readers will rejoice to notice these kind references to
other labourers in the vineyard, sent forth by a kindred society.
Elsewhere Mr. P. mentions another Christian Missionary of the same body
in terms which we gladly quote: "Here I would most particularly mention
the zeal and kindness of Mr. Horne, Wesleyan Missionary, by whose
efforts the little flock (at Turk's Island) I united in church
fellowship have been kept in order. He has read to them our pastoral
letters, and in their own words 'has taken great pains with them.'"]

It is affecting to think that, in sixteen days after the expression of
these devout sentiments, the departure of our dear brother took place.
(We are constrained by want of room to defer Mr. Burton's letter till
next month).


                              BELIZE.

A letter has reached us from this station announcing the safe arrival of
Mr. Henderson, who writes as follows, under date of December 10th:--

  Through the gracious providence of our heavenly Father we all
  arrived safely here on Friday, Nov. 28th, being eight weeks
  from the day of our departure from London.

  The passage, except when passing the Bay of Biscay a few days,
  and some squalls on our approach to the coast (which hindered
  us one day), was remarkably moderate, affording many pleasing
  testimonies to our minds that we had a compassionate God, and
  praying friends. The Divine goodness has been especially
  displayed toward us in regard to bodily health, which has
  continued, with the exception of a little sea-sickness, as well
  as when we left England; indeed, rather better.

  We came to anchor off Belize early in the forenoon, when I made
  it my business to see Mr. Bourn first alone; afterwards
  returned for Mrs. Henderson and child in the afternoon. I found
  Mr. Bourn himself well, but fatigued on account of the
  indisposition of Mrs. B., who had been ill about a week
  previously. She is now recovered so as to attend to family
  matters, and we are living altogether as one family, as happy
  as they can make us. There is no vessel here at present by
  which Mr. and Mrs. B. can go to New York, but one is expected
  daily. For myself, I rather desire his stay a little time to
  have instructions relative to the state of the Mission. It is
  almost our daily employment to visit some of the members at
  their homes. We are preparing to-day for a journey by water
  southward to Stern Creek, where Mr. B. is in the habit of
  occasionally visiting; on our return we intend another journey
  about the same distance up the river.

Mr. Henderson then states that he had been making arrangements for the
immediate establishment of an infant school, which Mrs. H. is well
qualified to superintend, and of a boys' school for the children of the
respectable inhabitants of the place. Three sabbath-schools had been
previously established by Mr. Bourn.

_Contributions received on account of the Baptist Missionary Society,
from Jan. 20, 1835, to Feb. 20, 1835, not including individual
subscriptions._


Graham's Town (South Africa) Auxiliary Society,
  by Mr. Kidwell, Secretary                                 138 14  1

Wigan, by Mr. W. Park:
  Collection, Lord Street Chapel                   8 13  7
  Teachers and children of Sabbath School          3 12  3
                                                  --------   12  5 10
Dunkeld Missionary Society, by Rev. John Black                5  0  0

Loughton Missionary Association, by Rev. S. Brawn             6 14  2

Twickenham, collected by Mr. Scott                            1  5  0

East Essex and Colchester Auxiliary, by Thomas Blyth, Esq.   53  8  8

Buchan Bible Society, for circulating the
  Scriptures in India, by Mr. Boulton                         5 10  0

Bristol, Rev. F. Clowes and friends, for School Books
  to be sent to the Rev. James Coultart                       2  0  0

Milton, (Northamptonshire), by Rev. W. Gray                   2  0  0


                               LEGACY.

Further Residue under the will of the late
  Mr. Thomas King, of Birmingham,
  by Messrs. Fiddian and Mumford                             13  9  6


                             DONATIONS.

  G. B.                                                        1  1  0

  Two Friends, on perusing the Tract 'Amelia Gale,'
  by Mr. James Jones, _Manchester_                             2  4  0

  Friend in _Yorkshire_, by the Secretary                     10  0  0

  Mr. Hollick, by Rev. Dr. Fletcher                            5  0  0

                 _On Account of Jamaica School Rooms._

  Friends at _Peel_ Meeting, by Mr. J. Barrett                15 12  0

  We readily comply with the wishes of our kind friends at Liverpool to
  insert the _particulars_, recently sent, of their Collection by Cards,
  for the Jamaica Chapels.

             _Lime Street, Rev. J. Lister._

  Mrs. Hampton                                2  0  0
  Miss Sarah Bell                             0  6  6
  Elizabeth Wilson                            2 11  0
  Misses Lang                                10 10  0
  Ellen Houghton                              7  0  0
  Mrs. Billings                               1 15  0
    Baistow                                   1 13  6
  Mrs. Lister                                 1  0  0
  Mrs. Lister, jun.                           1  0  0
  Friend                                      1  0  0
  Friends at Grappend, by Miss Clare          4  0  6
  Miss Carpenter                              1 13  6
  Miss E. Carpenter                           1 12  0
  Mr. Ball                                    1 10  0
  Mr. Rushton, jun.                           2  7  8
  Mrs. Godfrey                                2 15  0
  Mr. Dobson, donation                        5  0  0
  Miss Cunningham                             2 10  6
  Miss Bayliss                                3  0  0
  Mr. Maynard                                 1  0  0
  John Minto                                  1  0  4
  Miss Pearce                                 0 11  0
  Miss Winstanley                             1  0  6
  Misses Pryce                                7 10  0
  James Bolland                               0 10  0
  John Banks                                  0  5  0
  Mrs. Major                                  0 15  0
  Miss Edwards                                1  4  0
  Mr. Fisher's Friends, by Mr. Travenn        2  4  6
  Miss Lea                                    2  0  2
  Miss Eglington                              1  9  6
  Miss Quick                                  1  0  8
  William Jones                               0  8  6
  Mr. W. S. Tyrer                             1  5  0
  Miss Foxcroft                               0 17  0
    Eccleston                                 0  5  0
  John Edwards                                0 10  6
  Mrs. Page                                   3 10  0
  Mrs. Henton                                 5  1  0
  Elizabeth Briggs                            0 19  0
  Sarah Briggs                                0  7  0
  Elizabeth Copeland                          0  1  2
  Mr. Hampton                                 0  7  6
  Friend, by Miss Lacy                        0 10  0
  Miss Ashcroft                               5  0  0
  Samuel Cearnes                              1 10  0
  Misses Dicker                               2  4  0
  Mr. Sunderland                              1 13  0
  Friends                                     1  7  2
                                           -----------
                                             99 17  0
  Friend                                      0  3  0
                                           -----------
                                            100  0  0
                                           -----------

  Collected by Mrs. Sutlow
    for the Education of Negro Children       1  3  0

          _Byram Street, Rev. S. Saunders._

  Mr. John Hodgkinson                         0 14 10
  Mrs. Allcot                                 1  1 10
  Misses Haughtons                           12 14  6
  Miss Cribbin                                2 16  0
  Miss M. Smallshaw                           9  5  0
  Mrs. Hindle                                 3  6  6
  Miss Julia Hope                             0 17  0
  Miss M. L. Hope                             0 13  6
  Miss Walthew                                2 13  6
  Mrs. Lewis                                  0 16  0
  Mr. Lewis                                   0  7  6
  A Friend                                    0  1  0
  Miss Pritchard                             12  8  0
  Miss Lyon                                   4 10  0
  Miss Edwards                                3  5  0
  Mr. Whitehead                               0 16  0
  Mr. Evans and the Miss Baynes's             4 10  6
  Mr. Cowper                                  1  0  0
  Mrs. Burkett                               11  0  0
  Miss Saunders and Mr. W. Saunders          10  0  0
  Mr. Morrison                                2  6  0
  Miss Emily and Mr. W. Jones                 2 17  0
  Mrs. John Foster                            1  0  0
  Miss Harsnett                               1  3  0
  Mrs. Jackson                                2  0  0
  Miss Helena Meyer                           3  6  0
  Miss King                                   1 14  0
  Miss Dugard                                 0 12  6
  Miss F. Glover                              1  2  6
  Mr. Edward Cowper                           9  0  0
  Miss M'Cullock                              1 14  6
  Mr. Danson                                  0 17  6
  Mr. Joseph King                             0  7  6
                                           -----------
                                            110  2  8

  Mr. Underhill, jun., Edge Hill              4  4  4
                                           -----------
                                            114  7  0


                             TO CORRESPONDENTS.

A very valuable package of Elementary School Books for Jamaica has been
received, and forwarded to that island. The Committee feel greatly
indebted to those kind 'Friends' at Birmingham by whom they were
presented.

Similar acknowledgments are respectfully offered to the Rev. Thomas
Gisborne, of Yoxall Lodge, Staffordshire, and the worthy gentlemen
associated with him, whose seasonable liberality has placed at the
disposal of the Committee, 3000 copies of 'Selections from the Old
Testament,' drawn up expressly for the emancipated negroes. The whole
have been forwarded to various parts of the island.

Joseph Fletcher, Esq. and T. B. Oldfield, Esq. have laid the Society
under great obligations by permitting their vessels to convey, freight
free, a large quantity of Bricks and other articles for rebuilding the
Chapels in Jamaica.

Parcels of Magazines and other Books are gratefully acknowledged from
Mrs. Gillman, Bank Buildings, and from Mrs. Bryant and other friends at
Bath.

Mr. Burchell (December 30) requests that we would make an apology on his
behalf to those private friends who may have been expecting to hear from
him. Continual occupation has hitherto prevented his writing, but he
hopes soon to be able to do so.


             J. HADDON, PRINTER, CASTLE STREET, FINSBURY.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Baptist Magazine, Vol. 27, March
1835, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAPTIST MAGAZINE, VOL. ***

***** This file should be named 37583.txt or 37583.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/5/8/37583/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
