The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nameless Island, by Percy F. Westerman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Nameless Island
       A Story of some Modern Robinson Crusoes

Author: Percy F. Westerman

Release Date: October 7, 2011 [EBook #37652]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NAMELESS ISLAND ***




Produced by Al Haines









[Illustration: Cover art]





[Frontispiece: AMID THE CHEERS OF THE BAND OF BRITISHERS THE ENSIGN WAS
BROKEN AT THE MASTHEAD.  See page 68]




THE NAMELESS ISLAND


A Story of some Modern Robinson Crusoes



BY

PERCY F. WESTERMAN

_Author of "The Young Cavalier," etc._




London

C. Arthur Pearson Ltd.

Henrietta Street

1920




_Second Impression_




STORIES OF ADVENTURE.

_UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME_

Each Volume contains Eight Full-Page Illustrations by a well-known
Artist


The Boys of the Otter Patrol.

A Tale of the Boy Scouts.  By E. Le Breton-Martin.


Kiddie of the Camp.

A Scouting Story of the Western Prairies.  By Robert Leighton.


Otters to the Rescue.

A Sequel to "The Boys of the Otter Patrol."  By E. Le Breton-Martin.


The Clue of the Ivory Claw.

By F. Haydn Dimmock.


'Midst Arctic Perils.

By P. F. Westerman.


The Phantom Battleship.

By Rupert Chesterton.


Kiddie the Scout.

A Sequel to "Kiddie of the Camp."  By Robert Leighton.


The Lost Trooper.

A Tale of the Great North-West.  By F. Haydn Dimmock.


The Brigand of the Air.

By Christopher Beck.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

      I. THE HURRICANE
     II. AGROUND
    III. ABANDONED
     IV. THE LANDING
      V. THE CAMP
     VI. THE ANIMAL THAT WOULDN'T BE RESCUED
    VII. THE EMBLEM OF EMPIRE
   VIII. "A SAIL!"
     IX. UNWELCOME VISITORS
      X. STRANGE ALLIES
     XI. THE FRUSTRATED SACRIFICE
    XII. AT BAY
   XIII. ELLERTON TO THE RESCUE
    XIV. ROUTING THE SAVAGES
     XV. A KNIFE-THRUST IN THE DARK
    XVI. THE GALE
   XVII. BACK TO THE ISLAND
  XVIII. A SURPRISE FOR THE INVADERS
    XIX. THE PRISONER'S ESCAPE
     XX. THE ENEMY IS CORNERED
    XXI. THE BUCCANEERS' CAVE
   XXII. THE TREASURE CHAMBER
  XXIII. "A SAIL! A SAIL!"
   XXIV. A FALSE AND A REAL ALARM
    XXV. THE GREAT INVASION
   XXVI. A GREAT DISASTER
  XXVII. THE LAST STAND
 XXVIII. THE RESCUE




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Amid the cheers of the band of Britishers the ensign was
  broken at the masthead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

Ellerton was only just in time. Another dazzling flash enabled
  him to see the helpless form of the crippled seaman

Andy, finding the bull close to his heels, gripped a rope and
  swung himself into a position of comparative safety

The chief's canoe was paddled slowly towards the shore

Crash! fair in the centre of the lightly built fifty-feet hull
  struck the sharp stem

"A sail! a sail!" he exclaimed breathlessly

A huge turtle had crawled across the beach and ... had set the
  alarm bell ringing

With fierce shouts the savages tore down the path straight for
  the barricade




THE NAMELESS ISLAND




CHAPTER I

THE HURRICANE

The _San Martin_, a single-screw cargo steamer of 3050 tons, was on her
way from Realejo to Tahiti.  Built on the Clyde twenty years back, this
Peruvian-owned tramp was no longer in her prime.  Since passing out of
the hands of her British owners, neglect had lessened her speed, while
the addition of various deck-houses, to suit the requirements of the
South American firm under whose house-flag she sailed, had not
increased her steadiness.

Captain Antonio Perez, who was in command, was a short, thick-set man
of almost pure Spanish descent, swarthy, greasy, and vain--combining
all the characteristics, good, bad, and indifferent, of the South
American skipper.  As part owner of the _San Martin_ he was glad of the
opportunity of adding to the vessel's earnings, so he had willingly
agreed to take five passengers as far as Tahiti.

The five passengers were Mr. McKay, his son Andrew, Terence Donaghue,
Fanshaw Ellerton, and Quexo; but before relating the circumstances in
which they found themselves on board the _San Martin_, it will be
necessary to introduce them to our readers.

Mr. McKay, a tall, erect Queenslander, of Scottish descent, had,
through the death of a near relative, migrated from Australia to one of
the Central American republics in order to test the possibilities of an
estate which had been left him, before putting it into the market.

Andrew McKay, or Andy, as he was called, was a well-set-up young fellow
of nineteen, broad-shouldered and straight-limbed, with a fine head
surmounted by a crop of auburn hair.

Terence Donaghue, the son of an Irish Canadian, was about Andy's age,
and was on a visit to the McKays.  He was impulsive both in manner and
speech, high-spirited, and good-natured.

Fanshaw Ellerton, a lad of sixteen, was supposed to be serving his
apprenticeship on board the _Tophet_, a barque of 2200 tons, of the
port of Liverpool.  He was in reality a deserter--but in circumstances
beyond his control.

Taking advantage of general leave being granted to the crew of the
_Tophet_, Ellerton had gone "up-country," and, before he actually
realised it, he found himself besieged in Mr. McKay's ranch of San
Eugenio.

One of those revolutions that occur in many of the South Central
American states had broken out, and the rebels, thinking that Mr.
McKay's house and estate would prove an easy and profitable prize,
promptly attempted to take and plunder San Eugenio.

In spite of a vigorous defence, it seemed as if numbers would gain the
day, till Quexo, a mulatto lad on the ranch, contrived to steal through
the rebels' lines and bring timely aid, but not before Mr. McKay had
been severely wounded.

But, so far as his Central American affairs were concerned, Mr. McKay
was practically ruined, and he took steps to return to Queensland with
the least possible delay.

Andy, of course, was to accompany him, while Terence arranged to go as
far as Tahiti, whence he could take steamer to Honolulu and on to
Victoria, British Columbia.

"Never mind, old chap," exclaimed Andy, when Ellerton made the
startling yet not altogether unexpected discovery that the _Tophet_ had
sailed without him.  "We've stuck together through thick and thin these
last few days, and it seems as if we have been chums for years.  I know
the governor will be only too glad to have you with us, and no doubt
you can pick up your ship at Sydney."

Nor did Mr. McKay forget Quexo's devotion; and, to the mulatto's great
delight, he was engaged as servant at the--to him--princely salary of
five dollars a month.

A fever-stricken coast was no place for a wounded man, hence Mr.
McKay's anxiety to sail as soon as possible; and since ten days or more
would elapse before one of the regular line of steamers left for
Honolulu, passages were booked on the Peruvian tramp steamer _San
Martin_.

      *      *      *      *      *

"What a scratch crew!" remarked Terence, pointing at the swarm of
olive-featured Peruvians who were scrubbing down decks with the aid of
the ship's hose.

"But even they have one advantage over most of the crews of the
mercantile marine," replied Ellerton.  "They are all of one
nationality.  Take the _Tophet's_ crew--there are only eight British
seamen before the mast; the rest are Germans, Finns, and Swedes."

"That is a crying scandal," interrupted Mr. McKay, who was resting in a
deck-chair a few feet from the head of the poop-ladder.  "England, the
principal carrier of the world, has to rely upon foreigners to man her
merchant ships.  And the reason is not far to seek," he added.

The _San Martin_ was in the Doldrums.  Not a ripple disturbed the
surface of the ocean, save the white wake of the steamer as she pounded
along at a steady nine knots.  Overhead the sun shone fiercely in a
cloudless sky.

"How deep is it here?" asked Terence, leaning over the rail.

"Do you know, Ellerton?" asked Mr. McKay.

"No, sir; I had no opportunity of examining a chart."

"It's approximately three thousand fathoms.  Between the Galapagos and
the Marquesas is a vast sunken plateau.  Sunlight never penetrates
these great depths; probably all is dark beyond two hundred fathoms."

"And are there fish or marine animals in the bed of the ocean?"

"No one knows.  Possibly there are some marine animals capable of
withstanding the enormous pressure, for it may be taken for granted
that at three thousand fathoms the pressure per square inch is about
three tons."

"Is it always calm in the Doldrums?" continued Terence, for he had
never before "crossed the line."

"Often for weeks at a stretch.  What's your experience of these,
Ellerton?"

"Three weeks with the canvas hanging straight down from the yards.  If
you threw anything overboard it would be alongside for days.  I can
assure you, Terence, that I am jolly glad we're on board a steamer."

"How did you get out of it?" continued the young Canadian, eager for
further information.

"By one of the frequent and sudden hurricanes that spring up in the
belt of the calms; but even that was looked upon as a slice of luck."

Thus the days passed.  Conversation was the chief means of passing the
time, although the lads derived considerable amusement from their
efforts to teach Quexo English.

Reading was out of the question, for the ship's library consisted of
only a few Spanish books of little interest to Mr. McKay and Andy,
while to Terence and Ellerton they were unfathomable.

On the evening of the fourth day there was an ominous change in the
weather.

The sun, setting between high-banked, ill-defined clouds, gave out
bright copper-coloured rays that betokened much wind at no distant
date; while from the south-east a long, heavy swell, although far from
land, gave further indications of change.

"How is the glass, Captain?" asked Mr. McKay, as Captain Perez emerged
from the companion and began to make his way for'ard to the bridge.

The captain shrugged his shoulders.

"Low, senor.  I like it not."

"What an admission," exclaimed Mr. McKay, as the officer mounted the
ladder.  "Fancy a British skipper replying like that!  Here, Andy, you
are not shaky on the pins like I am; just present my compliments to
Captain Perez and ask him to tell you how the barometer stands.  I'm
rather curious on that point."

"You appear to have a good knowledge of seamanship, sir," remarked
Ellerton, as young McKay made his way to the bridge.

"Well, I must confess I have," admitted Mr. McKay.  "Years ago I spent
some months on a pearl-fisher in Torres Strait; but that's a long
story.  Some day, perhaps, I'll tell you more about it."

"Seven hundred and forty millimetres--a fall of twenty-two millimetres
in eight hours," announced Andy, reading the figures from a slip of
paper, on which he had noted the captain's reply.

"By Jove!" exclaimed Mr. McKay.  "That's equivalent to a trifle over
29.1 inches.  We're in for something, especially with that deck cargo,"
as he pointed to the towering baulks of mahogany which were stowed
amidships.

"Are they doing anything for'ard?" he continued.

"The men are placing additional lashings over the hatchways."

"Pity they didn't man the derrick and heave some of that stuff
overboard," replied Mr. McKay, eyeing the timber with concern.
"However, it will be dark in another quarter of an hour, so we had
better turn in and get some sleep while we are able."

It was shortly after midnight when Ellerton awoke, conscious that
something was amiss.  He had slept through severe gales in the old
_Tophet_ when she was scudding under close-reefed canvas before the
wind or lying hove-to in a hurricane in Magellan Straits; but there was
something in the peculiar motion of the _San Martin_ that roused his
seaman's instincts.

It was blowing.  He could hear the nerve-racking clank of the engines
as the propeller raced in the air, and the corresponding jar as the
ship's stern was engulfed in the following seas.  That was a mere
nothing; it was the excessive heel and slow recovery of the vessel
which told him that things were not as they should be.

Hastily dressing, he was about to leave the cabin when a hollow groan
caught his ear.  It was pitch dark, for the electric lights had failed,
and the after part of the ship was in a state of absolute blackness.

"What's up, Terence?"

Terence was like the sufferer on the Channel mail boat.  He was past
the stage when he was afraid he might die, and was entering into the
stage when he was afraid he might not.  Ellerton had suffered the
agonies of sea-sickness before, so, knowing that the unhappy victim
would prefer to suffer in solitude, he went outside.

In the alley-way he collided with the second mate, who, clad in
dripping oilskins, was returning from his watch on deck.

Ere the two could disengage, a heavy list sent them both rolling
against one of the starboard cabins, and, at the same time, Andy, who,
unable to sleep, was on the point of making his way over to Ellerton's
berth, stepped upon the writhing forms and promptly joined them on the
floor of the alley-way.

A number of choice expressions in English and Spanish, drowned by the
thunder of the "combers" on deck, arose from the struggling trio, till
at length Ellerton disentangled himself and succeeded in pulling his
chum from under the form of the second mate.

"Isn't it awful, this gale?" gasped Andy, whose right eye was rapidly
closing from the effects of an accidental knock from the Peruvian's
sea-boot.

"Yes, it's a bit thick," replied Ellerton, whose knuckles were bleeding
through coming into contact with the brass tread of the cabin door.
"But let's follow this chap up and get him to let us have a candle;
then we can see what we are doing."

As he spoke, a vivid flash of lightning revealed the Peruvian, still in
his wet oilskins, stretched at full length on his bunk, his head buried
in the blankets.  He was in a state of absolute funk!

A swinging candlestick was affixed to the bulkhead, and Ellerton was
soon able to procure a light.  Andy glanced at the barometer.  The
mercury stood at 715 millimetres (28.15 in.)--a fall of nearly an inch
since six o'clock on the previous evening.

"Can't we go on deck?" asked Andy, as the _San Martin_ slowly recovered
from a dangerous list.  "It's rotten being cooped up here."

"You would stand a jolly good chance of being swept overboard," replied
Ellerton.  "Everything is battened down, and we can only get out by the
sliding hatch communicating with the----"

His words were interrupted by a succession of heavy thuds, plainly
audible above the roar of the wind and waves, while the shouts of the
frantic seamen showed that something had broken adrift.

Taking advantage of the lift of the vessel as she threw her stern clear
of a mountainous sea, Ellerton opened the steel sliding doorway
sufficiently wide for the two chums to gain the poop.  Staggering along
the slippery, heaving deck, they reached the lee side of the
deck-house, where, gripping the stout iron stanchion-rail, they awaited
the next flash of lightning.

They had not long to wait.  A brilliant, prolonged succession of
flashes dazzled their eyes, the electric fluid playing on the wet
planks and foam-swept waist of the plunging vessel.

The reason for the commotion was now apparent.  One of the mainmast
derricks had broken adrift, and, charging from side to side like a
gigantic flail, had smashed the rail, crushed two steel
ventilator-cowls, and utterly demolished two boats in the davits.

The crew, trying to secure the plunging mass of metal, were working
with mad desperation, frequently up to their waists in water.

Two of the unfortunate men, crushed by the sweep of the derrick, had
been hurled over the side, while another, his leg bent under him, lay
helpless in the lee-scuppers, with only a few inches of broken bulwarks
to prevent him from sharing the fate of his comrades.

"Stand by, Andy!" shouted Ellerton.  "Take a couple of turns round this
bollard," and throwing the end of a coil of signal-halliards to his
friend, he made the other end fast round his waist and jumped down the
poop-ladder.

He was only just in time.  Another dazzling flash enabled him to see
the helpless form of the crippled seaman, and as he wound his arms
round the man's waist in an iron grip, a seething cataract of foam
swept the deck.

[Illustration: ELLERTON WAS ONLY JUST IN TIME.  ANOTHER DAZZLING FLASH
ENABLED HIM TO SEE THE HELPLESS FORM OF THE CRIPPLED SEAMAN]

The ship, stunned by the force of the gigantic billow, listed till her
deck took an angle of 45 degrees, or more.  To the young apprentice,
held only by a single turn of the thin signal-halliard, it seemed as if
the ship were already taking her downward plunge, for all round him
surged the torrent of solid water, his position rendered doubly
horrible by the intense blackness of the night.

Still he held on like grim death to the disabled seaman, the thin rope
cutting into his breastbone like a steel wire.  His feet were unable to
find a hold; the last fragment of the bulwarks had vanished, and only
the rope held him and his burden from a prolonged death in the surging
ocean.

Quivering like an aspen leaf, the stricken vessel slowly resumed an
even keel, and then began the correspondingly sickening list to
windward.

Another flash revealed the charging derrick whirling over his head;
then, as he felt the rope slacken and himself slipping across the deck,
his hand managed to grasp the foot of the poop-ladder.

Almost breathless by his exertions, and half suffocated through being
so long under water, Ellerton retained sufficient presence of mind to
clamber up the ladder, Andy assisting his burden by steadily and
strongly hauling on the rope; then, as the _San Martin_ once more began
her sickening roll to leeward, he sank exhausted to the deck, safe
under the lee of the deck-house, with the Peruvian still in his grip.

That last tremendous breaker had been the means of saving the ship,
though at the time it had threatened to end her career.  The dangerous
deck-load of mahogany baulks had been wrenched from its securing
lashings, and had been swept overboard; while the disabled derrick,
coming into contact with the donkey-engine, had snapped off short.

At the same time the waves had swept four more of the crew to their
last account, and the remainder, exhausted and disheartened by their
misfortunes, had gained the shelter of the fo'c'sle.

Securing themselves by the rope, Andy and Ellerton--the latter having
passed a bight round the now conscious and groaning seaman--hung on
with desperation.

From their comparatively sheltered position they could gain occasional
glimpses of the bridge, where Captain Perez, the first mate, and a
couple of seamen stood braving the elements, their sou'-westers just
visible above the top of the canvas storm-dodgers.

At one moment, silhouetted against the glare of the lightning, their
heads could be seen against a background of wind-torn clouds; at
another the vessel would be so deep in the trough of the waves that the
crests ahead appeared to rise high above the rigid figures on their
lofty, swaying perch.

"Will it hold?" shouted Andy above the hiss of the foam and the howling
of the wind, as a few tons of water struck the weather side of the
deck-house.

"I think so," replied Ellerton.  "It would have gone before this if
not."

"Then let's put the man inside.  We can then go below and get the
steward or some of the crew to look after him."

Accordingly they dragged the groaning seaman into the deck-house, and,
wedging him up with cushions to prevent him from playing the part of
Neptune's shuttlecock, they left him.

Seizing their opportunity, the two friends contrived to gain the
saloon, where they found Mr. McKay, who had succeeded in procuring and
lighting a pair of cabin-lamps.

"Thick, isn't it?" remarked Andy's father.  Then: "What have you
fellows been up to?" for both were wet to the skin, while Andy's eye
was black and green, and Ellerton's forehead was bleeding from a
superficial cut.

"Oh, nothing much," replied Ellerton modestly.  "We were caught in the
tail end of a comber.  The deck cargo's gone, though."

"That's good news," replied Mr. McKay.  "Though I fancy the worst is
yet to come.  I suppose Captain Perez is steering to the south'ard to
try and avoid the main path of the hurricane?"

"I haven't had the chance of looking at the compass," replied Ellerton.
"But I must go for'ard and get help for the poor fellow in the
deck-house."

"What fellow is that?" asked Mr. McKay of his son as the apprentice
disappeared along the darkened alley-way.

While Andy was relating with whole-hearted praise the story of his
companion's bravery, Ellerton was feeling his way along the narrow,
heaving passage that communicated with the fore part of the ship.

At length he came to the engine-room hatchway.  Down below he could see
the mass of complicated machinery throbbing in the yellow glimmer of
the oil lamps, while the hot atmosphere was filled with a horrible
odour of steam and burning oil.

Here, at any rate, the men were doing their duty right manfully, for he
could see the engineers, gripping the shiny rails as they leant over
the swaying, vibrating engines, calmly oiling the bearings of the
plunging rods and cranks.  The "chief," his eyes fixed upon the
indicators, was alertly awaiting the frequently recurring clank which
denoted that the propeller was racing.  For a few moments Ellerton
stood there fascinated, the spectacle of an engine-room in a vessel in
a storm was new to the lad, whose experience of the sea was confined to
a sailing barque.

Suddenly above the monotonous clank of the piston-rods came a hideous
grinding sound.  The cylinders began to give out vast columns of steam,
as the engines ran at terrifying speed.

Through the vapour Ellerton could discern the "chief," galvanised into
extraordinary alertness, make a rush for a valve, while his assistants,
shouting and gesticulating, dashed hither and thither amid the confined
spaces between the quivering machinery.

The main shaft had broken, and the _San Martin_ was helpless in the
teeth of the hurricane.




CHAPTER II

AGROUND

For a brief instant Ellerton hesitated; ought he to return to his
friends or make his way for'ard?  The _San Martin_, losing steerage
way, was rolling horribly in the trough of the sea; any instant she
might turn turtle.

There was a rush of terrified firemen from the grim inferno of the
stokeholds; the engineers, having taken necessary precautions against
an explosion of the boilers, hastened to follow their example,
scrambling in a struggling mass between the narrow opening of the
partially closed hatchway.

Clearly Ellerton had no means of gaining the deck in the rear of that
human press; so lurching and staggering along the alley-way he made his
way aft, where he met Mr. McKay, who, assisted by Andy, was about to go
on deck.  Terence, looking a picture of utter misery in the yellow
light of the saloon, and Quexo, his olive skin ashy grey with fear, had
already joined the others.

"Come on, Hoppy," shouted Andy cheerfully.  "Give me a hand with the
governor.  Terence, you had better stay here."

Carefully watching their chance, the two lads managed to help Mr. McKay
to the shelter of the poop deck-house, and they were about to return
for Donaghue and the mulatto when they encountered Captain Perez and
the first mate.  Both were in a state bordering on frenzy, the captain
rolling his eyes and calling for the protection of a thousand saints,
while the mate was mumbling mechanically the last compass course, "Sur
oeste, cuarto oeste" (S.W. by W.).

The cowardly officers had deserted their posts!

In an instant Fanshaw Ellerton saw his chance--and took it.

"Stop him, Andy!" he shouted, setting the example by throwing himself
upon the Peruvian skipper.

The man did not resist; he seemed incapable of doing anything.

"Don't bother about the other," hissed the apprentice.  "Make this chap
come with us to the bridge.  I'll be the skipper and he'll be the
figurehead."

The two chums dragged the captain across the heaving deck, up the
swaying monkey-ladder, and gained the lofty bridge.

Ellerton glanced to windward.  His seamanship, poor though it was,
began to assert itself.  The wind was going down slightly, but, veering
to the nor'ard, was causing a horrible jumble of cross-seas--not so
lofty as the mountainous waves a few hours ago, but infinitely more
trying.

The _San Martin_, swept on bow, quarter, and broadside, rolled and
pitched, the white cascades pouring from her storm-washed decks; yet
Ellerton realised that she possessed a considerable amount of buoyancy
by the way she shook herself clear of the tons of water that poured
across her.

The wheel was deserted.  The steersman, finding that his officers had
fled and that the vessel carried no way, had followed his superior's
example.

Cowering under the lee of the funnel casing were about twelve of the
crew, including the bo'sun and quartermaster.

"Tell the captain," yelled Ellerton to his chum, "to order those men to
set the storm staysail, if they value their hides."

Andy interpreted the order, which the captain, gaining a faint
suspicion of confidence, communicated to the bo'sun.

The bare chance of saving their lives urged the men into action.
Unharmed, they succeeded in gaining the fo'c'sle, and in less than ten
minutes the stiff canvas was straining on the forestay.

Gathering way, the _San Martin_, no longer rolling, pounded sluggishly
through the foam-flecked sea.

Ellerton would not risk setting any canvas aft; he was content to let
the vessel drive.

"Ask him whether we have plenty of sea room--whether there is any
danger of running ashore during the next hour or so?"

Andy put the question.

"No, senor; there is plenty of sea room."

That was enough.  The apprentice cared not what course he steered, so
long as he kept the waves well on the quarter.  When the hurricane was
over they could carry on till they fell in with some passing vessel and
got a tow into port.

"That's right.  Tell him to take his watch below," continued the
apprentice.  "And you might get hold of some oilskins, Andy."

Obediently the skipper left the bridge, and, steeling himself for a
long trick at the helm, Ellerton grasped the spokes of the wheel with
firm hands.

At length the day broke, and with it a regular deluge of rain, pouring
from an unbroken mass of scudding, deep blue clouds.  The rain beat
down the vicious crests, but the sea still ran "mountains high."

About noon Mr. McKay expressed his intention of joining Ellerton on the
bridge, and assisted by his son he left the shelter of the poop.

From the foot of the poop-ladder to that of the bridge a life-line had
been rigged to give the protection that the shattered bulwarks no
longer afforded.

When midway between the two ladders, a roll of the vessel caused Mr.
McKay to lurch heavily towards the rope.  His wounded limb proved
unequal to the strain, and falling heavily upon the main rope his
weight broke the lashings that held it to the ring-bolt.  Before Andy
could save him, Mr. McKay had crashed against the main hatchway.

"Hurt?" asked Andy anxiously.

"I'm afraid so," replied his father, manfully suppressing a groan.  "My
leg is broken."

By dint of considerable exertion the sufferer was taken back to the
saloon, and the ship's surgeon, who had been routed out of his cabin,
pronounced the injury to be a double fracture.

Ellerton, his whole attention fixed upon keeping the vessel on her
course, had neither observed nor heard the noise of the accident, and
great was his concern when Andy mounted the bridge and informed him of
the catastrophe.

"I think I can leave the command," he remarked.  "No doubt that
yellow-skinned johnny has recovered his nerve by now."

Five minutes later Captain Antonio Perez gained the bridge.  He had
lost his suave, self-confident manner, and his general appearance
showed a change for the better in his moral and physical condition.
Yet, without a word of thanks to the English lad who had saved the
situation, he called up two of the seamen, and placed them at the wheel.

"He might have been a bit civil over the business," remarked Andy.

"Poor brute!  I dare say he feels his position pretty acutely.  I only
hope he won't break down in a hurry," replied Ellerton.

For the next two days the _San Martin_ fled before the storm, the
trysail keeping her steady and checking any tendency to broach-to.  The
wind had increased to almost its former violence on the evening of the
first day, but the vessel was then close on the outer edge of the
storm-path.

Mr. McKay, who was suffering considerably, bore his injuries gamely,
while Terence, who had recovered from his bout of sea-sickness, began
to take a new interest in life.  Quexo, however, still lay on the floor
of the stateroom, refusing to eat or drink, and groaning dismally at
intervals.

"I reckon he's sorry he followed the Americanos across the wide river
that tastes of salt," said Terence, quoting the Nicaraguan way of
speaking of the sea.  "Even I can feel sorry for him."

"That's a good sign," remarked Andy.  "Yesterday you hadn't the pluck
to feel sorry for yourself."

On the morning of the fourth day of the storm the wind piped down
considerably, and the Peruvian captain ordered the fore and aft canvas
to be set.  The engine-room staff also began to take steps to attempt
the temporary repairing of the shafting, and had already removed a
considerable portion of the plating of the tunnel.

As yet the sky was completely overcast.  At noon the officers, sextant
in hand, waited in vain for an opportunity of "shooting the sun."
Where the ship was, no one on board knew, though it was agreed that she
was driven several miles to the south'ard of her proper course.

The weather began to improve as night drew on.  The setting sun was
just visible in a patch of purple sky, showing that fine weather might
be expected from that quarter.  The glass, too, was rising; not
rapidly, but gradually and surely.

"Now for a good night's rest," exclaimed Andy, for throughout the gale
the lads had turned in "all standing."

But Andy was doomed to be disappointed, for at four bells in the middle
watch (2 a.m.) a sudden crash roused the sleepers from their berths.
The _San Martin_ was hard and fast aground.




CHAPTER III

ABANDONED

Hastily assuring the helpless Mr. McKay that they would soon return and
tell him how things really stood, the three lads rushed on deck.

It needed no seaman's instinct to tell that the _San Martin_ was
doomed.  Scudding before the lessening gale, she had been lifted on the
crest of a huge roller and dropped fairly on the rocks.  Her forward
part, trembling under the tremendous blows of the waves, was hard and
fast aground, while her after part, lifting to the heave of the ocean,
assisted, like a gigantic lever, in the destruction of her bows.

Above the roar of the waves, the howling of the wind, and the
shattering of iron plates, arose the frantic shouts of the crew.

Already demoralised by their trying experiences in the gale, the last
vestiges of discipline had vanished.  In the darkness, for now no
favouring lightning flash came to throw a light upon the scene, the
Peruvian crew rushed madly for the boats, fighting, cursing,
entreating, and imploring the saints.

For'ard a succession of rapid cracks, as the trysail, having burst its
sheets, was flogging itself to ribbons, added to the din, till the
foremast, buckling close to the deck, crashed over the side.

"Come on," shouted Andy, and even then his voice sounded faint in the
midst of the terrifying uproar, "let's get the pater on deck."

Ellerton shook his head.

"Better stop where he is.  What chance do you think these fellows will
have?" and he pointed to the struggling mass of frenzied seamen as they
clambered into the boats.

Already the cutter, still in the davits, was crowded, the men striving
to swing her clear with oars and stretchers, while others were
scrambling up the boat ladders.

Round swung the foremost davit.  The men who had already climbed into
her began to lower away the boat-falls.  A sudden lurch sent the
cutter, already at a dangerous angle, crashing into the ship's side.
The lower block of the foremost fall became disentangled, and, amidst a
chorus of shrieks, the boat swung stern in the air, shooting its human
freight into the surging waters.

The next instant a huge wave dashed the swaying cutter into matchwood,
the wind drowning the death shouts of a score of hapless victims.

Heedless of the fate of their comrades, the remainder of the crew made
a headlong rush for one of the quarter boats.  Being more to lee'ard,
for the _San Martin_ had struck with the wind on her starboard quarter,
this boat seemed to stand little chance.

Ellerton could hear the captain's voice, urging the men to swing the
boat clear.  The apprentice sprang towards the falls.

"You are not going to throw away your life, are you?" shouted Andy,
grasping him by the shoulder.

"No; but I'm going to give those fellows a chance.  Stand by that rope,
take a turn round that cleat, and lower when I give the word."

The last of the Peruvian seamen had scrambled into the boat.  Not one
of these cared who was left; all that they knew was that a few remained
to man the falls, but in the darkness they were unaware that it was the
British lads who stayed to help them.

"Lower!" yelled Ellerton.

Swiftly the ropes ran through the blocks.  The crest of a wave received
the frail boat, and, more by luck than by good management, the seamen
contrived to disengage the falls.  Then the oars splashed, and the next
instant the boat was lost to sight in the darkness.

For a brief instant the chums stood in silence, grasping one of the now
burdenless davits.  They were alone--a crippled man, three lads, and a
native boy--upon an abandoned vessel that threatened every moment to
part amidships.

Where they were they had no possible knowledge.  The ship was aground,
but whether on an isolated rock, or, what was more than likely, upon
the edge of an encircling reef, they knew not.  They must wait till
daylight--if they were fated to see the dawn of another day--but they
were determined that the anxious period of waiting should not be passed
in idleness.

Returning to the cabin where Mr. McKay was lying in suspense, awaiting
news of their hazardous position, the lads briefly explained what had
happened during their absence on deck.

"We must hope for the best," observed the invalid.  "And, after that,
we stand a better chance than those in the boat.  Even if those poor
fellows escape being dashed to death upon a rock-bound shore, or being
engulfed in the waves, they'll have a terrible time.  No water or
provisions, no compass--a thousand tortures before they reach land or
are picked up by a passing craft."

"I think the seas are getting less heavy," said Andy.  "Is it because
the tide is falling?"

"The tide may have something to do with it," replied Mr. McKay; "though
the rise and fall is barely four feet."

"Our stern seems to be settling," said Ellerton.  "The ship doesn't
appear quite so lively."

"That may be because the water is pouring into the after-hold,"
remarked Andy.

"In that case the vessel is settling on the bottom; otherwise she would
sink.  That's another point in our favour, and it often happens that
there is deep water close to the reef," said the apprentice.  "But
let's to work.  Terence, you know where the steward's pantry is.  Take
a lamp and fetch up as much stuff as you can carry.  Andy, will you
please take Quexo with you and bring up a couple of barricoes of water?"

While they were thus engaged, Ellerton collected five lifebelts, one of
which he proceeded to fasten round Mr. McKay's body.

"We may want them, sir; but, on the other hand, we may not.  In any
case, if there is an island under our lee we had better wear these,
especially if we have to land through the surf."

"I fancy I shall have some difficulty in getting through the surf,"
replied Mr. McKay with a grim smile.

"Never fear, sir; we'll pull you through," was the determined assurance.

Presently Andy and the mulatto returned, having found and secured a
supply of the precious fluid.

"The fore-hold and the engine-room are flooded," reported the former,
"and I think there's a hole on the starboard quarter.  But I believe
there's some of the crew up for'ard--I heard them groaning."

"Let's go and see," replied Ellerton, buckling on a lifebelt and
picking up a lantern.

"Be careful, lads," cautioned Mr. McKay.

"Trust us," answered Andy, likewise putting on a belt.  "We need not
wait for Terence."

"Why, it's not half so rough," he continued as they gained the deck,
which had settled to a list of less than ten degrees, and no longer
lifted as the rollers swept past.  "See, very few of the waves break
over the ship."

"It's a bad job those cowardly beggars pushed off," replied Ellerton.
"They would have done better to have waited.  But listen!"

Above the moaning of the wind came the unmistakable sound of a groan.

"It's down there," exclaimed Andy, pointing to a battened-down hatchway.

"There's no harm in opening it now," replied his companion, casting off
the lashings and unbolting the heavy iron slide.  "Now, then, down you
go."

Andy, holding the lantern well behind his head, slowly descended, but
at two steps from the bottom of the ladder his feet encountered water.
At the same time a deafening bellow echoed in the confined space.

"Great snakes!" he exclaimed, "it's an ox!"

"Poor brute, it's nearly drowned, and half starved into the bargain.
And here is a pen full of sheep.  I wonder where they keep the fodder?"

"Here's some pressed hay," announced Andy after a short examination.
"And I don't think the salt water has touched it."

"Throw some down in that corner," continued his companion, pointing to
a part of the flat that the sea, by reason of the ship's list, had not
reached.  "We'll let the brutes loose; they can't do much damage."

"Now set to, lads," exclaimed Mr. McKay, when they returned to the
saloon, and found Terence with a regular store of provisions--the loot
of the steward's pantry.  "Make a good meal, for our future movements
are uncertain."

"It will be light in another hour," remarked Andy.

"And the sea's going down," chimed in the apprentice.

"And our spirits are rising," added Terence.

"You speak for yourself, Terry, my boy," replied Andy, laughing.  "Your
spirits were low enough a few days ago."

All hands set to with a will, for even Quexo had recovered his former
appetite.

"This storm has lasted longer than usual," remarked Mr. McKay.  "It was
of more than ordinary severity.  Still, I've known similar instances,
and within three hours of the height of the hurricane the wind has died
away to a flat calm."

"Then we shall be able to take to the boat almost immediately after
daylight."

"Is there one left?"

"Two.  I think one is stove in, but the other seems sound."

"A long voyage in an open boat on the ocean is no light matter,"
replied Mr. McKay.  "If we were in the latitude of the Trades the task
would be easier; but here we are, I imagine, in a zone of calms
alternating with violent hurricanes.  The best thing we can do is to
land on the island--if we are near one, as I firmly believe is the
case--and bring ashore as many of the ship's stores as we can.  Then,
if not sighted by any passing craft, we can set to work and deck in one
of the boats, provision her, and shape a course for the nearest trading
station.  By the time the boat is ready I trust I shall be firmer on my
feet."

"Do you hear that, Quexo?" asked Andy.  "You may be ashore in a few
hours."

Quexo grinned approvingly.  He had had enough of the sea.

"Don't build up his hopes too high," continued Mr. McKay.  "Even if the
weather continues fine, it may be days before we can effect a landing."

"Why?"

"Because after these hurricanes, although the open sea is comparatively
calm, a heavy ground swell sets in on shore.  A boat would certainly be
capsized, unless there happens to be a shelter formed by a barrier reef
of coral.  But now, up on deck.  It will be daylight in less than ten
minutes."

Eagerly the lads ran up the companion, and what a sight met their gaze
as the tropical day quickly mastered the long hours of darkness!

The _San Martin_ lay on the outer edge of a long, level reef of coral,
against which the surf still hammered, throwing up clouds of white
spray.

Less than fifty yards from the port quarter was a gap in the barrier,
giving entrance to the lagoon.  The doomed ship had missed the opening
by half her own length.

She lay with her bows pointed diagonally towards the reef.  Her funnel
and foremast had gone by the board, while she showed unmistakable signs
of breaking in two, for her bow and stern had "sagged" till amidships
her port side was flush with the water, while, correspondingly, her
starboard side, owing to the ship's list, was but five feet higher.

But it was neither the ship nor the reef that attracted the castaways'
attention.  Barely a quarter of a mile away was an island, rugged and
precipitous, the highest point towering a thousand feet above the level
of the ocean.

In several places the ground sloped towards the sea, the valley being
thickly covered with luxuriant foliage, while for a distance of nearly
a mile was a strand of dazzling whiteness, upon which the sheltered
waters of the lagoon lapped as gently as the ripples of a mill pond in
a summer's breeze.  Elsewhere, so far as could be seen, the rocks rose
sheer from the sea.

"Any sign of the boat?" asked Andy.

"No; but I'll get a glass," replied Ellerton, and swarming up the
stanchion of the bridge--for the ladder had been swept away--he gained
the chart-house.

From his elevated position he swept the shore with the telescope, but
no trace of the boat was to be seen.  Neither, so far as he could
judge, was the island inhabited.

On rejoining his comrades, the young apprentice next directed his
attention to the two remaining boats.  One, a gig, was, as he had
surmised, stove in, three of the planks being shattered.  For the time
being she was useless, though, he reflected, she might be patched up at
some future date.

The other, a 23-ft. cutter, was still secured to the boat-booms, and
was practically uninjured.  Her size and weight would, he knew, be a
severe drawback when the time came to hoist her outboard.

"I vote we bring your pater up on deck, Andy," said he.  "We must have
him out of the saloon sooner or later.  The sooner the better, I think,
because he can, if we place him on a pile of cushions close to the
break of the poop, direct operations."

It was a long and tedious task.  Mr. McKay was no featherweight, and
his injured limb had to be carefully handled.  Moreover, the companion
ladder was steep and narrow.

At length Ellerton solved the difficulty by procuring one of the men's
mess tables, nailing a strut to one end, against which the victim
steadied himself by his sound leg while he was stretched at full length
on the board.  On this improvised sleigh four pairs of strong arms
dragged the patient up the steep stairway and on to the poop deck.

"What do you think of that, sir?" asked Ellerton, pointing to the
island of refuge.  "Isn't it superb?"

"It is," assented Mr. McKay.  "I hope we'll find it so, for we will
have to throw ourselves upon its hospitality for a few weeks."

"Do you know its name, sir?" continued the apprentice.

"No; has it one?" was the astonished reply.

"The Nameless Island," announced Ellerton.  "Now, lads, three cheers
for the Nameless Island!"




CHAPTER IV

THE LANDING

This burst of high spirits showed how light-hearted the castaways were
in the face of difficulties, for what lay before them and how they were
to reach the island required all their powers of thought and action.

"How do you propose to get the cutter over the side?" asked Mr. McKay.

"By means of one of the derricks," replied Ellerton promptly.

"Quite so; but where is the power required to turn the winches to come
from?  We've no steam at our command, you know, and these winches are
not adapted to manual power."

The apprentice's face clouded; he thought for a few minutes, then--

"We can top one of the derricks and rig up a tackle, sir."

"Good!" replied Mr. McKay.  "But what is the weight of the boat?"

"Ours on the _Tophet_ weighed twelve hundredweight; this one is about
the same size."

"Then rig a gun tackle, and the four of you will manage the job, I
think."

Accordingly two large double blocks were obtained and the rope rove
ready for use.  One of the blocks was secured to the cud of the
derrick, which was then hoisted to an angle of about forty-five
degrees.  This took time, but at length everything was ready for the
crucial test.

"Now, all together!"

The three lads and the mulatto tailed on to the rope.  The blocks
squeaked as the strain began to tell; the cutter began to lift,
then--crash!

Flat on their backs fell the four lads; high in the air jerked the
disengaged lower block.  The slings to which it had been fastened had
snapped.

Slowly the victims regained their feet, Andy rubbing a tender portion
of his anatomy, Terence gasping for breath, for Andy's head had
well-nigh winded him.  Ellerton was clapping his hands to a rapidly
rising bump on the back of his head, while Quexo, whose skull was as
hard as iron, was hopping all over the deck, rubbing his shins, that
had saved the apprentice's head at the mulatto's expense.

"Try again, boys!" shouted Andy.  "Everything on board this blessed
craft seems rotten!"

A new span was placed in position, and the tackle again manned, and
this time their efforts were crowned with success.  The cutter rose
slowly in the air, till it hung fire five feet above the shattered
bulwarks.

"Belay, there!  Man the guy-rope!"

The derrick swung outboard, till the cutter was poised above the water
and well clear of the sloping sides of the hull.

"Lower away handsomely."

Slowly the boat dipped, till at length she rode, sheltered under the
lee of her stranded parent, upon the bosom of the ocean.

"Capital!" exclaimed Mr. McKay, as his son swarmed down the rope,
disengaged the tackle, and allowed the cutter a generous length of
painter.

Then the work of loading her was begun.  It was decided that for the
first trip nothing more than was absolutely necessary for immediate use
was to be taken, until it was settled where their camp was to be fixed,
and whether the island had any inhabitants.

"A small barrico of water will be sufficient, though I am certain there
are springs amongst those trees," said Ellerton.  His sense of
responsibility was hourly increasing.  "A barrel of flour, some tinned
goods, canvas and rope for a tent."

"Not forgetting hatchets, knives, and firearms," added Mr. McKay.

"Firearms?"

"Aye; one never knows how the natives--if there be natives on the
island--will greet us.  Most of the Pacific Islanders are fairly
peaceable, thanks to missionary enterprise and the fear of a visit from
a warship; yet cannibalism still exists.  I have known instances of the
crews of small 'pearlers' being treacherously surprised, killed, and
eaten.  So get hold of the arms; you'll probably find the key of the
captain's cabin in the chart-house; if not, burst open the door."

Ellerton departed upon his errand, and presently returned with the news
that there was no trace of the key.  "Here is a sextant and a bundle of
charts, however," he added.  "They are bound to be useful, although I
cannot understand the meaning of the depths on the chart."

"They are in 'brazas,' equal to about five and a half English feet.
But, as you say, the charts will be of extreme importance to us."

"Come on, Terence, let's burgle the captain's cabin," exclaimed
Ellerton, laying hold of a hatchet.

Soon the sound of blows was heard, followed by the splintering of wood,
and the two lads returned literally armed to the teeth.

Each had a couple of rifles slung across his back; Terence carried half
a dozen revolvers in his arms and a sheath-knife between his teeth,
while Ellerton staggered beneath the weight of several belts of ball
cartridges and a box of revolver ammunition.

"There's more to come; the place is like a regular armoury," explained
Terence.

"That's somewhat unusual," replied Mr. McKay.  "Most captains keep
firearms of a kind in their cabins.  I strongly suspect that those arms
were to be sold to some South American insurgents.  They are much too
good for bartering with the South Sea Islanders.  Nevertheless, I'm
right glad we have been able to arm ourselves thoroughly, as I expected
we should have to be content with a couple of pistols between the lot
of us."

The work of loading the boat proceeded briskly, till the strictly
limited quantity of gear was carefully stowed under the thwarts.  Then
came the question, how were they going to transport the crippled Mr.
McKay to the shore?

"Hoist me over by the derrick, of course," replied he.  "A couple of
rope spans round the plank and their bights slipped over the hook of
the lower block, and the trick's done."

Ellerton and Terence thereupon slipped down a rope into the boat and
carefully guided the swaying mess table and its helpless burden on to a
couple of the after thwarts.  This done, they were joined by Andy and
Quexo, and, shipping the heavy ash oars, they pulled clear of the ship.

The first fifty yards meant hard and careful rowing, for directly they
were beyond the shelter of the stranded vessel they felt the full force
of the rollers as they dashed against the coral reef, barely a boat's
length to lee'ard.

Once, indeed, it seemed as if the cutter were bound to be swept upon
the rocks; but by dint of the utmost exertions of her crew, the boat
surely and slowly drew away from the influence of the rollers.

"My word, that was a narrow squeak!" exclaimed Andy, wiping his face,
from which the perspiration ran freely.  "I thought we were going to be
capsized that time."

"It doesn't say much for the chances of those poor fellows last night,"
replied Ellerton.  "They must have dropped smack on top of the reef."

"We'll soon find out," said Mr. McKay.  "You see, they were immediately
to lee'ard of the ship, and it was high water at the time.  If they
survived, we'll find them ashore right enough."

"But I saw no sign of the boat when I looked through the glass."

"That may be because there is a creek or cove that is invisible from
the ship.  Being directly to wind'ard, we are bound to find either the
men or the remains of the boat."

"The ship is sitting up well," remarked Andy, for, the tide having
dropped nearly six feet--it had been abnormally high by reason of the
terrific wind--they could see the top of one of her propeller blades.
"Do you think she'll stay there?"

"It certainly doesn't seem as if she is likely to slip off into deep
water, but we cannot say for certain.  The first fine day there's
little or no swell we'll sound all round her.  Now, give way, lads."

The rowers resumed their oars, and the boat, passing through the narrow
gap in the reef, gained the shelter of the lagoon.

"Fine, isn't it?" exclaimed Terence enthusiastically, as he rested on
his oar and gazed into the clear depths of the tranquil water.  "Won't
we be able to have some bathes?"

"You'll have to be careful if you do," remarked Mr. McKay.  "There are
bound to be sharks about."

He did not think it advisable to call the lads' attention to a
commotion in the water a few hundred yards in front of the boat.  From
his inclined position he could see ahead, while the rowers had their
backs turned in that direction.  His keen eyes had detected the
sinister dorsal fin of not one, but many sharks, all cutting towards
one spot.  There could be but little doubt of the fate of the Peruvian
seamen.

The noise of the approaching oars disturbed the huge monsters, and they
darted off to the shelter of the rock-strewn floor of the lagoon.

Unaware of the tragedy, the lads urged the boat almost over the fatal
spot, and five minutes later the cutter's forefoot grounded on the
sandy beach.

"Terence, I want you and Quexo to stay in the boat," said Ellerton,
after the survivors had, by a common impulse, knelt down and returned
thanks to Divine Providence for their escape.  "Keep her stern from
slewing round, so that we can push off in a hurry.  Andy and I are
going to explore."

And, buckling on a revolver and an ammunition belt, and grasping a
rifle in his hand, Ellerton took a flying leap over the bows and
alighted on the sand.

The lads found themselves on the shore of a small bay, its extremities
bounded by two towering cliffs, that rose sheer from the lagoon.  That
to the left was not less than five hundred feet in height, while the
other was but slightly lower.  Midway between these impassable
boundaries the land sloped abruptly to the beach, and was thickly
covered with cocoanut palms.

"Keep your weather eye lifting, Andy," cautioned Ellerton, who had
taken the precaution of charging both the magazine of his rifle and the
chambers of his revolver.

It was an unnecessary warning, for Andy was an infinitely better scout
than his companion; still, it showed that Ellerton was fast adopting
the manner of life required in a wild and unsettled country.

Skirting the edge of the wood, the lads kept a vigilant look-out for
any traces of human agency, but nothing was visible.

Presently they came to a small stream, which, trickling down the steep
hillside, was lost in the sand.

"There'll be no lack of fresh water," exclaimed Andy thankfully, for he
knew the value of that precious fluid.  "But, I say, isn't everything
quiet?"  For, save the babbling of the brook and the distant roar of
the breakers on the reef, there was an unaccustomed silence.  Not a
bird sang in the groves, not an animal rustled the thick undergrowth.

"I think we may take it for granted that the island is uninhabited--at
least, this part," said Andy, as they completed their walk along the
shores of the bay.  "Otherwise, there's almost sure to be a beaten
track to the shore."

"It doesn't promise much for the boat's crew," answered Ellerton.
Then, with an exclamation of surprise, he shouted: "Look!  What's that?"

Lying on the sand a few feet from the water's edge was a mournful relic
of the unfortunate boat, her back-board bearing the words _San Martin_.
A little farther they found an oar.

"There were two boats, remember," said Ellerton.  "And one we know was
capsized."

"I vote we explore the next bay," exclaimed Andy.  "There's no suitable
clearing here for a camp, and felling trees takes time; so let's get
back to the boat."

"Well?" asked Mr. McKay on their return.

"We must push off and land on the other side of the cliff," said his
son.  "There may be a better site for our tent.  It's too steep and
densely wooded here."

"Any signs of the crew?"

"Only part of their boat."

"I feared as much," replied Mr. McKay.

      *      *      *      *      *

"This looks more promising," exclaimed Andy enthusiastically, as the
boat slowly rounded the northernmost of the two cliffs.

Here the land sloped less abruptly towards the lagoon, while in places
there were terraces almost bare of trees.  In the background towered a
range of mountains whose rugged sides gave the appearance of being
unclimbable, while on either hand of the bay rose lofty cliffs.

The beach, too, was better adapted for landing purposes than where they
had first touched, consisting of sand interspersed by ledges of rocks
jutting seawards, thus forming convenient natural jetties.

"This will do admirably," said Ellerton, pointing to a narrow cove
betwixt the ledges.  "There's sand at its head, so there's no fear of
the boat being damaged."




CHAPTER V

THE CAMP

Slowly the cutter was backed in till its sternpost stuck on the smooth,
even bottom.

The castaways could not have chosen a better harbour.  On either hand
the rocks, smooth and flat-topped, allowed a boat to be moored
alongside without danger of being left high and dry at low water, while
the ledge shelved so gradually that it was possible to bring the boat's
gunwale level with the natural pier at any state of the tide.

"I think we had better make a tour of exploration as we did before,"
said Andy.  "Not that I think this part of the island is inhabited any
more than yonder bay."

"Say, Andy," exclaimed Terence, "isn't it about time I had a spell
ashore?"

"All right, Terence," replied Ellerton.  "You go with Andy and take
Quexo; I'll stay with Mr. McKay."

"Thanks, Hoppy," replied Terence, and without further ado he jumped
ashore.

"Here, take this rope and make her stern fast before you go," said
Ellerton.  "And you, Andy, stand by with the painter."

"Where shall I make fast to?" asked Terence.  "This rock is as smooth
as a table."

"See if there's a lump of rock on the other side."

Terence crossed the landing-place, holding the rope's-end in his hand.
Suddenly he shouted:

"Come here, you fellows!  Here's a boat!"

There was a rush to where Terence stood, while even Mr. McKay raised
himself on his elbow, eager to hear the news.

Lying bottom upwards on the sandy shore was the ill-fated boat in which
the last of the crew attempted to reach the shore.  Her bows were
considerably damaged, while amidships a portion of her keel and both
garboards had been stove in, leaving a jagged hole nearly two feet in
diameter.

Four or five oars lay on the shore within a few feet of the boat, but
there were no signs of the hapless crew; the sand above high-water mark
was innocent of footprints.

"They are drowned, sure enough," said Andy sadly.

Alas! though they did not know it, the fate of the crew was far more
terrible.  Holed on the outer reef, the boat, rapidly filling, had been
swept into the lagoon, where the waves, though high, were not so
terrific as outside the coral barrier.

Well it was that the watchers on the wreck heard not the awful shrieks
as the sharks fought for and seized their helpless prey.

Ellerton returned to the cutter to inform Mr. McKay of their discovery,
while the others set off to explore.

In less than an hour they were back, and reported that there were no
signs of human habitation, although the shore was strewn with the
remains of the first boat that left the wreck, including most of the
oars, gratings, also a quantity of timber, presumably from the
shattered decks of the _San Martin_.

"But we've found a fine place to pitch the tent," continued Andy.  "You
see the second terrace?  Well, at the extreme right is a steep ravine.
The other two sides are enclosed by a wall of rock, while on this side
there is a natural path, although you can't distinguish it from where
we are."

"That sounds all right," said his father.  "But how are we to get the
gear up there--including the useless lump of animated clay in the shape
of myself?"

"I hadn't thought of that," replied Andy.

"We must find a more convenient spot at first," continued Mr. McKay.
"Then, when we have landed all the gear from the ship that we can
possibly manage to move, we can devise some means of setting up a more
substantial dwelling on the terrace you mention.  Now, if you will
please carry me ashore, you can proceed to unload the boat."

In spite of the adaptable jetty, the work of getting Mr.
McKay--crippled as he was--on shore was no easy task.  The patient bore
the discomfort gamely, uttering a heartfelt sigh of relief as the lads
set the improvised stretcher down in the shade of a thin grove of
cocoanut palms.

"How far away is the stream--I think you mentioned there was a stream
in the bay?" asked Ellerton.

"Less than a hundred yards away.  It's very clean, but not so full as
the one we found," replied Andy.

"Then let's set up the tent.  This place will do for a day or two at
least."

The chosen site consisted of soft springy turf, sloping very gradually
towards the lagoon.  In the background was a wall of rock, about forty
feet in height, forming the limit of the next terrace, while on either
hand the trees served as an efficient screen from all winds save those
blowing from the sea.

By the aid of their axes the lads felled five young palms, and soon
stripped them of their heads.  Four of the trunks were then lashed in
pairs, and set up with guy-ropes at a distance of about fifteen feet
apart, and one end of the fifth pole was placed over the crutch formed
by one of the pairs.

This done, Ellerton swarmed up the other pair of poles and fastened a
small pulley to the extremity of one of them.  A rope was passed
through the block, one end being lashed to the lower part of the fifth
pole that rested on the ground.

"Haul away, lads!" he shouted.

And the pole, lifted into a horizontal position, was quickly placed
between, thus forming the ridge of the tent.

One of the fore and aft sails was then thrown over the ridge pole and
its end pegged down; while to make doubly sure, the lads piled stones
and sand upon the ends of the canvas.  Filling in the back and front of
the tent with portions of another sail took an hour's steady work, and
the dwelling was then pronounced ready for occupation.

The box of ammunition, the rifles, bread cask, and water-beakers were
neatly stowed against the afterpart of their dwelling, till, on Mr.
McKay's suggestion, a low barricade was erected close to the flap of
the tent.  Then pieces of canvas were cut and laid down to serve as
beds, the cripple having the use of the cushions that had been brought
ashore.

"I don't see why we should sleep on the hard ground," remarked Terence.
"Of course, we have been used to it, but, after sleeping in a
comfortable bunk, we are bound to feel the difference.  So let us cut a
number of small trees and fasten the strips of canvas to them like a
stretcher."

This was accordingly done, the beds being raised from the ground by
means of two stout planks lashed to short uprights driven firmly into
the earth.

"There we are, all in a row," exclaimed Terence, as they surveyed the
result of their labour with evident satisfaction.

"Now, Quexo," said Andy, "go down to the beach and gather as much
driftwood as you can carry.  And, Hoppy, you start opening that tin of
beef there, and I'll slice up the bread.  But----"

"What?" exclaimed Terence and Ellerton.

"We are a set of donkeys!  We haven't brought a pot or a kettle ashore
with us."

"Boil the water in the beef-tin," said Ellerton.

"Spoil the coffee," objected Andy.

"Either that or nothing.  But how about a light?  Has anyone any
matches?"

More disappointment.  Terence suggested using the object glass of the
telescope as a burning glass, but the sun was low in the heavens; Andy
was for sprinkling some powder on a heap of dry leaves and firing it by
means of a blank cartridge; while Ellerton vaguely remembered that fire
might be obtained by rubbing two pieces of dry wood together.

"Have you ever tried to make a blaze that way?" asked Mr. McKay.  "I
don't think you would succeed.  Savages can do the trick, I know, but
I've never seen a white man obtain fire by that means.  I would have
suggested flint and steel.  We have plenty of steel, only,
unfortunately, flints are as scarce as diamonds on this island, I
fancy.  However, now you have exhausted your brains over the problem,
allow me to assist you.  Andy, put your hand in the inside pocket of my
coat and you'll find my metal match-box.

"Now you are satisfied," he continued, as his son produced the required
article.  "The fact of the matter is, you were all in such a hurry to
get ashore that you never gave a thought to the things most urgently
required.  Lucky for you, my lad, you've a father to think for you.
Now will you please empty that case of biscuits?  I am afraid some
spray splashed over it, and in time the salt will make the biscuits
soft."

Andy did as he was requested, but a moment later he uttered an
exclamation of surprise, for on opening the lid he discovered a kettle,
saucepan, and coffee-pot, knives, forks, and spoons, while wedged in
between the metal articles were bottles containing salt, pepper,
vinegar, and several useful drugs in tabloid form.

"I say, pater, you are----"

"Merely one who has learnt by experience the value of forethought.
While you were busy on deck I sent Quexo to gather these things and
stow them in a box."

Suddenly the conversation was interrupted by a series of shrieks.  The
lads seized their rifles and rushed to meet the mulatto, whose face was
livid with fear.

"A caiman is after me, senor," he shouted in his native tongue.

"Nonsense," replied Andy; then turning to his companions he explained
that the mulatto had declared that an alligator had run after him.

"It's impossible," he added.  "However, we'll see what's frightened
him."

On emerging from the edge of the wood that had obstructed their view of
that part of the bay where Quexo had been to gather dry sticks, the
lads burst into a roar of laughter.  Sedately waddling over the sand
was a huge turtle.

"Follow me, Hoppy," exclaimed Andy.  "Get between him and the sea; we
can't afford to lose this chance."

Finding its retreat cut off, the turtle began to throw up showers of
sand with its flippers, but Andy rushed it, and, seizing one of the
creature's horny limbs, strove to capsize the reptile.

The task was beyond him; even with the aid of his two chums he could
not raise the shell-clad creature from the sand.

"Get hold of an oar and one of the empty tubs," he exclaimed
breathlessly.  "You go, Terence.  Hoppy and I will prevent the turtle
getting away."

Presently Terence returned with the desired article, and using the oar
as a lever the three lads succeeded in turning the turtle on its back,
when Andy, with a dexterous sweep of his knife, cut the animal's throat.

"Hurrah!  Turtle steak to-morrow, pater!" he shouted on their return to
the camp.

Quexo gathered up the firewood that he had dropped in his flight, and
as darkness set in, a roaring fire was kindled, and a gorgeous supper
eaten.

Then, ere the last dying embers had ceased to glow, Terence, who had
volunteered to keep the first two hours' watch, shouldered his rifle
and took up his position in the shelter of the neighbouring palm-trees.




CHAPTER VI

THE ANIMAL THAT WOULDN'T BE RESCUED

No unusual incident marked the castaways' first night on the island.
Guard was relieved with the utmost regularity, while the weary watches
were spent in gazing at the exterior of the tent and listening to the
regular breathing of its four inmates.

At length the day broke, and the camp became the scene of activity.

Breakfast over, there was a rush to the boat; Quexo, however, remaining
with the injured Mr. McKay.

The weather showed every indication of remaining fine, a light
south-easterly breeze--a part of the regular trade-wind--blowing off
shore, while not a cloud was visible in the dark blue sky.

"We must make two trips to-day," observed Andy, as they pushed off from
the little natural dock.  "Yesterday the clouds kept the sun's rays
from us, but to-day we will not be able to work during midday."

"Honestly, I don't feel like work," remarked Terence, stifling a yawn.

"I suppose there is some excuse for you, seeing you did two turns of
sentry-go last night," replied his friend.  "Still, this is an
exceptional time, and we must set to work with a will.  Can we get over
the reef, do you think, Hoppy?"

"We had better stick to the channel," replied Ellerton.  "You see, we
don't know the actual depth, and there is a slight swell on.  We'll
board on the port quarter, so as to get between the ship and the reef."

The lads plied their oars steadily yet without undue exertion, and in
less than half an hour from the time of leaving the shore they ran
alongside the stranded _San Martin_.

Ellerton's first care on boarding the wreck was to supply fresh water
and food to the animals.  To get them safely ashore was a difficult
problem, for the ox was an unwieldy brute to ship aboard the cutter,
while it was equally risky to let it swim ashore on account of the
presence of numerous sharks.  The sheep could be trussed up and laid
upon the bottom boards.

Andy and Terence at once made for the provision-room, and returned
laden with flour, salt beef, tinned goods, and some small chests of
pressed tea.  These articles they placed on deck close to the entry
port and proceeded to procure more.

Ellerton, having attended to the live stock, made a thorough
exploration of the after cabins and staggered on deck looking like a
second-hand wardrobe dealer, for he realised the necessity of having a
good supply of clothing.  Then a huge pile of bedding, including
waterproof sheets, blankets, and pillows, was added to the already
large collection of plunder.

"I think this lot will be sufficient for one trip," remarked Andy.

"We may as well take the rest of the navigating instruments," replied
Ellerton, "and, what is also necessary, the carpenter's chest."

"Capital," replied his chum.  "That will, of course, come in handy; but
won't we require it on board?"

"There are enough tools for work both ashore and on board," said
Ellerton.  "I've seen to that.  But I should like to get the animals
off."

"The ox?"

"If possible.  Otherwise we must kill it and bring the carcase ashore
piecemeal."

Andy thought for some moments.  He, too, realised the danger of the
animal being devoured by sharks.  Dead or alive, the ox would be far
more useful to the castaways.

"How are we going to get the brute on deck?" asked Terence.

This was a poser, for with the fall of the foremast the derricks for
working the fore-hold had also been carried away.

"We must rig up a pair of sheer-legs," observed Ellerton.

"Well?  How are we to pass a sling round the brute's body?"

"That's as easy as pie; the beast is quiet enough."

"Then you take the job on, Hoppy; I'd rather not.  So let's look sharp
with the sheer-legs; there's plenty of tackle to hoist the creature
with."

The work of making the early preparations proceeded without a hitch,
then Ellerton commenced his particular part of the operations.

By the aid of a lantern which he hung from the deck-beams, the
apprentice descended once more to the partially submerged hold.
Holding a stout canvas sling, with a rope ready to haul tight the
moment the lifting gear was in position, Ellerton climbed over the
partition of the stall.

The animal, now refreshed by its food and drink, had lost its docile
manner, and eyed the intruder with no friendly spirit.  Possibly it
thought the youth was one of the brutal Peruvian cattle-drivers.  If
so, there was some excuse for its action, for lowering its head the
brute tossed the apprentice right over the wooden partition, landing
him squarely in the midst of the startled sheep in the adjacent pen.

"Aren't you nearly ready?" asked a voice from above.

Ellerton sat up.  He was beginning to feel pain in more than one part
of his anatomy.  The task of tackling an apparently inoffensive ox was
not going to be quite so easy as he imagined.

"Come and bear a hand," he replied.  "The brute is getting vicious."

Andy thereupon descended into the semi-gloom of the hold.

"Be careful," continued the apprentice.  "He nearly bumped my head
against the deck-beams; as it was, I had a flight through space."

"Then I'm not going to pass a sling round him," said Andy.  "We'll
lasso him just behind the horns."

This was done, but then came the difficulty: how were they to release
the animal from the stall and drag it to the hatchway?

"Look here," explained Andy, "I'll take this end of the line on deck,
wind it on to the tackle, and heave taut.  Then we'll unship this
ladder and you can unfasten the front of the stall."

"Then what happens to me?" objected Ellerton.

"Oh, you can make a bolt to the fore end of the hold and stay there
till Terence and I haul the brute on deck.  Then we'll re-ship the
ladder and you can get out."

Ellerton had his doubts, but he followed his companion's counsel.
Directly there was a strain on the lasso, he threw open the door of the
stall and rushed for the shelter of the sheep-pen.

Bellowing lustily, and contesting every inch of the way, the animal was
slowly dragged towards the hatch, to the accompaniment of a lusty
"Heave-ho!" from the two youths on deck.

Terence watched the operation with considerable misgiving, expecting
every moment to see the rope part and to find himself confronted by the
infuriated brute.

Slowly the animal was forced across the floor of the hold, then its
ponderous carcase rose, kicking and plunging, in the air.

As the animal appeared above the coaming, the light of day
revealed--not a mild ox, but an unusually sturdy specimen of an
Andalusian bull!

"Belay there, and lower away the after guy!" shouted Andy, "or he'll
drop down the hatch again when we let go."

Terence hastened to obey; but, allowing the sheers to incline too far
forward, the infuriated animal's legs touched the deck.

Instantly the brute made a wild rush, the lassoo parted like pack
thread, and the next moment Terence and Andy were flying for their
lives, while Ellerton, a prisoner in the hold, heard the thunder of the
animal's hoofs and its triumphant bellowing as it revelled in its
new-found freedom.

Andy made a desperate rush aft, but finding the bull close to his
heels, gripped a rope hanging from the boat booms, and swung himself
into a position of comparative safety upon one of the narrow timbers,
his upward flight being assisted a little too well by the obliging
animal.

[Illustration: ANDY, FINDING THE BULL CLOSE TO HIS HEELS, GRIPPED A
ROPE AND SWUNG HIMSELF INTO A POSITION OF COMPARATIVE SAFETY]

Never did matador execute a more rapid leap over the barrier than did
Andy on this occasion.  Terence, finding that he was not pursued, took
a more leisurely step, and hoisted himself into the main shrouds, where
he would be quite safe from any further onslaught of the animal.

For a while the bull eyed the fugitives with undisguised
disappointment, then spying the heap of bedding and clothing on the
deck, it lowered its head and rushed headlong to the attack.

Both lads watched the proceedings, powerless to prevent the
catastrophe, and indulging in vain regrets that their firearms were not
available, as beds, blankets, and suits of useful clothing were tossed
overboard.

At length a heavy blanket became impaled upon the brute's horns, the
folds falling over its eyes.

In vain the bull strove to toss aside the fabric; then, rushing along
the deck, it collided with ventilators, hatchways, and other obstacles,
each obstruction increasing its anger.  Wheeling suddenly, the bull
darted through the entry port and vanished over the ship's side.

"Oh, the boat!  The boat will be smashed to firewood," shouted Andy,
sliding down from his perch.

Terence had joined him, and, heedless of Ellerton's voice shouting to
be released from his prison, the two lads rushed to the side of the
vessel.

The animal had fallen upon one of the thwarts of the boat, breaking it
completely in half, and was lying on the bottom-boards plunging wildly.
One kick in a vital place and the boat would be holed.

"There's enough damage done already," muttered Andy.  "It's the only
way," and running aft he returned in a moment with a loaded rifle.

"How are you going to manage it?" asked Terence.  "You'll do almost as
much damage to the boat with the bullet----"

"Shut up!" growled Andy, and, snapping the safety catch of the weapon,
he swung himself without further delay into the stern sheets of the
cutter.

The bull tried to rise, but in vain.  Its head reared itself slightly
above the gunwale; the rifle cracked.

"There's fresh beef at least, Terence.  Throw Hoppy the tail end of a
rope and get him out of that hole."

Then, as Ellerton appeared, blinking in the strong sunshine, Andy
continued:

"Throw those things into the boat, and look sharp.  We've wasted enough
time and precious cargo this morning--all for the sake of that brute."

During the time the boat was being rowed shoreward, Andy--usually so
genial and even-tempered--preserved an almost sullen silence; while
Ellerton, annoyed at having failed to bring the bull ashore alive, was
also ill at ease.  Nor did the latter guess the cause of his friend's
glumness till some days later, when he observed Andy repairing a rent
in one of his garments.  Even a graze from an infuriated bull is likely
to cause discomfort, he thought, though there is no reason why others
should suffer for it.




CHAPTER VII

THE EMBLEM OF EMPIRE

"You've been a long time," remarked Mr. McKay, as the three youths made
their appearance.

"Yes," admitted Terence, "I'm afraid we have; but we must blame Hoppy's
bull."

"Hoppy's bull?" asked Mr. McKay.

"Yes, the ox turned out to be a bull--and a tough customer he was,"
replied Terence, who then proceeded to give Mr. McKay a graphic
description of how they had tried to unload the bull from the wreck.

"And how do you feel to-day?" asked Ellerton.

"Considerably better," replied the injured man.

"You've been moved," declared Andy, pointing to some marks in the grass.

"I plead guilty," replied his father with a smile.  "Quexo dragged my
couch out in the sunshine.  I wanted to take an observation at midday.
Just hand me that chart.  I've pricked our position.  Here it is.
Reduced to English degrees the latitude is 21 deg. 4' 15" S. and the
longitude 134 deg. 17' 14" W. of Greenwich.  As I suspected, we are on the
fringe of the Low Archipelago, well away from the Great Circle route
between Panama and New Zealand, and equally remote from the regular
tracks between the Sandwich Islands and Cape Horn.  That means that
unless a whaler or stray trading vessel puts in here, or that we make
the cutter seaworthy enough for a thousand-mile voyage, our stay here
is likely to be indefinitely prolonged."

"I'm sure I don't mind," observed Andy.

"Nor I, if only my people knew we were safe," added Terence, and
Ellerton expressed himself in a similar manner.

"Isn't the heat oppressive?" said Andy.  "It's like an oven here."

"Yes," assented his father.  "I can see we've made a mistake in
choosing this spot.  It's splendidly sheltered--too much so--for what
with the rocks behind us and the palm groves on either side, the air
cannot circulate.  We must find a more open spot on the next terrace."

"There's no reason why we shouldn't have two camps--one for stormy
weather and the other for the dry season," replied Andy.  "Once we've
finished with the wreck we can set to and build a more substantial
home.  But what do you say?  Hadn't we better unload the boat?"

"I'm game," replied Ellerton.

"What did you bring ashore?" asked Mr. McKay.

"Mostly provisions, bedding, and clothing, though that beastly bull
tossed a lot of stuff overboard.  We've also brought the rest of the
navigation instruments."

"Are you making another trip to-day?"

"I hope so," replied Ellerton.  "I shall not be satisfied till those
poor sheep are safely ashore.  By the by, Andy, you might tell Quexo to
build a fence between the rock and the edge of this terrace.  It won't
take long, and it will inclose enough pasture land to feed the sheep
for some time to come."

"I'll tell him directly we've had lunch; but come on, unloading the
boat will take all our spare time before lunch, and we mustn't work too
hard in this broiling sun."

By the time the cutter's cargo was brought up to the camp Quexo had
prepared the meal.  This over, the inhabitants of the Nameless Island
indulged in a siesta till the sun was sufficiently low in the heavens
to enable them to resume work.

"Don't forget to bring some lamps ashore," said Mr. McKay, as the three
lads prepared to set off to the wreck.  "And a bundle of signal flags,
while you are about it."

This time the salvage operations were uninterrupted.  The sheep,
securely trussed up, were placed in the boat, while the bunting, lamps,
a portable galley, and a set of blacksmith's tools, including a bellows
and anvil, were also lowered into the cutter without mishap.

"Let's get the hatch off and see what is in the forehold," suggested
Ellerton.

The hold was full of water, as the lads had expected, but a hasty
examination showed that the part of the cargo nearest the opening was
composed of several sheets of galvanised corrugated iron.

"This is fortunate," exclaimed Andy.  "We'll be able to knock up a
decent house.  But what's that I can see for'ard?"

"Looks like farming implements," suggested Terence.

"You are wrong," replied Andy.  "I know; it's what the Americans term a
runabout."

"A what?" asked Ellerton.

"A runabout--otherwise a motor-car."

"Fancy a motor-car on the Nameless Island!" exclaimed Terence, and the
lads burst into a fit of hearty laughter at the incongruous idea.

"We'll have it ashore in time," observed Andy.  "It will come in
useful."

"How?"

"Never mind how.  I have an idea, and, all being well, I'll fix it up
to a good purpose."

"Suppose we try and find the bill of lading and the charter-party; they
will give us some idea of the nature of the cargo."

A search revealed the required documents, but, being in Spanish, the
apprentice could make no meaning to the text.

"Snakes!" ejaculated Andy.  "There's enough to set us up as universal
providers!  Woollen and cotton goods, boots and leggings, hardware of
American manufacture, nine cases of rifles--for some blooming
insurgents more than likely--30,000 rounds of ammunition, and--hullo,
this looks dangerous!--two tons of dynamite; building and railroad
materials, agricultural implements, and one petrol-driven runabout,
consigned to Monsieur Georges Lacroix, Grand Bassin, Tahiti.  Well, I'm
afraid Monsieur Georges Lacroix will have to wait for his motor-car!"

"By Jove, we are lucky!" ejaculated Ellerton.  "That is, provided we
get the stuff ashore."

"We'll do it," replied his chum resolutely.  "Only give us time and
good weather, and we'll leave precious little on the _San Martin_, I
can assure you."

"Time to be off," exclaimed Terence.  "It will be dark in an hour."

So, thrusting the documents into his belt, Andy dropped over the side,
and received the rest of the articles that the lads had collected.
Then, well laden, the boat returned to the shore.

"We've much to be thankful for," exclaimed Mr. McKay, after he had
perused the ship's papers.  "There is, I think, no need for anxiety as
to our future.  You brought the signal flags, I hope?"

"Yes," replied Ellerton, "and a couple of Peruvian ensigns."

"Good!  I'm going to make up a Union Jack.  There are two reasons for
doing so.  The first is that it can be used as a means of attracting
passing vessels; the second, and more important to my mind, is that it
signifies that the island becomes part of the British Empire.  I've
been going into the question pretty deeply.  You may be aware that the
Low Archipelago belongs to France.  These islands consists of a number
of flat coral islands, hence their name.  Now, as this island is lofty
and of volcanic origin, I cannot see that it can be classed as
belonging to the Low Archipelago, even though it is not far distant
from that group.  Neither does it appear to have been inhabited, so we
may be pretty safe in claiming it.  Terence, there's a pencil and paper
close to your elbow; will you please sketch a plan of a Union Jack?"

Terence did so, but the result was not to Mr. McKay's satisfaction.

"You try, Andy."

Nor was Andy's attempt any more satisfactory, so Ellerton was put to
the test.

"Shame on you, lads!" exclaimed Mr. McKay reproachfully.  "Three
members of the good old British Empire, and unable to draw its national
ensign correctly.  Here, hand me that pencil."

"Now do you see," he continued, after he had explained the various
minute particulars of the flag.  "There's a broad white diagonal above
the two portions of St. Patrick's cross next to the pole, and a broad
white diagonal below the two portions farthest from the pole.  If the
flag is hoisted in any manner but the correct the ensign becomes a
signal of distress.  Often in bygone days hostile ships have attempted
to sail under British colours, and in nine cases out of ten their
ignorance of its peculiarities has led to their undoing.  However,
we'll postpone the cutting out till the rest of the boat's cargo is
brought up."

"How is Quexo getting on?" asked Ellerton.

"He's been away the whole afternoon.  I guess your fence is nearly
completed by now."

"Then I'll go and see how he is progressing," remarked the apprentice.

The mulatto had indeed made rapid strides, for only a few feet more
remained to be done, so Ellerton returned to the boat to liberate the
sheep.  Ere nightfall the pen was tenanted by a score of animals,
frisking with enjoyment at finding themselves once more in pasture.

That evening three large lamps contributed to the comfort of the tent.
The lads, tired out with their exertions, were "taking things easy,"
lamenting the fact that there was no literature to beguile the time.

Mr. McKay, having been raised to a sitting position, called for the
bunting.  Laboriously he threaded a needle and commenced his lengthy
task.

"One moment, sir," exclaimed Ellerton.  "Wouldn't a sewing machine be
better?"

"A what?  Bless the lad!  Where's a machine to be had?"

"On board, sir.  I noticed a couple in the fo'c'sle.  You see, a seaman
has to make his own duds."

"Very well, I'll put off the job till to-morrow, if you'll remember to
bring one of the things ashore."

"Any need to keep watch to-night, pater?" asked Andy.

"I think it would be advisable till we've explored the island.  Not
that I anticipate any interference, but forewarned is forearmed."

Mr. McKay's words proved to be correct.  Nothing occurred to disturb
the camp during the second night ashore.

"Do you think that Terence and you can manage by yourselves?" asked Mr.
McKay during breakfast.

"I think so," replied Ellerton.

"Then Andy can take Quexo and make an exploration of the interior.  I
particularly want him to reach the summit of the hill, so as to find
out if there are other islands in the vicinity."

"You understand, Andy?" continued his father.  "Keep a sharp look-out
for signs of past or present inhabitants, any animals you may come
across--there may be a few pigs--and, above all, note the general
extent of the island and the position of its neighbours, if visible.
Don't overburden yourselves; a revolver and twenty rounds apiece, a
water-bottle, and some provisions will be quite enough to carry.  Rest
on the summit of the hill during the heat of the day, and get back here
well before sunset."

Having seen the explorers on their way, Ellerton and Donaghue pushed
off the cutter and rowed to the wreck.

It was again an ideal morning, and without the faintest hitch the boat
was made fast alongside the battered hull of the _San Martin_.

"I've a mind to try and patch up that gig," remarked Ellerton, gazing
at the battered boat.

"Take too much time," was Terence's reply.

"No, I mean to fasten some painted canvas over the hole and nail some
copper sheathing outside the canvas to protect it.  It won't be a long
job, so meanwhile you might clear all the light gear out of the cabins
and saloon."

Two hours sufficed to effect the temporary repairs, and the gig on
being launched let in very little water.  Ellerton was overjoyed with
his success.

"We'll take a double load ashore, Terence," he exclaimed.  "We may as
well make a start by clearing the for'ard hold."

So saying, Ellerton began to strip off his clothing.  He was an expert
swimmer and diver, and these qualifications stood him in good stead.

Taking a strong hook attached to a rope in his hand, he dived from the
coaming of the hatchway.  The top of the stacks of galvanised iron was
but a few feet below the surface, and in a few seconds the hook was
affixed to the wire rope that held the plates together.

Then, regaining the deck, the apprentice assisted his companion in
hauling their booty out of the hold.

Six times the operation was repeated, till the deck resembled a "tin"
city in the western plains of Arizona.

"It takes it out of you," remarked Ellerton.  "I wish we could get rid
of the water in the hold; though I'm afraid the vessel's too badly
strained to be able to patch up her sides."

"Even then we would have a bother to get rid of the water," replied
Terence.  "Still, we've done very well up to now."

"There's all that railway line material underneath the iron sheeting;
that will want some shifting."

"We'll do it some time, but now we'll get off home."

It seemed natural for the lads to talk of the camp as "home," for
already they were becoming attached to the free, yet none the less
comfortable, manner of living.

"Wait while I get the sewing machine from the fo'c'sle.  But you may as
well come, too, and we'll take both of them."

With this, Ellerton, accompanied by Terence, made his way for'ard.  In
the gloom of the stuffy fo'c'sle, the sight of which forcibly reminded
him of his quarters on the _Tophet_, Ellerton found the required
articles.

"Hullo, here's a find!" he exclaimed, holding up a concertina.

"Sling the blessed thing overboard," replied Terence laughing.  "If you
take it ashore it's bound to make trouble in the camp."

"It may come in handy."

Ellerton looked upon everything as being likely "to come in handy."  He
would have overstocked the island with useless things in the hope that
they might be of use at some distant date.  In this case, did he but
know it, the concertina was fated to play a most useful part.

"All right, then," assented Terence good-humouredly.  "To look at us
now one would think we were going to run old women's sewing meetings
and popular Saturday night concerts."

With the gig in tow, the lads returned to the shore, putting off the
unloading of their boat till the evening, though they brought the
sewing machines with them to the tent.

"Now I can get on," exclaimed Mr. McKay.  "It's slow work lying here
and unable to do a decent bit of hard work."

Lunch, followed by the customary siesta, occupied the rest of the
afternoon.  By the aid of a telescope Andy and Quexo had been seen on
the summit of the hill, and their descent followed till an intervening
spur hid them from sight.  Mr. McKay calculated that they would be home
within a couple of hours.

"You might cut down a suitable palm tree--one about forty feet in
height--Terence," he added.  "I should like to have the flag flying on
their return."

The tree was easily felled, and a small block, with signal halliards
rove, was fastened to its smaller end.  This done, a hole was dug to
receive the pole, and by the aid of a pair of guys the flagstaff was
erected and set up in quite a professional style.

About five in the afternoon Andy and the mulatto returned.  They
reported that from the summit of the hill the island appeared to be
nearly circular, without any noticeable bays that might serve as boat
harbours.

The reef extended completely around the island, approaching it closely
on the southern side, while there were three well-defined entrances
besides the one they already knew about.

Andy reckoned that the extreme length of the island was about seven
miles, its breadth barely a mile less.  There were no other islands
visible, but as the sea was hazy away on the north-west it was possible
that land might lie in that direction.

"Then, assuming the altitude to be one thousand feet, your horizon
would be approximately forty-two miles off," remarked Mr. McKay.
"Well, in that case we are not likely to be troubled by our neighbours,
for the nearest island cannot be less than fifty miles away.  Did you
find any signs of the island having been inhabited?"

"Yes," replied Andy, "we found this," and opening a leather sling case
he produced a pistol.  It was a quaint specimen of a flint-lock weapon,
its large-bore barrel eaten with rust and its silver-mounted walnut
stock pitted and rotted by exposure.

"I don't think the gentleman who dropped this article is in a fit state
to call upon us," observed Mr. McKay.  "Nevertheless, it shows that we
are not the first civilised people to set foot on the island.  What is
the interior like?"

"There are distinct signs of a volcano about.  The top of the hill is
most certainly an extinct volcano, while the base is honeycombed with
fissures like the volcano of Monotombo.  Otherwise the island is well
wooded."

"You've done well," commented Mr. McKay.  "Now it's nearly sunset, so
there will be just time to hoist the Union Jack."

"Finished it, then, pater?"

"Rather!  Now, Andy, you hoist the emblem of empire!"

Amid the cheers of the band of Britishers the ensign was broken at the
masthead.  For a few minutes it fluttered idly in the breeze, then, as
the sun sank beneath the horizon, the Jack was slowly lowered.

They had asserted the King's authority over the island to which they
had now given the name of McKay's Island.




CHAPTER VIII

"A SAIL!"

For the next five months things went smoothly at McKay's Island.

Taking every advantage of the remaining period of the dry season, the
lads worked hard.  Almost everything of value was removed from the
wreck.

The heavy lengths of railway lines were safely transported to the
shore; the motor-car, its mechanism not altogether useless, was stored
under a canvas canopy on the lower terrace.

The ship's dynamos were removed, as well as the lighter portion of the
main propelling machinery, while the remaining derricks, practically
the whole of the wire rigging, and all the woodwork that could be taken
away, had found a safe storage-place on McKay's Island.

Most of the dynamite had been cautiously conveyed ashore and placed in
some of the numerous caves at a safe distance from the camp.  The
remainder of the explosive had been judiciously used--under Andy's
direction, for his experiences at San Eugenio had not been thrown
away--in demolishing those portions of the wreck that prevented easy
access to the precious cargo.

Only the bare hull of the _San Martin_ now remained.  No doubt the
first on-shore hurricane would sweep away every vestige of the
ill-fated vessel, but the castaways were satisfied with the knowledge
that nothing of value remained on board.

Nor had the work ashore been delayed.  Already a substantial
three-roomed building of galvanised iron reared itself proudly upon the
second terrace.  Its furniture--the best that the state-rooms and
cabins of the _San Martin_ could provide--would have made many a
stay-at-home Englishman green with envy.

The lads had contrived to lay a double set of rails from the shore up
the steep path to the lower terrace.  Then, by means of a steel hawser
attached to two sets of trucks, they were able to draw the bulk of
their goods to the higher level with little difficulty.

The mode of locomotion, thanks to Andy's ready skill, was comparatively
simple.

At first Terence wished to utilise the motor of the "runabout"; but to
this proposal Andy objected, having another purpose in view for the
undelivered consignment for Monsieur Georges Lacroix.

Included in the rolling stock were several iron tip waggons, of the
kind generally in use in mining districts.  Two of these Andy attached
to each of his "trains."  Those on the upper level he filled with
earth, till the weight, being greater than the other set of waggons,
caused the former to descend the incline, and at the same time raise
the trucks filled with cargo from the beach.

This plan acted very well, but the labour in filling the trucks with
soil was tedious; so Andy conceived the brilliant idea of trapping some
of the water from the little stream, and conveying it by means of a
length of iron pipe supported on trestles into the empty tip waggons.

From that moment the "McKay's Island Express" was in full working
order, and the task of hauling the salved cargo up the terrace became a
matter of comparative ease.

Those five months had worked wonders in Mr. McKay.  Though weak on his
feet, he was able to walk, and showed promise of soon throwing off all
ill-effects of his double misfortune.

As a natural result of his prolonged convalescence he had grown stout.
This was a source of worry to him, and he longed to be able to get
about again as usual.

Amongst their many undertakings, the lads found time to make use of the
remains of the disabled gig.

Realising that the work of replacing the garboards and keel would not
repay the amount of labour expended on the work, they cut the boat in
two, and built transoms to each of the sound ends.  Thus they possessed
two light craft, each about ten feet in length, and easy to haul up and
down the beach.

When occasion served, they could also bolt the two transoms together,
and thus form one boat, resembling the original gig with a slice of her
'midship section missing.

The craft proved of great service while the cutter was under
reconstruction.  This was a big task, for not only had the lads given
her a fairly deep keel, to make her more seaworthy, but a cabin,
water-tight well, and decked fo'c'sle were added.  The rig was altered
to that of a yawl, while Andy hoped at an early date to instal the
motor in her.

Hitherto his difficulties lay in the fact that the motor was not water
cooled, nor was it adapted to consume kerosene.  They had a plentiful
supply of that fuel, but of petrol they had none.  Nevertheless, Andy
had firm faith in his capabilities, and trusted to overcome these
difficulties all right.

In this craft the hopes of the inhabitants of McKay's Island were
centred.  Although happy in their little domain, for plenty of work had
proved the greatest factor to their well-being, they yearned at times
for the society of their fellow-men and civilisation.

Directly the rainy season was over the little party meant to try their
fate upon the broad Pacific.  It was to be a risky voyage, but others
had done similar passages under worse conditions.  Blythe, of H.M.S.
_Bounty_, for instance, did he not successfully accomplish a voyage of
4000 miles in an open boat in forty-one days?

The advent of the rainy season was heralded by a hurricane of terrific
force.

Giving but little warning, the storm swept over the island, uprooting
trees and turning the tiny rivulets into foaming torrents.  The usually
placid surface of the lagoon became a seething cauldron, huge breakers
sweeping completely over the reef and lashing themselves upon the
rock-strewn beach.

Well it was that the lads had hauled their craft above the reach of
those breakers, for on the morning following the commencement of the
storm not a vestige of the hull of the _San Martin_ was to be seen.

Fortunately the house was solidly constructed.  The hail pelted on the
iron roof, the windows rattled and the doors shook to such an extent
that it became necessary to barricade them, while almost incessantly
the lightning flashed and the thunder rolled in deafening peals.

While the rains lasted there was very little outside work done.
Welcome as were the showers at first, they soon became monotonous.  It
was too hot to wear oilskins, the ground was too soft to walk on
without sinking ankle deep in mire, so that the castaways were thrown
upon their own resources to pass the time as well as they were able
within doors.

Lack of books had been their greatest discomfort, even the study of the
Spanish charts and treatises on navigation became a pleasure; paper and
writing materials they possessed, and Mr. McKay systematically wrote up
his diary.

But the task that gave the lads the greatest pleasure and amusement was
their efforts to teach Quexo English.

The mulatto was a willing though difficult pupil, and was doubly
handicapped by being unable to write even his own language.
Nevertheless, before the rainy season was over, Quexo could understand
most of what was said to him, and was able to reply in weird sentences
and phrases that often set the lads laughing.

At length the "off season"--as Terence termed it--passed, its departure
being marked by almost as severe a hurricane as the one that preceded
it.

Then for three days and nights a thick mist overspread the island.  The
air resembled that of a hothouse, without the least suspicion of a
breeze.

On the morning of the fourth day the sun shone in an unclouded sky, the
mud disappeared as if by the touch of a magic wand, and the inhabitants
of McKay's Island awoke to their life of outdoor activity.

"I think we will do well to postpone the time of our departure for
another month," remarked Mr. McKay.  "We shall then have more chance of
a wind, and the zone of the Trades will extend farther north by then.
We shall have plenty to see, too, in a month."

"I want to get the motor fixed up," observed Andy.  "I think my plan
for making a water-jacket will succeed, and installing the engine and
tuning it up will take quite a week."

"If you succeed the motor will prove invaluable, especially if we lose
the benefit of the Trades," replied his father.

Andy was hard at work making a propeller.  This he did by means of two
sheets of steel plating riveted to an iron boss; for, in order to
prevent the boat from being unduly kept back while under sail alone, he
had decided to have but two blades, which when at rest were up and
down, in line with the boat's stern-post.

Terence, who was also of an engineering turn of mind, had embarked upon
a somewhat ambitious programme.  He meant to use the dynamo for
lighting purposes.

"But," objected Ellerton, "what's the use?  We are leaving the island
shortly."

"Possibly; but I am looking beyond then, Hoppy.  Provided I could be
sure of a passage to 'Frisco occasionally I would not mind settling
down here.  No doubt I am indulging in wild day-dreams, but still, my
plans may mature, and there's a living to be made out of the island.
But to deal with present events; the dynamo will be of great service to
us, as we can recharge those accumulators we brought ashore.  Then Andy
will be able to use electrical ignition for his motor instead of the
slower and more uncertain lamp ignition."

"Quite so, Terence," assented Andy.  "So carry on, my boy."

Thus encouraged, Terence, assisted by Ellerton and Quexo, dug a deep
trench close to the brink of the lower terrace, the side of which he
lined with thick planks from the wreck.

Next a water-wheel, twelve feet in diameter, was constructed, the
paddle floats being cut from the iron plates obtained from the same
source.  A portion of the ship's piston rods formed the axle of the
wheel, a grooved drum being attached to take the driving belt of the
dynamo.

At length came the critical test of Terence's work.  The stream, once
more diverted, was conducted into the trench, and as the last barrier
to its progress was removed the water rushed through its new channel.
Then, with a cascade of silver splashing from its floats, the wheel
began to gather way, and was soon spinning merrily.

"That's all very fine," exclaimed Andy, who had left his work to view
the opening ceremony of the McKay Island Power Company.  "But how are
you going to stop the wheel?  It will soon wear its axle out at that
rate; and, besides, we can't have that noise day and night."

"Never thought of that!" replied Terence.  "We must make a hatch to
trap the water when we don't require the power."

Two days later the dynamo was in full working order.  The lads were
highly delighted, and suggested several schemes for making use of the
electric current.

Then came Andy's triumph.  After many difficulties and failures he
succeeded in duly installing the motor in the yawl, and on a trial trip
inside the lagoon the boat behaved magnificently under power.

"We'll have a trip round the island to-morrow," he exclaimed, as the
craft was moored for the night.  "Let's turn in early so as to make a
start immediately after sunrise."

The morning dawned bright and calm, with no wind.

"It will mean running under power," observed Andy, as the lads, laden
with provisions and tins of kerosene, wended their way to the shore.
"I mean to----"

He stopped, his eyes fixed seaward.

His companions followed his gaze, and simultaneously there was a shout
of:

"A sail!"




CHAPTER IX

UNWELCOME VISITORS

"Great Scott!  It's a native canoe," declared Mr. McKay.  "And she's
heading straight for the island!"

The craft was some little distance from the entrance to the reef, her
huge brown sail hanging idly from its yard, while the crew vigorously
plied their paddles as they made the water fly from her sharp prow.

"Trouble in store?" queried Andy.

"It's well to be prepared," replied his father.  "I know these natives
of old.  Sometimes they are quiet and inoffensive, at another time they
are bold and war-like, or, what is worse, extremely treacherous."

"Then we must arm ourselves?"

"Assuredly.  Quexo, bring my glass."

The mulatto darted off, and presently reappeared, bringing a glass of
lime-juice.

"Not that, you ass!" exclaimed Mr. McKay, laughing.
"Glass--telescope--see?" and he raised his hands to imitate the
operation of using a telescope.  "I'll have the drink, anyhow."

Once more Quexo ran to the house, this time bringing back the required
instrument.

"There are at least forty natives," said Mr. McKay, after a lengthy
examination of the oncoming craft.  "They may be armed.  If so, their
weapons are lying on the bottom of the canoe.  But unless I am very
much mistaken, there's a white man aboard."

"A prisoner?  Let me have a look, pater!"

In his eagerness Andy almost snatched the telescope from his parent's
hand.

"A queer set of customers," he exclaimed; "but I don't think the white
man is a captive, for he's talking to a fellow with his hair frizzed up
a foot above his head."

"We've seen enough for the time being," rejoined Mr. McKay quietly, "so
we'll return to the house and serve out the arms.  At the rate they are
travelling, the canoe will be here in ten minutes."

"They won't injure the boat?" asked Andy anxiously, for the yawl was
almost like a child to him.

"Not when they see us with rifles in our hands.  Whatever you do, don't
let them have reason to think we want to fight, and, above all, don't
show any signs of fear."

The party quickly strapped on their ammunition belts and revolver
holsters, then, grasping their rifles, they hastened down to the beach.

The canoe had by this time entered the lagoon, and its occupants had
perceived the house and the other buildings, for they had ceased
paddling, and were gazing in wonder towards the shore.  Nor did the
appearance of five armed men serve to set their minds at rest.

"Hullo, there!" shouted Mr. McKay.

"Hullo, there!" was the reply.  "What's your game?"

"What's yours?" replied Mr. McKay.

"All square, governor.  Can we land?"

"Provided you keep your people in order," replied Mr. McKay, then
turning to his companions he exclaimed: "By Jove!  I know that fellow;
he's no good, I'm afraid."

"You know him?"

"Yes, I met him on a pearl-fisher in Torres Strait twenty odd years
ago.  He hasn't changed much in appearance, and I'm afraid his manners
haven't.  Still, I'll not claim acquaintanceship with him at present."

The paddles were resumed, and the canoe glided quietly to the shore.
The natives, for the most part stark naked, began to tumble over the
side, some grasping enormous clubs studded with sharks' teeth, and
others long triple-barbed spears.

"Tell those fellows to throw those weapons back into the canoe,"
shouted Mr. McKay sternly.  "Otherwise we'll not permit them to land."

The white man spoke a few words to the turban-haired native, who in
turn uttered an order to his men.  Instantly the weapons were thrown
into the canoe with a loud clatter, and the natives, wading ashore,
secured their boat and proceeded to squat in a semicircle.

"My name's Blight--Jimmy Blight," exclaimed the stranger.

Mr. McKay merely nodded his head in reply.  He could not bring himself
to say the words "Pleased to see you," for the simple reason that he
was not.

Jimmy Blight had had a chequered career.  He was a man of about fifty
years of age, some five feet eight inches in height, and of medium
build.  Years of exposure to a tropical sun had not left any trace upon
his face, for his complexion was a chalky white.  He had a bristling,
dark moustache; cut high over the lips, a scanty crop of dark hair, a
thin, straight nose, rather deep-set eyes that were continually
shifting in expression, while his hands, the broad nails of which were
bitten to the quick, showed little trace of hard work.

When Mr. McKay first met him he was mate of a pearling vessel, and
already he bore a bad reputation as a hard drinker and a card-sharper,
while it was well known that his tyranny had more than once caused
bloodshed amongst the Kanaka crew of the vessel.  By his white
associates he was commonly known as "Chinese Pork"--in other words,
something very unpleasant.

"Well, what can I do for you?" asked Mr. McKay bluntly.

"The island's free, I guess?" replied Blight, with a leer that
ill-concealed his natural aggressiveness.

"So long as you behave yourself; but should one of those men touch so
much as a copper nail, we'll send you to the right about in double
quick time.  Understand?"

"Yes, boss.  But how about a drink?  You seem fixed up pretty
comfortable here."

"You can have as much water as you want at the stream.  Beyond that,
I'm afraid we cannot provide you."

"Humph!  Must take pot-luck, I suppose.  Say, are you traders?"

Mr. McKay did not think it advisable to answer.

"What's your business, might I ask?" he inquired.

"It's a long story, boss.  You see my mates here"--indicating the group
of squatting natives--"belong to the island of Ahii, which lies seventy
miles nor'west of here.  In fact, I was very comfortable along of 'em,
but might is right in these parts, I'll allow."

"Chinese Pork" paused to allow the weight of this sentence to take
effect, but Mr. McKay betrayed no sign.

"So a few days ago a tribe of natives from Teku came and drove us out.
There was a fight, you bet, but our fellows got the worst of it.  So we
hooked it, and took canoe to Ni Atong, which is less than twenty miles
S.E. of Ahii.  Ni Atong's all very well, only it ain't big enough, so
we're trying to find a larger island to settle upon.  There's close on
a couple of hundred natives, and ten large canoes at Ni Atong.  Strikes
me this place 'ud suit, 'specially with white gents like yourselves for
company like."

"I'm afraid you must give up all idea of bringing your friends here,
Mr. Blight, or yourself either."

"Say, why?"

"Because we cannot permit it."

"Look here, boss," replied Blight with an impudent swagger.  "How do
you think you'll stop two hundred natives if they set their minds on
landing here?  Even I couldn't stop 'em."

"Let them try," replied Mr. McKay.  "Now, Mr. Blight, I cannot refuse
you hospitality.  Food will be sent down to you; then, when your men
have rested sufficiently, I must ask you to leave this island."

And turning on his heel, Mr. McKay began to make his way back to the
house, the lads following him closely.

Before he had taken a dozen steps the ex-pearler ran after him.

"See here, boss; I don't mean to give offence--no offence meant--but
you'll allow it's hard on a chap to be done out of his own crib by a
pack o' niggers.  And then you can't deny you've treated me
off-handish, specially as you're the first white man I've seen these
two years.  So let's come to terms.  I see you're well armed.  Why not
come back to Ahii with us, and make those chaps from Teku clear off
back to their own island?  Then the Ahii people won't want to trouble
you.  See?"

"I'll consider the matter," replied Mr. McKay.  "By the by, do you ever
go to Tahiti?"

"Not often, boss.  I was there two years ago.  When I've got a cargo of
copra ready I send it by a native boat.  Why do you ask?"

"I merely wanted to know, Mr. Blight.  But now I must be off.  I'll
send the provisions along shortly, and will give you a definite reply
to your proposal in a few hours.  It seems to me that the easiest way
out of the mess is to accept the fellow's advice," remarked Mr. McKay
as they entered their house.  "We certainly don't want to try
conclusions with a horde of savages on this island.  No doubt we could
beat them off, but in any case there is a considerable amount of risk.
If I can get Blight to give me a guarantee--though I don't place much
reliance on his word--backed by the chief's assurance that his men will
not trespass upon the island, I think we can very well help them."

"Do you think there will be much of a struggle?" asked Ellerton.

"Between whom?"

"The natives of Ahii and the natives who took possession of their
island."

"No; our presence will soon turn the scale, though we may not even have
to use our firearms.  You can rely upon it that I'll do my best to
prevent bloodshed.  Are you willing to go, lads?  If you have
objections don't hesitate to say so."

"I haven't," said Ellerton.

"Nor I," added the others.

"Very well, then.  Quexo, take this keg of flour down to the beach, and
tell that white man that his people can gather as much taro and
cocoanuts as they want, so long as they don't cross to this side of the
stream.  You understand?  Do you think we might spare Blight a lamb,
Andy?"

"I think so, pater.  We've twenty at least."

"Then tell Quexo to take one down when he comes back.  Now, boys, if we
are going on this trip, we had better make preparations.  We ought to
start by sunrise at least, if we want to reach Ahii before dark."

"But are we going straight to Ahii?"

"No, by Jove!  I forgot that for the moment.  Of course, it will be
much better to spend the night off Ni Atong--I suppose there's a
lagoon--and proceed to Ahii on the following morning."

"Well, Quexo," said Andy, on the mulatto's return, "what did the white
man say?"

"He say: 'Come here you number one size blackamoor.  What your massa
name is?'  An' I say: 'I no number one size blackamoor; I no niggah,
sah; an' my massa name me no give, massa he tell you his name if you
ask.'"

"That's a smart reply, Quexo," replied Mr. McKay, laughing.  "There's
nothing like keeping your master's counsel and your own.  Now take that
carcase down to the beach.  Ellerton, you might take a stroll along the
edge of the cliff and, without attracting undue attention, keep an eye
on the rascals.  I don't want them straggling across the stream."

Thus bidden, Ellerton walked cautiously to the edge of the first
terrace, then laying his rifle on the ground, stretched himself into a
comfortable position so that he could see without being seen, and hear
without being heard.

Most of the natives had dispersed, and were busily engaged in seeking
taro and cocoanuts, although they kept strictly within the bounds laid
down by Mr. McKay.

Blight, the chief, and a couple of natives had killed the lamb and were
roasting it by the aboriginal method of caking it with clay and placing
it in the red-hot embers of a fire.  Although the white man cast
several curious glances at the cliff, above which the roof of the house
was just visible, he refrained from setting foot upon the path that led
to Mr. McKay's settlement.

Late in the afternoon Mr. McKay went down to the beach and informed
Blight that he had decided to lend his aid, at the same time
stipulating that the natives must promise not to molest the inhabitants
of McKay's Island.

The remainder of the yawl's stores were then carried aboard, Andy and
Ellerton volunteering to keep watch on the boat while Mr. McKay,
Terence, and Quexo took turns in patrolling the edge of the terrace.

A tent, some blankets, and a few luxuries in the way of provisions were
then sent down to the ex-pearler, while the natives prepared to sleep
under the shelter of the palm trees and bushes.

"If you see or hear anything of a suspicious nature, Andy," cautioned
Mr. McKay, "here is a signal rocket.  Don't use it except in
circumstances that warrant our interference.  You have plenty of
ammunition?"

"Seventy rounds of rifle ammunition and fifty revolver cartridges each.
You'll see that another box of ammunition comes off in the morning."

"Aye, aye," replied his father.  "Now I think everything is ready to
make an early start, so you had better be off."

Then, having bade the rest of the party good night, Andy and his trusty
companion descended to the beach, passed between knots of curious
natives, and embarked in the yawl's tender.

Five minutes later they were on board, and the ammunition stowed away
within easy reach.

The lads had made an excellent job in converting the ship's cutter.
From the awning-covered well a short ladder led to the cabin.  Here
four roomy folding bunks, a swing table, plenty of lockers and racks
had been fitted, while the linoleum-covered floor, the red baize
curtains, and the polished brass lamp imparted an air of comfort.
Overhead a skylight served to admit both fresh air and light.

In the fo'c'sle, to which access could be obtained either by sliding
doors between it and the cabin, or through a hatch on deck, were the
sails, spare ropes, anchor cable, and a small stove constructed from
one of the galleys of the _San Martin_.

The motor had been installed under the floor of the well, while on the
afterside of the cabin bulkhead was fixed a boat's compass, illuminated
by means of the cabin lamp, so that the steersman could keep a course
with comfort, whether by day or night.

"Now, Hoppy, I'll take the first watch," remarked Andy, as the sun sank
beneath the lofty peak of McKay's Island.  "I'll turn you out at two in
the morning, and then you can carry on till daybreak, if that will suit
you."

"Righto!" replied Ellerton.

And turning in upon his bunk he was soon fast asleep, lulled by the
slight motion of the little craft as she rose and fell to the gentle
heave of the lagoon.




CHAPTER X

STRANGE ALLIES

"Turn out, Hoppy!"

Ellerton was awake in an instant, but forgetting that the cabin of a
small craft does not possess unlimited headroom, he sat up and brought
his head violently in contact with the deck beams.

"What's up?" he exclaimed, grasping his revolver.  "Anything wrong?"

"No," replied Andy.  "Only it's two o'clock, and your watch."

"Goodness!  I feel as if I've only been asleep five minutes."

"Sorry for you, then, old chap, for you've got to keep awake five
hours."

So saying, Andy slid into his bunk, and within a minute his regular
breathing showed that he was asleep.

Ellerton took up his position under the shelter of the dew-sodden
awning.  Everything was quiet, save for the occasional splash of a fish
as it played upon the surface of the placid water, and the ever-present
rumble of the breakers upon the distant reef.

Shorewards the outline of the island was dimly visible against the loom
of the starlit sky, while a light from the seaward window of the house
and the dull red gleam of the dying embers of the fire the natives had
kindled were the only sign of human occupation.

Yet, Ellerton reflected, the bush might be alive with savages, awaiting
the opportunity to fall upon the settlement, murder his friends, and
possess themselves of the valuable stores.

Perhaps the story of the seizure of Ahii and the flight of the
inhabitants to Ni Atong was a myth, invented by that rogue Blight for
the purpose of luring the castaways into a false position.

There could be no doubt about it, Ellerton's nerves were "jumpy."
Perhaps it was that the suddenness of coming into contact with human
beings other than his comrades had acted upon his nerves.

Ellerton realised that he was entering into a new phase of his
existence.  He regretted it, for, beyond his natural anxiety concerning
his parents, he had grown to love the isolated life on McKay's Island.

Then, should Blight's story prove to be correct, Ellerton felt sure
that Mr. McKay's action was the only course permissible.  The little
colony was to fight for its existence, and the more remote the scene of
hostilities the better chance they had of securing the sole
proprietorship of the island.

Hist!  A succession of faint sounds like those of a man stealthily
swimming caused Ellerton to sit bolt upright, grasp his rifle, and peer
intently through the darkness.

There was no mistake about it.  It was some object heading directly for
the yawl, its track being marked by a faint blur of phosphorescence.

Visions of bloodthirsty savages, swimming, knife in mouth, to surprise
the crew of the little craft, filled Ellerton with alarm.  He raised
his rifle, released the safety catch, and took aim at the mysterious
intruder.

"Andy," he whispered, but his friend was too deep in slumber to be
awakened by a whisper.

"I'll wait till he's close alongside," muttered Ellerton, fingering the
trigger.

At that moment there was a perceptible jar alongside the boat, followed
by a prolonged grating sound, as if a piece of sandpaper were slowly
drawn over a rough surface.  Then, with a swirl and a succession of
phosphorescent splashes, the object vanished.

The sound had roused Andy.

"What's up?" he exclaimed, springing into the cockpit.

Both lads looked over the side.  Deep beneath the surface they saw a
huge luminous shape slowly gliding away.

"My word!" whispered Andy.  "Can't you see what it is?  It's a shark."

"I thought it was some natives swimming off to us."

"Never fear.  They'll never attempt such a thing with a sentry like
that brute," replied Andy as he re-entered the cabin.

Slowly the weary hours passed, till the sun rose in a sky of misty
grey, and the inhabitants of McKay's Island, both black and white,
bestirred themselves into activity.

"Not much wind, boss," was Chinese Pork's salutation as Mr. McKay and
his companions arrived at the beach, whither Andy had rowed in the
tender.

"There'll be some before long," replied Mr. McKay.  "It usually springs
up about an hour after sunrise."

"It'll mean a long pull if it doesn't," rejoined Blight.  "Shall I lend
you four or five hands to work the sweeps?"

"I'll not trouble you, thanks.  It's your men who will find it hard
work, I fancy."

"Say, why?  You just see them use those paddles.  They'll keep it up
for hours at a stretch.  Your craft'll be the tail end of this 'ere
procession, I guess."

"We shall see," replied Mr. McKay quietly, for he had no desire to
enlighten the ex-pearler upon the subject of the motor.

"Say, boss?"

"Well?"

"That's a rum packet," said Blight, indicating with a jerk of his thumb
the boat the lads had made from the wreck of the gig.  "I bet you never
bought her at Hilo?"

Mr. McKay did not reply.  He quite realised that the ex-pearler was
trying to pump him, while, on the other hand, he was equally determined
to conceal the fact that he and his companions were on the island
through shipwreck.

Although Mr. McKay hated deception, he wished to convey the impression
that they settled here by choice, yet Blight's question showed that he
kept his eyes open.

"Are you ready to start?" demanded Mr. McKay.  "There's a wind
springing up from the south-east'ard."

"As soon as you like.  But can you lend me a revolver, cap'n?  I've got
a bloomin' Martini, but I've run out o' cartridges months and months
ago."

"Here you are, and here are fifty cartridges.  I'll make you a present
of the pistol," replied Mr. McKay, though he realised that he was
playing into the man's hands.

Then, without waiting to receive the ex-pearler's thanks, he stepped
into the boat and was rowed off to the yawl.

"Good morning, Ellerton," he exclaimed.  "All quiet, I suppose?  Well,
let's get the canvas on her."

Already the natives were hauling their canoe down the beach, and by the
time the yawl had set her sails the splash of a score of paddles showed
that they had lost no time in embarking.

"Up with your helm, Andy; check the jib sheets."

Then, as the little craft drew clear of the land, the freshening breeze
caused her to heel and glide through the ruffled water of the lagoon.

By the time they had gained the passage through the reef the yawl was
ahead of the canoe.

"Glorious!" ejaculated Andy.  "See, they're setting their sail.  It
will be a good race, after all."

Half a dozen bronzed natives were setting the raking mast and bending
the yard with its enormous sail of cocoa fibre.  Then, as the sail rose
swiftly in the air, the breeze filled the mat-like canvas.  The crew
took in their paddles and watched the yawl with curious eyes.

"We are gaining on her, I think," remarked Andy.

"Yes; we must shorten sail," replied Mr. McKay.  "But I want
particularly to note the respective speeds of the two craft.  I should
think that, under sail and aided by her paddles, that canoe could
overhaul us under sail alone.  Yes," he continued, after a few moments'
careful observation.  "I think I've seen enough in case of future
developments, so we'll strike the topsail."

Under reduced canvas the yawl kept the canoe at a regular distance from
her, neither gaining nor allowing the latter to overhaul her.  Quexo,
fearing an attack of sea-sickness, had retired to the seclusion of a
berth in the fo'c'sle, while Ellerton and Terence, who had kept the
last portion of the previous night's watch, followed his example,
though from other motives.

Andy was steering.  His father, who had given him the course, was below
preparing a meal.

The wind held steadily all the forenoon, and by eleven o'clock the
summit of McKay's Island had dipped beneath the horizon.  It was not
without feelings of regret that Andy saw it disappear.  He, too,
realised that they were embarked upon a hazardous mission, and that
possibly great sacrifice would have to be made ere they returned to
their island home.

At midday the wind died away to a flat calm, the yawl rolling
sluggishly in the oily swell, with her boom swaying violently from side
to side, and threatening dire disaster to the heads of any of the crew
that incautiously came within its reach.

The canoe, similarly situated, did not hesitate to lower the sail, and
paddle close alongside.

"This is a bit rotten, cap'n," shouted Blight.  "Shall I give you a
tow?"

"No thanks, don't trouble about us," replied Mr. McKay.  "You can
paddle on ahead, and we'll follow when the breeze springs up.  If we
can't fetch Ni Atong before dark you might get those fellows to light a
fire on the beach, so that we can come up to the anchorage."

"Righto, boss!  Ta-ta!"

There was a peculiar glint in the man's eye.  He fancied that the
superior speed of the canoe under paddles was an asset in his favour
for the events he had already planned.

The chief gave the word, the blades dipped, and, gathering way, the
canoe soon gained a rapid pace.  The long-drawn song of the paddlers
gradually died away as the distance increased, and an hour later the
canoe was lost to sight.

"Now, Andy, we'll start the motor, and creep up within a couple of
miles of Ni Atong.  They will think we have picked up a breeze."

"Why don't you want to let that chap Blight know we've a motor?"

"Frankly, Andy, I don't trust him.  If he plays a straight game, well
and good; but, should he act treacherously--and I have every reason to
believe he will, judging by his past career--we must keep a trump card
up our sleeves.  That's why I wanted to make sure of the respective
speeds of the two craft, for you may be certain that, since the chief
is in her, yonder canoe is the largest and swiftest they possess.
Under power we can easily outstrip her, I have no doubt."

No sooner had the motor started than Terence and Ellerton appeared.

"Hullo!  Where's the wind?" asked the latter.

"And where's the canoe?  added Donaghue.

"Hull down," replied Andy.  "They've gone on ahead to give us a
house-warming.  Now, you fellows, get yourselves something to eat, and
then give us a spell.  I'll let you have the course.  Keep your weather
eye lifting, and look out for a breeze.  It may come down suddenly."

"You bet I will," assented Ellerton.  "How far are we from Ni Atong?"

"About twenty miles.  Directly the island hoves in sight call us."

At about four in the afternoon Terence, who had climbed the main-mast
and had taken up a perch upon the diminutive cross-trees, reported land
ahead.

Mr. McKay and Andy were instantly warned, and, a breeze springing up,
the motor was shut off.

Half an hour later the heads of a patch of palm trees were visible from
the deck.

"That's Ni Atong, right enough," commented Mr. McKay, as bit by bit the
land appeared to rise above the horizon.  "Blight told me that the
entrance to the lagoon is easily picked out."

Ni Atong resolved itself into a low, regularly outlined island barely
two miles in length.  Its surface was covered with dense scrub and a
few cocoanut palms, the soil being apparently loose and sandy.  So far
as could be seen, a coral reef extended round the island at a distance
of half a mile from the shore, the rocks in places protruding above
water to a height of nearly three feet.

"There's another island showing up on our port bow, sir," announced
Ellerton.

"Then that's Ahii.  It's a lofty island something like ours, judging by
the appearance of that mountain.  However, we'll hear and see more of
it later on.  Now, Andy, we are approaching the reef.  Do you climb
aloft and con the boat in through the channel."

This is the only practical method of entering an unbeaconed lagoon, for
owing to the sudden increase in depth, a lead line is of little use.
On the other hand, the extreme clearness of the water makes it possible
for a man aloft to detect instantly any rocks or shoals that lurk
beneath the surface.

For the space of five minutes it was an anxious time.  On either hand
the breakers thrashed themselves in masses of milk-white foam upon the
glistening coral reef, while ahead a narrow patch of undulating, yet
unbroken water showed the presence of the only available channel into
the shelter of the lagoon.

"Starboard--bear away--starboard again--port, steady!"

Under the light breeze the yawl was in danger of dropping to leeward
upon the merciless rocks.  One moment her stern was lifted high in the
air, the rudder consequently being useless.  The next she threw her
streaming bows above the following wave, then, shaving the edge of the
reef by a bare five yards, the little vessel glided into the quiet
waters of the anchorage.

The crew now had time to look about them.  Drawn up on the sandy beach
were seven large canoes, similar to that which had paid an unwelcome
visit to McKay's Island, while others, only slightly smaller in size,
were hauled up beneath the shelter of the bushes, their lofty carved
prows alone being visible.

The beach was lined with natives, numbering at least 180 men, besides a
host of women and children.

The men were of medium stature, muscular, and well built.  In colour
they resembled that of Quexo, being considerably lighter than the
natives of New Guinea.  Many of them bore scars, possibly
self-inflicted or the result of inter-tribal wars.

"Stand by to let go!" shouted Andy to Terence and Ellerton.  Then, as
the yawl shot up into the wind, he followed up with: "Let go!"

With a roar and rattle of chain the anchor plunged to the bottom of the
lagoon, and as the crew prepared to lower and stow the sails, Mr. McKay
waved his arm towards the crowded shore.

"Well, lads," he exclaimed, "what do you think of our allies?"




CHAPTER XI

THE FRUSTRATED SACRIFICE

"A rum-looking crowd," observed Terence.  "They look as if they could
do a lot of damage, though."

"Yes," replied Mr. McKay, "I am sure of it.  These fellows often fight
for fighting's sake, and a pretty spectacle they make of it at times.
I've seen them at it before."

"What, these natives?"

"No, the inhabitants of New Guinea.  They are strongly associated,
however, not only in manners and customs, but in language.  I must
polish up my Polynesian lingo, though after acquiring a smattering of
Spanish I'm afraid I've become very rusty.  Come, now, hurry up and
snug down, and we'll go ashore."

"Armed, of course?"

"Yes, certainly.  Take your revolvers only.  I don't think we need fear
anything at present.  If there's to be trouble it will be after the
natives have made the best use of us."

Accordingly the little crew worked with a will; then, directly the
canvas was stowed and a second anchor laid out, the whole party went
ashore.

They were received with great show of goodwill, the natives crowding
round them with shouts of welcome, while the ceremony of rubbing noses
was duly performed.

Several of the women advanced bearing long garlands, and, to the
undisguised bashfulness of the three lads, placed the flowing chains
round the necks of their visitors.  Quexo, however, was denied that
honour.  He was a coloured man, and therefore, in the eyes of the
natives, of no consequence.

"You made a quick passage, boss, after all," observed Blight.

"Aye, we picked up with a breeze," replied Mr. McKay, though he did not
offer to explain when the breeze was encountered.

"They've prepared a feast for you," continued the ex-pearler.  "So
let's put our best foot foremost."

At a short distance from the shore was a large clearing, temporary huts
made of branches and leaves of palm trees being erected in a vast
double circle.  Here a number of natives were busy baking pigs and
fowls, while there was an abundance of yams and cocoanuts.

"They are very improvident with their supplies," remarked Andy.  "They
evidently seem as if they are certain of returning to the land of
plenty."

"Yes," replied his father, who had taken an early opportunity of
examining the roasted pigs to make sure they were pigs.  "We may as
well set-to and enjoy their hospitality; now, keep close together and
see that your pistols are easy to draw."

The chiefs, each distinguishable by his huge mop of greased and frizzed
hair, had squatted in a semicircle, and no sooner had the guests seated
themselves than there was a terrific scramble on the part of the native
chiefs to help themselves.

"We must forget for the moment that we are civilised and follow their
example," remarked Mr. McKay, seizing a bit of pork in his fingers.

His companions did likewise, and notwithstanding the absence of knives
and forks they managed to eat and enjoy their share of the feast.

This done, there was a war-dance performed by the young men of the
tribe, the warriors brandishing their clubs with such energy that it
seemed wonderful that no one was hurt.

The natives did not appear to use their heavy clubs for the purpose of
knocking their imaginary adversaries over the head; instead, they
utilised the upward swing of their arms, lunging with the weapon on its
upward stroke.

Andy particularly noticed this, and remarked it to his father.

"Yes," was the reply.  "It's a favourite 'knock-out' blow with these
fellows.  I've seen them at it in actual combat.  The idea is to get
underneath their antagonist's guard, and strike him on the chin with
the upward sweep of the club, and knock him senseless.  Afterwards the
winning side secure those who are only stunned and----"

"And what?"

"Eat them!"

At length the display came to an end, and the guests prepared to return
on board.  Mr. McKay had attempted to converse with some of the chiefs,
but the result was a failure.  He therefore told Blight to inform the
chief that an early start was to be made on the morrow.

The news was received with redoubled shouts of delight, and the entire
population escorted the white men to the beach.  Nor did they stop
there, for men, women, and children rushed headlong into the sea, and
formed a huge bodyguard of swimmers till the yawl was reached.

All round the boat the water was black with the heads and arms of the
swimmers, for these natives of the Pacific Islands take to the water
often before they can walk.

Splashing and shouting loud enough to scare every shark within a mile,
they swam round and round the yawl, none offering to climb aboard, till
at a shout from one of the chiefs they turned and swam rapidly to the
shore.

"We must set watches to-night, I suppose?" asked Andy.

"Certainly!  Although these people are supposed to be our friends, we
must imagine ourselves in hostile waters.  I remember once that a small
schooner put into Niihau.  The natives came off to barter, and appeared
to be extremely friendly.  During the night about a couple of hundred
swam off to the schooner and took her crew entirely by surprise.  We
found the charred remains of her timbers about a month afterwards, but
not a trace of her unfortunate crew.  They had been made into 'big
pig.'"

"What's that?" asked Ellerton.

"Otherwise killed, roasted, and eaten."

"Then what happened?"

"The usual.  Gunboat, landing party, etc.  The village was shelled and
burnt, and the island afterwards annexed to the Empire.  So, you see,
we must exercise due caution, although I don't want to upset your
nerves."

It must have been shortly after midnight when the crew was awakened by
a warning shout from Terence.  Turning out of their comfortable bunks,
the others rushed from the cabin, armed in anticipation of a sudden and
treacherous attack.

A low rumbling greeted their ears, the sound apparently coming from the
shore.  For more than a minute the mysterious sound continued, then it
suddenly ceased.

"What is it?" asked Donald.

"I'm afraid I cannot tell you," replied his father.  "It's rather like
the sound of a submarine explosion; probably a volcanic eruption."

Again the noise was repeated, yet no agitation of the placid water took
place.  The natives did not appear to be disturbed, for no commotion
due to human agency could be heard from the island.  This time the
rumbling continued for quite five minutes, dying away in a succession
of long-drawn tremors.  Then all was quiet.

"I can't make it out," remarked Mr. McKay.  "Whatever it is it seems to
be accepted by the natives without a protest.  To-morrow I'll inquire."

The party remained on deck for nearly an hour, but as the mysterious
noise was not repeated, they at length retired to the cabin, leaving
Terence to continue the remainder of his watch.

Just after sunrise Ellerton called Mr. McKay's attention to something
on the beach.  Seizing his glasses, the elder man brought them to bear
upon the spot, and the next moment he exclaimed:

"Come on, lads, get your arms and row ashore as hard as you can."

Without waiting for an explanation, the three lads jumped into the
boat, Mr. McKay taking his place in the stern sheets.

"Don't look ahead; keep your eyes on the boat and pull," said Mr. McKay
quietly, yet there was a grim, determined expression on his face that
betokened trouble ahead.

The moment the little craft touched the beach the lads jumped out, and
led by Mr. McKay, they made their way at top speed along the sandy
shore.

Fifty yards from where they landed was the chief's canoe, which had
been hauled up on shore since the previous night.  At regular intervals
betwixt its lofty prow and the water were six dark objects lying on the
sand.

The lads gave a gasp of horror, for lashed firmly to bamboo poles were
six natives.  Their fellows were preparing to launch the canoe over
their bodies.

"Stop that!" shouted Mr. McKay sternly, holding up his hand to arrest
the progress of the heavy craft, which was quivering under the grasp of
fifty stalwart blacks.

The natives hesitated, glaring at the interrupters of their ceremony,
while some of the chiefs made signs for the interfering strangers to
stand aside.

"Where's Blight?" shouted Mr. McKay, as he opened the cut-off of the
magazine of his rifle.

"Here I am, boss," replied that individual, coolly sauntering forward.

"Tell them to knock off this horrible business."

"Let 'em carry on, boss," was the reply, almost apologetic.  "You see,
they ain't got no prisoners, and the chief's canoe must be launched in
this 'ere way, else it's bad luck.  So they picked on some of their
least wanted pals.  Bless me, you'll soon get used to it.  I did years
ago."

"You can tell them from me that the moment that canoe moves we'll open
fire.  You might also explain that if our wishes are not carried out,
we'll go back to our own island, and those rascals can stay here to
starve.  Now be quick, and let them know we mean business.  Cover these
tow-headed rogues," he continued to his companions.  "If I give the
word, let fly continuous volleys till the rest of the rascals bolt."

Evidently the chiefs knew the power of the white men's rifles, for they
stepped back a few paces.  Some of their followers grasped their clubs
and spears, and courageously awaited their leaders' orders.

Jimmy Blight spoke rapidly.  At first his words seemed to enrage the
chiefs, but finally they expostulated.

"What do they say?"

"They are willing to let the brutes free if you promise that your
power'll keep off the--the--you know what I mean, boss, the----"

"Evil eye?"' suggested Mr. McKay.

"Aye, that's it."

"You can tell them that there's nothing to fear on that score.  Let
them know that six men alive are worth something, and that six squashed
to a pulp will do them no earthly good."

Once again Blight turned to the half-pacified chiefs, a rapid exchange
of words followed, and in the end the latter signed to their people to
free the captives from their terrible position.

"That's over, thank God!" ejaculated Mr. McKay with intense fervour.
"Tell the chiefs I'm going to make them a present," and putting his
rifle to his shoulder he fired six shots in the air in rapid succession.

Astonishment held the natives spell-bound; they had never before seen a
magazine rifle discharged.  The sharp "crack" of the weapon, its
smokelessness, and the peculiar screech of the nickel bullets filled
them with awe, and with great hesitation they accepted the six empty
cartridge-cases as an exchange for the release of the intended victims.

"They've given you a tally, boss," observed Blight.  "They call you
'The Wonder that Breathes Fire.'"

"I hope they will bear it in mind then," replied Mr. McKay.  "Now let
them proceed with the launching operations.  When all is ready we will
set sail.  By the by, what was that noise we heard last night?" he
inquired, turning to the ex-pearler.

"Noise!  What noise, boss?"

"A kind of prolonged roar of distant thunder.  Twice it occurred."

"Oh!  I know what you mean.  We don't take no notice of it in these
parts.  It's the 'Barking Sands.'  See yon hills?"--pointing to a ridge
of sand dunes about sixty feet in height.  "The stuff's slippery like,
and often it rolls down, and makes a row.  There's a sight of other
islands about here like it."

Half-an-hour later a flotilla of nine canoes, crowded with armed
natives, paddled slowly towards the entrance of the lagoon.  As they
passed the white men's craft, their paddles rose in the air to the
accompaniment of a sonorous salute.

Then, as the dripping anchor rose clear of the water, the breeze filled
the sails of the yawl, and she, too, started to play her part in the
hazardous enterprise.

Another five hours would decide whether Ahii would fall into the hands
of its former possessors, and, what was still more important, the fate
of the little band from McKay's Island.




CHAPTER XII

AT BAY

Once clear of the reef, the canoes ceased paddling, and the brown
cocoa-fibre sails were hoisted.

The yawl, by reason of her superior spread of canvas, soon forged ahead
till, drawing in line with the largest canoe, in which were Blight and
the head man of the tribe, the speed was regulated so as to keep within
hailing distance of the ex-pearler.

Mr. McKay had already been given a rough chart of the island of Ahii.
Like their own island and Ni Atong, Ahii was surrounded by a reef, only
that on the eastern side the rocky barrier practically touched the
shore.  There were four large passages through the reef, two on the
southern side--which they were approaching--one on the western, and the
fourth on the northern.

The summit of Ahii was clearly visible from Ni Atong, and as the
flotilla neared the island its peculiarities could be gradually
discerned.  It was considerably larger than McKay's Island, and
composed chiefly of a dark brown rock, its flat portions covered with
verdure.  The general outline resembled a saddle, the higher of the two
peaks being over two thousand feet above the sea.

But in place of the glistening sands of McKay's Island there was a
beach of black sand, apparently the ground-up deposit of lava, for from
the lower of the two peaks a thin cloud of smoke was emitted, showing
that Ahii was still an active volcano.

At the western termination of the beach was perceived the entrance to a
small creek, while beyond this opening low, dark-coloured cliffs rose
sheer from the sea.

The approach of the invaders was observed long before the flotilla
reached the entrance of the lagoon, and by the aid of their telescopes
and field-glasses the crew of the yawl saw that the beach was lined
with warriors, armed with formidable beak-headed clubs, long spears and
oblong shields, the natives being bedecked with barbaric finery and
plentifully bedaubed with paint and ochre.

"That's their boat harbour," shouted Blight, pointing to the creek.
"Their canoes are drawn up on the banks about half-a-mile up the river.
The village is on the port side.  Shall I tell our men to push right in
and burn their blessed canoes?"

"No," replied Mr. McKay.  "I don't want unnecessary violence; besides,
if their canoes are destroyed, how can they leave the island?  Let our
boats remain about two hundred yards from shore.  You will then stand
in the chief's canoe and tell the natives to clear out.  Say that we
give them till midday.  Otherwise we must open fire on them."

"Then you don't want these fellows to have a set-to?"

"No!  No bloodshed unless it cannot possibly be avoided.  Now carry on
and we'll be ready to open fire to cover your retreat if they give
trouble."

Blight could not but obey.  The chief's canoe was paddled slowly
towards the shore, the natives regarding the late inhabitants of Ahii
with contemptuous gestures not unmingled with curiosity.  They expected
a mad rush, a fierce conflict on the shore, and an easy victory; but
the apparently timorous approach of a solitary canoe mystified them.

[Illustration: THE CHIEF'S CANOE WAS PADDLED SLOWLY TOWARDS THE SHORE]

The ex-pearler stood up and shouted to the hostile chiefs.  Whether he
gave Mr. McKay's message in a conciliatory manner the Australian was
not in a position to ascertain.  More than likely, Blight, with a white
man's contempt for "niggers," put his own construction upon the
request, for before he had spoken half-a-dozen sentences there was a
blood-curdling yell, and a shower of stones was hurled at the canoe.

The crew paddled out of range, while their companions, with loud
counter-shouts of defiance, urged their boat to the attack, till by
dint of much hand-waving Mr. McKay kept them temporarily in check.

"They've asked us to come ashore and be made into 'big pig,'" shouted
Blight.  "Shall we let our men loose?"

"Not here," replied Mr. McKay.  "Paddle along the shore and we'll make
a landing as far from the village as possible.  That will give the
enemy a chance to clear out if they get the worst of it."

Headed by the yawl, the little fleet kept parallel with the shore, a
crowd of about two thousand armed savages keeping pace with the
invaders, yelling, dancing, brandishing their weapons, and hurling the
direst insults of which the natives were capable at their apparently
inferior enemies.

"It must be a sharp lesson, lads," observed Mr. McKay.  "What wouldn't
I give for a Maxim or an automatic Colt.  Ellerton, you take the helm
and keep the boat just so, no nearer to shore."

The flotilla was now abreast of that part of the beach that was
terminated by the cliffs.  Here the flat shore consisted of a
wedge-shaped piece of ground, so narrow that the enemy was unable to
take due advantage of its superiority in numbers.  The rapid fire of
four magazine rifles would play havoc with the dense serried ranks of
bronzed and painted warriors, but still Mr. McKay refrained from making
the first advance.

"Let them fight it out between themselves," he shouted to Blight, who,
however eager he was to send the natives to the fight, did not show any
strong inclination to lead them.  "We'll open fire if our fellows get
the worst of it."

It was plainly impossible to keep the invaders in hand.  With a roar of
defiance that momentarily drowned the yells of their more numerous
adversaries, the natives urged their canoes towards the shore.

Then, as craft after craft grounded upon the beach, their crews dropped
paddles, grasped their clubs and spears, and plunged waist deep into
the water.

It was a veritable struggle between a host of bronzed paladins.

Clubs met with a loud and ponderous clang, spears met shields or else
found a softer billet, while those of the defenders of the island who
could not gain the van hurled enormous stones over the heads of their
foremost ranks at their vindictive foes.

Above the shouts of the combatants could be heard the shrieks of the
desperately wounded.

Several received serious wounds on both sides, yet save in extreme
cases, they bore their hurts bravely, returning to the fray with the
utmost determination, till failing strength caused them to drop, still
fighting so long as they could wield a club or thrust with a spear.

Twice the rightful inhabitants of Ahii gained a footing on the shore,
and twice were they swept back by the weight of numbers, for as fast as
one of the defenders fell, another filled his place, while on the other
hand the invaders had no reserves.  True, there were the white men, but
it was impossible to wield a rifle without serious consequence to
friend as well as foe.

"How these fellows fight!" exclaimed Andy.  "They simply won't give
way; they'll be exterminated."

"It's fighting for fighting's sake," replied his father.  "We must chip
in or we'll find ourselves opposed to the whole island without a native
to help us.  Luff her up, Ellerton.  That's right; now keep her as she
is."

The yawl moved slowly in the opposite direction to her previous course,
though still parallel with the shore.  By this means the scene of the
actual struggle was passed and only the serried rearguard of the
defenders was abeam.

"Now, lads, aim low!"

The four rifles opened a rapid fire.  It seemed like butchery, yet, as
Mr. McKay had said, there was no alternative.  Twenty human beings
cannot stop a modern rifle-bullet fired at one hundred yards' range.

The defence seemed to melt away, and with redoubled shouts of triumph
the friendly natives started in pursuit of the fugitives, knocking over
the head all who were overtaken.

"If those fellows won't keep in hand, they will be in danger of being
cut off," exclaimed Mr. McKay.  "We must follow our friends up.
Ellerton, you stay on board, and keep our craft underway."

Hurriedly the two McKays, Terence, and Quexo jumped into the tender,
rowed ashore, and followed the ghastly trail of the victorious natives.

It was a hazardous undertaking, for some of the fugitives had fled
inland instead of following their main body in their retreat upon the
village.  At any moment these might rally and fall upon the little band
of white men, the dense scrub being favourable for such tactics.

There was no sign of Jimmy Blight.  He had not accompanied the natives
in their first attack, although he was known to have been in the
chief's canoe, nor had he made his appearance when the white party
landed.

"Keep a bright look-out, lads," cautioned Mr. McKay.  "Have your
revolvers ready.  They are more serviceable than rifles here."

At almost every yard of the way lay natives either dead or grievously
wounded.  Many of the latter were bold enough to attempt to rise and
threaten the white men.  So far as possible, the wounded were ignored,
greatly to their surprise, for a savage rarely gives and never expects
quarter.

Once or twice, however, a warrior would spring to his feet after the
white men had passed, and with his remaining energy throw his club or
spear at his enemies.  In that case it became necessary to silence the
desperate native for ever.

Suddenly from the shelter of a dense belt of scrub three powerful
blacks dashed upon Quexo, who had strayed a few yards behind the rest
of the party.

The mulatto raised his revolver and fired, and a huge native sprang a
good three feet in the air and tumbled on his face.  But ere Quexo
could repeat his shot a triple-barbed spear pierced his shoulder.  He
fell, the weapon still embedded in his flesh.

The man who had thrown the lance drew a stone knife, and threw himself
upon the prostrate mulatto, while the third native raised his club to
complete the business.

With admirable presence of mind Quexo shot the man with the club, who
in his fall completely covered the hapless mulatto.

Alarmed by the first shot, Mr. McKay and the two lads ran to the aid of
their companion, but ere they emerged from the bush a third shot rang
out, and the savage who had hurled the spear at the mulatto fell shot
through the head.

Then as Andy rushed to the spot where Quexo lay, Jimmy Blight stepped
from the cover of a group of palm trees.

"Not a bad shot, eh, boss?" he exclaimed, as he thrust fresh cartridges
into his revolver.  "You'd best get your young fellow on board as quick
as you can, I reckon."

Quexo was groaning dismally, now the actual struggle was over.  The
triple spear-head had made a ghastly wound in his shoulder, for in his
fall the haft had broken off short.  Mr. McKay managed to extract it
skilfully.

In the midst of their misfortunes the roar of the combatants came
nearer and nearer.  The enemy had rallied; the savages were driving
back their attackers.  Already men were streaming by, flying for their
lives.

"Guess we'd best hook it," exclaimed Blight.

"Bear a hand, Andy," said his father, as he pointed to his helpless
servant.

"Don't be a fool, boss!" shouted the ex-pearler, who was already
beginning to retire.  "He's about done for, and we'll be the same if we
stop.  Come along!"

"Not I," replied Mr. McKay sturdily.  "You go if you want to.  Come on,
Andy, move him across to yonder thicket.  We'll make a last stand here
if it comes to the worst."

Something in Mr. McKay's reply must have appealed to the better nature
of this low-down specimen of the white race, for, turning swiftly on
his heel, he returned.  Kneeling beside the unconscious man he helped
himself to his bandolier, revolver, and rifle.

Without another word the four men lifted Quexo to the shelter of the
trees, and quietly and resolutely made ready to receive the horde of
triumphant savages.




CHAPTER XIII

ELLERTON TO THE RESCUE

Already the last of the fugitives had passed, rushing blindly for the
shelter of their canoes, and the foremost of their pursuers were
emerging from the clearing.

Mr. McKay, cool in the time of extreme peril, calculated that only
about a hundred of their allies remained alive, while, making due
allowance for the tremendous execution, there were at least a thousand
bloodthirsty foes.  Four against a thousand!

"Don't fire yet!" he whispered.

The main body of the savages crossed the clearing at breakneck rate,
and disappeared in the direction of the beach, but others came at a
more leisurely pace, examining those of the fugitives who had fallen.
Those who showed signs of life were bound hand and foot, for what
purpose the white men had no doubt whatever.

Presently the keen eye of one of the savages caught a glimpse of one of
the rifle barrels.  The man was evidently a chief, for, in addition to
his coat of paint, he wore a short cloak of feathers.

Without a moment's hesitation the savage uttered a loud shout and ran
straight in the direction of the white men, followed, at a distance of
about twenty paces, by some fifty yelling natives.

"You take that fellow, Blight!" exclaimed Mr. McKay quietly.

Blight raised his rifle to his shoulder, took a sight in the centre of
the chief's broad chest, and pressed the trigger.

"Missed, by smoke!" he cried, for the man came on steadily.

It was the work of a few seconds to open and close the bolt of the
rifle, and in that time the chief still ran on; but before Blight could
discharge his weapon a second time, the native's knees appeared to give
way, and he pitched headlong on his face.

All four men were firing fast into the hostile press.  The rush was
stopped, although some of the savages came near enough to hurl their
spears, several of which stuck in the trunks of the palm trees behind
which the little band took shelter.

Many of the attackers fled for safety, others did not deign to run, but
retired slowly, brandishing their weapons at their enemies as they did
so.  Some paid for their rashness, for it was a case of fighting for
existence, and every native put out of action told.

"The beggars are going to corral us," exclaimed Blight.  "See, they are
running round to our left."

A couple of volleys drove the natives back still farther, yet without
attempting to take cover they continued their tactics of trying to cut
off their enemies' retreat.

The South Sea Islanders rarely resort to strategy in actual fighting.
They may, indeed, take steps to surround their enemies, and then charge
fearlessly to close quarters.

The white men were even now surrounded, for the advanced body, having
failed to prevent the embarkation of the discomfited invaders, had been
attracted by the sound of the firing and had completed the hostile
cordon.

In the lull that ensued, Mr. McKay contrived to place a temporary
bandage over Quexo's shoulder.  The mulatto was still unconscious, but
showed no symptoms of having been poisoned by the spear thrust.

"I wonder what Hoppy is doing?" remarked Terence, after moistening his
parched lips with a draught from his water-bottle.  "I guess he's in a
terrible stew."

"He may manage to make our friends attempt another attack.  If so, we
can bolt for the shore; though I'm not going to put much faith in
that," replied Mr. McKay.  "They've had too much of a licking, I fancy."

"Pity you didn't let us burn those blessed canoes, boss; these black
rascals will be able to follow our craft now."

"Yes, I admit I erred on the side of mercy, Mr. Blight," was the reply.
"It's my fault, and I must take the blame."

"That comes o' being so mighty particular," retorted the ex-pearler
bluntly.  "If we come out o' this I guess your opinion of a nigger will
have an almighty change.  Now, stand by, for here they come."

"Don't be taken alive, lads," continued Mr. McKay, and the next instant
the rifle-fire reopened.

Upon the dense masses of natives every shot told, yet having only one
rifle for each front the fire was not sufficiently extended to keep the
advancing enemy at bay.

The air was filled with shouts and shrieks, while stones and spears
flew in deadly showers.  Once the magazines were empty there was no
time to recharge.  The heated rifles were flung aside and the revolvers
were brought into use.

The four men shot rapidly and well, the heavy lead bullets stopping the
headlong rush far more effectively than did the nickel rifle ammunition.

Once again the attack failed, the savages drawing off and leaving at
least fifty of their number dead or wounded on the field.  Not one of
the enemy had got within twenty yards of the death-dealing weapons of
the white men.

"Now, boss," gasped Blight, as he bound a discoloured silk handkerchief
round a spear-scratch on his left wrist.  "Shall we make a bolt for it?
We can fight our way to the shore."

Mr. McKay pointed to the still unconscious Quexo.

"Put a bullet through his head.  He won't feel it.  Why should we chuck
away our chance for a wounded nigger?"

"Look here, Mr. Blight, I've told you before you can go if you want to.
Here are two revolvers you can take; there's a good chance now, so go,
and good luck to you!  I must stay here--what do you say, lads?"

Terence and Andy grimly signified their intention of remaining with
their stricken comrade.

Blight saw there was a chance, but, in his opinion, far from a good one.

Although the spot the little band had chosen for their stand was within
a hundred yards of the sea, to return to where the canoes had landed
their armed contents was at least a quarter of a mile distant.

Then, again, directly he left cover and began to run, a hundred natives
would join in the pursuit.  Even could he manage to fight his way
through the ring and outstrip his pursuers, there was a long swim in
front of him.

Good swimmer though he was, Blight recognised that he was decidedly
inferior in speed to the amphibious natives.

"I see it's no go, boss," he exclaimed.  "So let's stick at it to the
end.  Come on, you black fiends!" he added, shaking his fist at the
dark masses of warriors, as they prepared to renew the attack.

"Don't waste a single shot," cautioned Mr. McKay.  "Here's the main
attack, so direct a combined fire in that direction, till they get
within fifty yards.  Then each man must look to his front and do his
best."

The words were scarcely spoken ere the fierce yells of the savages
redoubled, and the rush began.

Scorning to take advantage of the slightest bit of cover, they raced
furiously, leaping over the low scrub that would have stopped a
civilised race.

Then the rattle of the rifle-fire rose above the shouts of the natives.
Scores were hit, some falling on the spot, others running several yards
ere their strength failed, while many of the wounded, in their mad
thirst for vengeance, staggered after their comrades in an endeavour to
launch themselves upon the white men.

No longer was there need to raise rifle to shoulder.  Firing from the
hip, the little knot of desperate men emptied their magazines into the
throng of natives, then, casting aside their rifles, as before, they
grasped their revolvers, hardly daring to hope to check the headlong
rush.

Suddenly to an accompaniment of a peculiar screech, a trail of thin
smoke flashed earthwards from the sky.  Then, with a terrific report,
an explosion took place right in the middle of the surging pack of
savages, and ere the cloud of dense, suffocating smoke cleared away,
the natives fled in all directions.  Some, indeed, were so terrified
that they fell flat on their faces, clapping their hands to their ears
to shut out the echoes of the thunderous report.

Those who were on the remote side of the encircling body of natives,
though far from the scene of the explosion, were also seized with
panic, and the whole crowd, save those who had been hit or were too
dazed to move, fled helter-skelter for the village.

For a full minute none of the white men spoke.  Terence and Andy looked
with utter amazement at the retreating foes; Mr. McKay and Blight, more
hardened in peril, seized the opportunity to thrust fresh clips of
cartridges into their magazines.

"Guess a gunboat's been dropping a shell," observed Blight, who was the
first to break the long-drawn silence.

"You are wrong," replied Mr. McKay quietly.  "A shell would never throw
out a cloud of smoke like that; it's not the colour of lyddite either."

"Then what is it?  Who fired it?"

"Young Ellerton," was the astonishing reply.

Mr. McKay was correct in his surmise.  Ellerton, on seeing his
companions start in support of their coloured allies, was not
altogether at his ease.  He kept tacking the yawl, so as to be within
easy distance of the landing-place in case of a hasty retreat on the
part of the invaders.

Gradually the sounds of the running fight died away; but no report of
firearms served to show that the white men had got in touch with their
foes.

Seen from seaward the scrub seemed almost so thick as to be impassable.
Mr. McKay and his companions were literally swallowed up in the
trackless waste that lay beyond the low range of cliffs.

Ellerton looked around at the canoes.  Beyond a man left in each as a
boat-keeper they were deserted.  Blight had vanished; when and where
the young Englishman knew not.

Suddenly the distant report of a revolver burst upon his ears.  He knew
it to be a pistol shot, for it had not the short, sharp crack of a
rifle.  That meant foes at close quarters.  Then came two other reports
in quick succession, followed by a prolonged silence.

The firing reassured him.  He realised that his friends were not with
their savage allies, and that they were, in consequence, between the
village and the beach.  Rightly enough he guessed that they were
dealing with a party of stragglers, the noise of only three shots and
the absence of rifle-fire showed that the conflict was brief and
decisive.

The youth tacked once more, and steered eastward along the beach.
Again the long silence filled him with a nameless anxiety.  He
regretted the evil day when Blight and the natives came to McKay's
Island; but in the circumstances nothing else could be done.  They had
put their hand to the plough; there was no turning back.

Then, gradually but surely, came the sound of the natives still engaged
in conflict, unaccompanied by the report of firearms.  There was no
mistaking it.  Their allies were being driven back; but where were the
white men?

Nearer and nearer came the sounds of the retreating natives and their
pursuers, till the foremost of the fugitives gained the shore.  Jumping
into their canoes they pushed off, panic-stricken and utterly fatigued.
Then came the main body, a sorry remnant at most, grimly fighting their
foes at almost every step.

Waist deep in water they fought, till the survivors contrived to escape
in their boats.  Two canoes were left unmanned, their solitary
occupants paddling laboriously out of the reach of their foes.

Nor did the pursuit cease at the water's edge, for several of the enemy
dashed boldly into the waves and swam after the retreating craft.

One of the latter was, indeed, overtaken, and a desperate struggle
ensued between the rival natives, till the crew of another canoe,
seeing their companions' plight, returned and saved them from being
wiped out.

Then the flotilla moved well out into the lagoon, and took up a
position beyond the yawl, the natives, many of them badly wounded,
being too exhausted to paddle another stroke.

Ellerton was now confronted with a real peril.  His friends, if alive,
were cut off; he was unable to gather any tidings from the natives, who
replied to his gestures by grunts and meaningless exclamations.

Just then came the rattle of musketry.  At all events, Mr. McKay and
his party were still in a position to offer resistance, but against
what odds?

Just then the wind, hitherto light, died utterly away.  Ellerton knew
nothing about the motor, and he himself was now in a position of peril.
Unable to move, save by using a sweep, which was hard work, he was at
the mercy of the savages, who, lining the shore, had realised his
predicament, and were preparing to swim off and carry the yawl by storm.

Ellerton had plenty of rifles and revolvers, but even then he could not
hope to keep the mob of foes at bay.

Seizing a rifle, he sprang upon the cabin-top and opened fire.  It was
a fairly long range--some six hundred yards--but Ellerton gauged the
distance to a nicety; with the correct elevation, missing a man in that
throng was about an impossibility.  A commotion showed that the shot
had taken effect.  Another with equally good result!  Ellerton again
felt the lust of battle.

Suddenly, in the midst of his cool and deliberate firing, a blow from
the boom nearly knocked the youth overboard.  The breeze had again
sprung up.

Recovering himself by grasping the main shrouds, Ellerton laid his
rifle on the deck and jumped into the cockpit.  He meant to steer along
the coast towards the village, and, if possible, aid his friends by a
long, dropping fire.

His progress was slow, the wind being still light, and ere the yawl had
travelled a hundred yards the firing on shore died away.

What did it mean?  He thought.  Were his companions at length
overwhelmed by dint of numbers?  If so he would take revenge; he would
cruise up and down the shore and blaze away so long as a savage
remained on the beach, or a cartridge remained on board.

And after?  He gave but a brief thought to that--a solitary existence
on a boat far from the little island he regarded as his home--but the
thought filled him with the rage of despair.

Steering by means of the tiller between his knees, Ellerton headed
diagonally towards the shore, at the same time charging the magazines
of half-a-dozen rifles.

While thus engaged, to his astonishment and delight the sound of firing
was resumed, the scene of action being nearly abreast of where the yawl
was steering.  He immediately hove-to, and again ascending the
cabin-top, looked ashore.  The scrub and several small groves of
cocoanut palms prevented him from seeing the combatants, and on this
account he refrained from opening a dropping fire, for fear of harming
his friends.

He was in a helpless state of perplexity till all at once a thought
struck him which gave him new-born hope.

The night he and Andy kept watch on board, in the lagoon of McKay's
Island, they had taken some rockets to use should they require
assistance.  These rockets were of the ordinary sea-pattern, making a
loud explosion by means of a small charge of gun-cotton.

Hurriedly Ellerton fixed one of the rockets so that it would assume a
curved flight instead of soaring upwards, then turning the vessel's
course till the direction of the projectile would be as near as
possible towards the scene of action, he discharged the novel weapon.

      *      *      *      *      *

"That was a lucky thought of yours, Ellerton, my boy," exclaimed Mr.
McKay, when the little party was safely on board.  "They scooted like
rabbits.  But, by Jove! it was a narrow squeak."




CHAPTER XIV

ROUTING THE SAVAGES

There was not the slightest doubt about it.  The expedition had failed
disastrously.  Quexo was badly wounded, the white men all more or less
exhausted, while barely forty utterly demoralised natives were cowering
in their canoes.

"Well, we can't stay here," remarked Mr. McKay, after the mulatto's
hurts had been dressed and the wounded man placed on one of the bunks.
"They will be starting in pursuit, I'm thinking, and so, Mr. Blight,
will you tell those black rascals to man two of their canoes and
destroy the others?  By that means we may be able to get the survivors
back to Ni Atong."

Mr. McKay's opinion of the ex-pearler was undergoing a change.  No
doubt the man was a bit of a scoundrel, he thought, but he was older
and possibly more of a reformed character than in the old days in
Torres Strait.  He had certainly fought well and had impressed the lads
as a resolute and cautious combatant.

"I'll tell 'em, boss," he replied.  "But, by snakes, it's a bad
look-out."

"It is," assented Mr. McKay, as he prepared to go below and bind up a
slight wound on his shoulder.  "Your friends will have to be content
with Ni Atong for a while, I'm thinking."

Andy was also in the cabin, where he was attending to a surface wound
on his forehead--the legacy of one of the savages' showers of
stones--so only Terence and Ellerton remained on deck with the
ex-pearler.

"Couldn't the boss bring over the rest of your pals and settle our
score with those niggers?"

"What pals?"' asked Terence, taken aback by the suddenness of the
question.

"Why, the other chaps on your island."

"There are none," replied Terence.

Barely had the words escaped him, when he realised that he had made an
admission.  He had revealed the comparative weakness of the defences of
McKay's Island.

"Oh!  Is that so?" was the rejoinder.

Blight said no more on the subject, for the yawl was now within hailing
distance of the forlorn flotilla.

The natives accepted their white companion's orders without demur.  The
two most serviceable canoes were brought up with their full complement,
and the rest were scuttled till they floated awash--useless to friend
or foe.  Then with a light breeze the three craft--the yawl leading the
forlorn procession--headed for the opening in the reef.

Jimmy Blight was thinking.  He was not of a thinking nature, but
scheming and plotting were the only intellectual subjects in which he
excelled.  In fact, he was a past master in the art of intrigue.

He briefly summed up the situation and enlarged upon it.  His house and
store at Ahii were in the hands of a hostile race of savages.  His
wealth of copra and other valuable native products had vanished.

Had his black friends been able to regain possession of Ahii, he would
not have hesitated to incite them to fall treacherously upon the white
men from McKay's Island, and the doubtless valuable stores of that
place would be his.  Now, with fewer than forty of his savage friends
at his command, the risk was too great--at least at present.

No, he must wait his time, return to Ni Atong, and endeavour to find an
opportunity of surprising and slaying the handful of whites.  If only
he dared!  With a fully charged revolver he might make a sudden
attack----

This wicked scheming was suddenly interrupted by a shout from one of
the canoes.  The keen-eyed savages had detected an ominous movement
ashore.  Their enemies were launching their canoes in pursuit of their
discomfited adversaries.

"Say, boss!" exclaimed the ex-pearler, as Mr. McKay emerged from the
little cabin.  "What's to be done now?  There ain't no wind, in a
manner o' speaking, and those reptiles'll overhaul us hand over fist."

Mr. McKay did not reply at first, but anxiously scanned the shore with
his glasses.

"There are seven canoes," he announced.  "Three for us to tackle and
two for each canoe. 'Tis long odds, but I reckon we'll come out on top."

"Why not get aboard the canoes, and let this 'ere packet go?" asked
Blight.  "There'll be more chance with the blacks using their paddles.
It'll be a flat calm in a minute or so."

"No," replied Mr. McKay.  "We'll fight it out as we are, though we've
had quite enough for one day."

The crews of the two friendly canoes were still lying on their paddles,
realising that their only hope was in remaining by the white man's
boat.  Their indifference had vanished, and weapons were brandished in
a way that showed a grim determination to fight to the death.

"Tell them to paddle for all they are worth," exclaimed Mr. McKay.

"What for?" demanded Blight, his old aggressive manner beginning to
return.  "What's the use?  Let's keep together, I vote."

"I mean to," replied Mr. McKay coolly.  "Now do as I tell you."

Sullenly the ex-pearler obeyed, and the natives, plying their paddles
to the accompaniment of a mournful chant, soon increased the distance
between them and the almost becalmed yawl.

"Now, Andy, start the motor."

Great was Blight's astonishment as the engine began to purr, and the
little craft shot through the water at a good eight knots.  He had
never seen an internal combustion engine before.  Although motor-driven
craft are common amongst the pearling and trading fleets in the
Pacific, he had left the fishing-grounds some years before the first
motor had made its appearance.

Nor was the wonder of the crews of the friendly canoes any the less.
To them the white man's boat, vomiting clouds of vapour from the
exhaust and producing a series of rapid explosions, was nothing more or
less than a fiery-dragon.

"We are going the pace too much," remarked Andy, for the yawl was
easily outdistancing the canoes, whose crews were showing signs of
physical distress.

"Yes, we must stand by them," replied his father.  "See, our pursuers
are gaining; you are quite sure the motor is thoroughly tuned up, I
hope?"

"Running like clockwork," was Andy's enthusiastic reply.

"Good!  Now, lads, it's revolvers for this business.  Get the canvas
off her, then.  Keep well under cover; I'm going to ram the leading
canoe."

The sails were quickly stowed, and the bowsprit run in.  The five men,
revolvers in hand, kept in the cockpit so as to be sheltered by the
raised roof of the cabin.

"Now, Ellerton, how's your nerve?"

"Perfectly fit."

"Then put your helm over when I give the word and strike yonder canoe
square amidships."

The pursuers had trailed out in a long, straggling line, a couple of
hundred yards separating the foremost from the second.

On they came, fearlessly.  Ellerton could see the foam flying from the
sharp prow, the muscular backs of the straining oarsmen, and hear the
steady yet rapid thud of the paddles.  Now he could discern the whites
of the eyes of the fierce-looking warriors who were gathering in her
lofty bows.

"Make due allowance for the way she carries," cautioned Mr. McKay.
"Now, hard over!"

The youth at the helm put all his strength against the tiller.  The
yawl rolled outward as she turned, then recovering herself rushed
straight for her gigantic antagonist.

With a yell of defiance the savages let fly a shower of arrows and
stones.  The masts and deck were literally bristling with darts, while
the stones rolled like hail upon the planks.

Under the protection of the cabin-top the white men escaped the deadly
volley, but Ellerton, gripping the tiller with a vice-like grip, felt a
hot, stinging pain in his left arm.

Then, crash!  Fair in the centre of the lightly-built fifty-feet hull
struck the sharp stem.  There was a terrific splintering of wood and
the gurgling sound of inrushing water, while at the same time the fore
part of the yawl was crowded with a score of black fiends.

[Illustration: CRASH!  FAIR IN THE CENTRE OF THE LIGHTLY BUILT
FIFTY-FEET HULL STRUCK THE SHARP STEM]

Then the revolvers barked, and the living mob of savages melted away,
and the next instant the yawl was ploughing her way over the shattered
remains of the war-canoe.

"Hurrah!" shouted the crew.  "Now for the next!"

But the second canoe, profiting by her consort's misfortunes, turned
and paddled rapidly back, to obtain the support of the third.

With a difference of barely one knot in speed the advantage of the
motor-driven vessel was lost, so the crew had to be content to keep out
of range of the arrows and pour in volleys from the rifles.

It was a stern lesson, but one that was absolutely necessary, for the
remaining canoes turned tail and paddled hurriedly for the shore.

The sharp and short conflict was ended by the return of the two
friendly canoes, whose crews, with true savage instinct, completed the
work of destruction by spearing every man whose head remained above
water.

"Capitally done, Ellerton!" exclaimed Mr. McKay.  "You--Why, what's the
matter with the lad?"

The lad's face had turned a ghastly greyish hue, and only Andy's prompt
action saved him from falling upon the grating of the cockpit.

"Look!  He's hit!" said Andy, pointing to Ellerton's left arm, which
had hitherto been concealed.

In a trice Mr. McKay cut away the wounded youth's shirt-sleeve.  The
arrow had gone through the fleshy part of his forearm, the barb
projecting quite a couple of inches.

"Hold his arm as firmly as you can," said Mr. McKay.

Then, grasping the haft of the missile, he dexterously snapped it in
two.  In spite of his care and skill, the slight motion caused the lad
to utter a groan; but the worst was still to come.

Lubricating the broken shaft with some cocoanut oil, Mr. McKay told
Andy and Terence to hold Ellerton's arm tightly, so as to compress the
veins and arteries, and consequently numb the limb.  Then with a rapid
and deliberate motion he laid hold of the barbed end and drew the
fragment of the missile through the wound.  With a low moan Ellerton
fainted.

"Couldn't be better," remarked Mr. McKay.  "Now, lads, take him into
the cabin, and start the stove as fast as you can.  I'm afraid the
arrow is poisoned."

Andy and Terence lifted their comrade upon one of the bunks opposite to
that on which Quexo was peacefully slumbering.  Mr. McKay had given the
mulatto a strong sleeping draught; he now took up a rifle, and,
withdrawing the cleaning rod, snapped it close to the "worm."

"You might take the helm, Blight," he remarked.  "You know the course?
I shall be busy for half an hour or so."

Blight nodded.  Left alone, he gave a glimpse at the compass, put the
tiller up till the vessel lay on her proper course, and motioned to the
two canoes to follow.

Then he resumed his meditations.  Everything seemed in his favour.
Half a dozen revolvers, thrown down after the fight, were within hand's
reach.  In the cabin were two wounded persons and three totally
unsuspecting unarmed men.  And close by were the two canoes containing
his coloured associates.  What could be easier?




CHAPTER XV

A KNIFE-THRUST IN THE DARK

More than once Blight bent over the array of death-dealing weapons, but
on each occasion his nerve failed him.

Accustomed as he was to deal swiftly with the natives, never hesitating
to shoot down any black creature that thwarted him, he shrank from
tackling his intended victims.

Not from feelings of compunction did he pause; he was a coward at
heart, and the thought of a possible failure filled him with a horrible
dread.  So, nervously sawing at the tiller, he gnawed his lower lip and
formed fresh plans for evil.

Meanwhile Mr. McKay, unconscious of his peril, proceeded with his
preparations.  He deeply regretted the fact that the case of surgical
instruments salved from the _San Martin_ was at that moment--like the
Dutchman's anchor--left at home, or rather on McKay's Island.  In the
final hurry of embarkation that important item had been overlooked.

Grasping the glowing portion of the cleaning rod, Mr. McKay approached
the unconscious lad.  Once more telling the other two lads to hold the
patient's arm firmly, he inserted the red-hot metal into the wound.

It was the work of a few seconds, but the operation of cauterising the
wound was accomplished.  Time alone would tell whether this rude
surgery was a success or not.

An hour later the low-lying island of Ni Atong was in sight, and just
before sunset the yawl and her two native consorts entered the lagoon.

It was a pitiful home-coming.  The miserable remnant of the fleet of
canoes told the tale, and already the beach was lined with a crowd of
wailing women and crying children, with a sprinkling of old men, whose
services had been dispensed with on the fatal expedition.

The latter had good cause for being cast down.

In many of the Pacific Islands old age is looked upon as a useless
qualification, and, failing a crowd of prisoners to serve as sacrifices
and to appease the warriors' appetites, it was their aged and infirm
fellow-tribesmen who were doomed to die to keep the angry gods
good-tempered.

"Coming ashore, boss?" asked Blight, as if he did not care one way or
the other.  "I can give you a shakedown in my hut."

"I'm afraid we cannot manage it," was the reply.  "You see, with our
two patients it is out of the question."

"Well, well!  Maybe it will be best, 'specially as them natives are
going to have a bit of a bust-up to-night.  You mayn't like it, though
I'm used to it.  When do you set sail for your own island?"

"To-morrow at dawn."

"Oh!"

Mr. McKay looked up sharply.  There was a strange sound about that
"Oh!"  The ex-pearler realised that the exclamation was a weak
expression of regret, and hastened to explain.

"I thought as how you would be wanting fresh water, 'specially for your
two young chaps.  Make a day of it, and have a spell ashore.  One more
day won't make no difference like."

"Possibly not," assented Mr. McKay.

"Then there are yams and plantains.  They'll be rare good for feverish
fellows.  You're welcome, you know."

"I'll see what the others say.  So now, Blight, my son can row you
ashore."

"This is a present, isn't it, boss?" asked Blight, pointing to the
revolver that he had used to such good purpose at Ahii.

"Certainly, I gave it you," was the reply.

"Thanks!"

Blight picked up the weapon and thrust it with assumed carelessness
into his belt; then, bidding the crew of the yawl good night, he
stepped into the dinghy.

Hardly had the sun set, than the wearied crew retired to the cabin for
rest and refreshment.

Ellerton was awake, feverish, and at intervals in great pain.  Quexo
still slumbered.  Andy and Terence were sleepily nodding their heads in
an almost vain endeavour to keep awake.

Mr. McKay, though utterly done up, announced his intention of keeping
watch on deck the moment he had finished supper.

Just as the moon rose, a blood-curdling roar came from the island.
Instantly the two McKays and Terence rushed on deck.  Fires gleamed in
the centre of the wretched village, and around the flames danced a
hundred natives, yelling, screaming, and invoking their idols.

"What are they up to, pater?" asked Andy, as his father scanned the
shore with a pair of night-glasses.  "Let me have a look when you've
finished."

"You had better not," was the reply.  "Take my word for it."

The lads understood.  They were fairly well acquainted with the hideous
orgies that are practised on these islands.

"And to think we helped those villains," remarked Andy.

"Well," admitted his father, "it was, as I said before, the only course
open to us.  Now, I think all danger is past.  They are not strong
enough to attempt to seize our island, so we can go back with easy
minds."

"I hope so," returned his son.  "But my word, it's cost us something!"

"I can't understand that chap Blight," said Terence.  "He seemed mighty
curious to know how many of us lived on the island."

"You told him?"

"Yes!  I let the cat out of the bag, I fear."

"You did?" replied Mi.  McKay gravely.  "I'm sorry; but perhaps there's
no harm done.  However, we'll set sail to-morrow morning in any case.
I, for one, will not be sorry to say good-bye to Mr. Blight.  Now,
lads, you must turn in.  I'll be all right here; and to-morrow, all
being well, I'll make up arrears of sleep."

Left to himself, Mr. McKay sat in the cockpit and watched the orgies
ashore till the fires died out and the sounds of the worshippers
ceased.  Half-an-hour later he appeared, to all intents and purposes,
to be lying in the stern sheets fast asleep.

At about three in the morning the moon, now high in the heavens, threw
her beams upon a strange drama.

Swimming with eel-like swiftness and silence towards the unguarded yawl
came three men.  Two were natives, the third a white man, and each had
a glittering knife betwixt his teeth.

Grasping the boat's stern, Blight (for it was he) listened intently.
Then, hearing only the sounds of deep slumber arising from the cabin,
he cautiously placed his foot over the bobstay, and with slow and
stealthy movement hoisted himself clear of the water.

Having made sure that the deck was deserted, he climbed softly upon the
fo'c'sle and proceeded to unfasten his revolver, which he had secured
to the top of his head by means of a strip of cocoa fibre.

Presently he was joined by one of the natives, and at a short interval
by the second.  Creeping towards the open skylight the miscreant
listened once more.  The loud ticking of the cabin chronometer and the
deep, regular breathing of the sleepers, alone broke the stillness.

Suddenly Blight perceived Mr. McKay's form lying with his head buried
in his arm upon one of the seats of the cockpit.  This was awkward.  He
raised his revolver, then reflected that ere he could reach the cabin
after firing the fatal shot the occupants would be aroused.

Sprawling full length upon the cabin-top, Blight watched the slumbering
victim with considerable misgivings, till realising that Mr. McKay was
sound asleep, he raised himself upon his elbow, and beckoned to the two
natives.  Uplifting his knife, Blight made an imaginary thrust, then
pointed meaningly towards the sleeper.

Just then a shark glided past the boat at barely an oar's length.
Rising to the surface it turned on its back and snapped at some
floating object.  The sharp, almost metallic snap of those powerful
jaws filled the would-be murderer with alarm.  He realised that the
sleeper might awake, and also that his own retreat was cut off.

The sweat poured in torrents from his brow and ran down his chalky
cheeks.  But the sleeping man stirred not.

Reassured, Blight again signed to the natives.  Knife in hand the two
glided along the narrow waterways, dropping noiselessly into the
cockpit, and crept towards their unsuspecting prey.

Blight, revolver in hand, followed, stopping by the side of the cabin
bulkhead, ready to dive into the cabin and complete the murderous
business the moment the fatal blow was struck.

Like panthers the two natives launched themselves upon their victim,
their knives flashed in the moonlight; the next instant they were
buried to the hilt in the body of the sleeper.

Ere the weapons could be withdrawn, two shots rang out in quick
succession.  One of the natives fell face foremost across the coaming
of the cockpit, the other gave a spring and plunged lifeless into the
sea.

Then, before Blight could realise the sudden turn of affairs, he felt
the contact of the muzzle of a smoking revolver against his temple.

"Hands up, Blight!" exclaimed Mr. McKay resolutely.

The would-be murderer's weapon fell from his nerveless grasp and
immediately his hands were raised high above his head.

The noise of the firing had aroused the sleeping inmates of the cabin,
and Andy, Terence, and even Ellerton rushed through the narrow doorway
into the well.

"Get hold of a few pieces of lashing and secure the rascal," said Mr.
McKay calmly.

"You are not hurt?" asked his son anxiously.

"Hurt?  Not a bit of it.  No thanks to this beauty, though.  See!"

And, still keeping the weapon at the would-be assassin's head, he
pointed to the made-up figure of himself, in which the hilts of the two
knives glittered in the moonlight.

Andy and Terence lost no time in securing the ankles of the prisoner.
Then ordering him to lower his hands, the lads deftly lashed his elbows
together behind his back.

"So, Mr. James Blight, alias 'Chinese Pork,' I find your delightful
character has undergone little change during the last twenty years.
One would have thought that your unpleasant experiences in connection
with the _Sea Belle_----"

"What d'ye mean?" gasped the prisoner, his eyes rolling heavily in his
terror.

"I beg you not to interrupt.  A connection with the _Sea Belle_ would
have taught anyone but an utter villain or a fool a lifelong lesson.  I
will pass over those minor affairs at Boni Harbour and Fortescue
Strait, though by mentioning them you can realise that I know a good
deal of your former career.  What you've been doing since is of little
consequence, though I'll wager that your existence will not bear
investigation.  Now, to complete your record, you've been caught in the
act of attempting to treacherously slay your white--well, I won't say
friends.  Thanks to a merciful Providence, your schemes were thwarted.
I am now going to keep you in custody till I can hand you over to
justice at Brisbane, where you will have a fair trial and be allowed to
answer to a number of various crimes."

Mr. McKay paused to note the effect of his accusation, then he
continued:

"I am going to keep you a close prisoner in the fo'c'sle till we return
to our island.  You will then be kept in confinement ashore till such
time as we are able to reach some island under the control of a
recognised British governor.  Have you anything to say?"

The ex-pearler maintained a sullen silence, and, without offering any
resistance, he was carried into the fo'c'sle and locked in, there to
meditate on the fate in store for him.

"Ellerton, go back to your bunk.  You ought not to be here," exclaimed
Mr. McKay.

"But I feel all right again," replied the youth.

"Probably you do, but with your arm in that state absolute rest is
essential.  So go.  Andy, we've had enough of this island, so let's
clap on all sail and shape a course for home."

In the moonlight the entrance through the reef was plainly visible.
There was a favourable breeze, so that the yawl could lay on her course
without having to tack.

As the anchor rose, a long-drawn chorus of shouts of rage came from the
beach, and a swarm of arrows, all of which fell short, hurtled through
the air.

"So much for our native allies," observed Mr. McKay.  "They are all in
the swim in this business.  No matter, they can do us no harm."

To the accompaniment of a farewell shout of anger from the baffled
inhabitants of Ni Atong, the yawl glided swiftly across the moonlit sea.




CHAPTER XVI

THE GALE

Throughout the night the stiff little craft gallantly breasted the
waves, making a much better passage than she had done on her outward
voyage, and at sunrise the highest peak of McKay's Island appeared
above the horizon.

But with the rising of the sun the wind increased in force, and an hour
later it was blowing half a gale, and dead astern.

Trembling on the crest of a huge wave, then sliding with a sickening
sensation down the green slope into the trough, the little craft held
on her course, steered by Andy's sinewy arm.

Mr. McKay, unable to keep his eyes open, lay deep in slumber upon one
of the bunks.

Ellerton, propped up by cushions, was kept awake by the motion of the
boat, every lurch causing his wound to pain horribly.

"Another couple of hours will find us home, Hoppy, old man," exclaimed
Terence cheerily, as he entered the cabin.  "But it does blow."

"So I should think," replied Ellerton.  "But how is she behaving?"

"Like a cork; we've only had the tail end of a couple of seas aboard.
Well, cheer up!  Make yourself at home and wish you were," and with
this pleasantry Terence returned to keep Andy company.

Each time the yawl breasted the summit of a wave, the peak of McKay's
Island could be seen rearing its head above the waste of storm-tossed
waters.  Each time it did so it appeared to be getting nearer.

Andy knew that there was danger ahead, but he forebore to mention the
fact to his chum.

The "back-wash" from the terrible reef, with its accompaniment of a
tumble of dangerous cross-seas, had to be encountered, and the risky
passage through the coral barrier made at all costs.

For half-an-hour more the seas, though high, were comparatively
regular, but at the expiration of that time the dinghy, which was being
towed astern, was filled by a vicious comber.  The dead weight of the
water-logged craft caused the stout painter to snap like pack-thread,
and the next instant the tender was lost to view in the turmoil of
foaming water.

"Can't we go back for her?" shouted Terence, for the howling of the
wind made ordinary conversation inaudible.

"Impossible!" replied his chum.  "She would be swamped before we hauled
to the wind.  Besides, the dinghy's done for."

"It's a rotten look-out.  We shall miss her."

"Yes," assented Andy.  "But it can't be helped.  Look here, Terence,
now we are going through a patch of broken water.  I can see it a mile
or so ahead.  We may have a few seas on board, so lash yourself to this
cleat and stand by with the bucket.  You may have to bale for all
you're worth."

Terence closed the cabin-doors.  Fortunately they were close-fitting
and comparatively watertight; but, on the other hand, the cockpit was
not a self-emptying one.  Whatever quantity of water broke over had to
be baled out.

"We'll have one of those cans of kerosene out of that locker,"
continued Andy.

"Going to start the motor?"

"No; to throw oil on the sea.  Kerosene's not very heavy, but it's all
we have.  Now, stand by, here it comes."

Only a mile now separated the yawl from the entrance to the lagoon of
McKay's Island, but every yard of that mile was beset with dangers.

Andy gripped the tiller, and braced himself for the ordeal.  He had
been the chief workman in the task of converting the boat into her
present form, and now his handiwork was to be put to the test.  A
faulty piece of wood, a defective screw, an unsound rope--and their
lives would have to answer for it.

With a dull roar a white-crested wave broke over the fore-deck, burying
the little yawl as far as the mainmast; then ere she could recover
herself another comber came like a cataract over the lee quarter.  Well
it was that both lads had taken the precaution of lashing themselves
on, otherwise they might have been swept clean out of the well.

Andy, wellnigh breathless--for he had been hit in the side by the
tiller as the boat attempted to broach to--retained sufficient presence
of mind to thrust the helm up and enable the craft to meet the next
following wave stern on.

"Bale!" he shouted.  "Bale for your life!" and seizing the kerosene can
that was floating from side to side of the cockpit, he splayed a
quantity of oil over each quarter.

Terence, who was thrown in every direction as far as his tether would
allow, struggled manfully with the bucket, but could hardly cope with
the frequent showers of spray that literally played over the boat from
every point of the compass.

The helmsman noticed, with feelings of deepest concern, that the yawl
had made considerable headway since entering the zone of broken water,
and it would be touch-and-go whether they could avoid being carried on
to the lee side of the coral reef.

It was now nearly high tide, and the cruel ridges were covered,
although in the trough of the heavier waves the jagged lines of
glistening coral showed themselves above the smother of foam.

Andy tried his best to keep the boat's head towards the channel, but in
vain.  She had lost ground, and was driving straight for the reef.  One
chance alone remained.  He must put the yawl about and endeavour to
claw-off the treacherous reef.

Like a top the little craft responded to the shift of the helm.  For a
few brief seconds the reefed head-sail slatted violently in the howling
wind; then, to the accompaniment of another tremendous sea, the yawl
staggered on her fresh course.

Andy's idea was to sail round to the lee side of the island and cruise
about in the shelter of the reef till the gale moderated; but a few
moments sufficed to show him that the spread of canvas--already as much
as the vessel could carry--was not sufficient to take her to windward.
She was drifting broadside on to the reef.

"Quick, Terry!" he shouted.  "Tell them to stand by and make a rush
directly you open the cabin door.  The yawl's done for.  She'll be
smashed to splinters in five minutes."

Mr. McKay received the appalling intelligence fairly calmly.  He at
once proceeded to fasten a lifebelt round Ellerton's practically
helpless form, and then did a like service to Quexo.  Nor did he forget
the prisoner, Blight.  But, on sliding back the fo'c'sle hatch, he
found the man lying senseless on the floor.  Either he had fainted
through sheer fright, or he had been stunned by being thrown against
one of the lockers, and bound hand and foot, had been unable to help
himself.

Blight was no feather-weight, but in spite of the plunging and rolling
of the doomed craft, Mr. McKay gripped him with one hand and dragged
his senseless body into the cabin.  Then, cutting his bonds, he
completed his work of mercy by lashing the sole remaining lifebelt
round the body of his would-be murderer.

"You've nothing to put on," gasped Ellerton.

"True; but I have my strength," was the reply, as Mr. McKay stealthily
girded on a leather belt in which hung a formidable sheath-knife.  It
was not the thought of being cast on the waters that troubled him.
Death, should it come, would be swift and merciful.  But should they
survive the dangers of the reef there was the probability of far
greater peril.

Though he forbore to mention the fact to Ellerton, Mr. McKay thought of
the sharks, and with a fervent unspoken prayer to save them from these
creatures, he stood ready for the cabin door to be opened.

Meanwhile Terence and Andy had cut themselves free from their lashings.
Twenty yards away the reef showed its teeth as if waiting for its prey.

Then with a noise like the rattle of musketry, which drowned the
thunder of the breakers, the staysail burst asunder, and the yawl, in
spite of the helmsman's efforts, flew up into the wind.

Down in the trough of a murderous sea she sank.  A rapid glance astern
showed the glistening reef towering several feet above the little
craft, the white foam pouring down the honeycombed ridges as if the
rock were baring itself to strike a harder blow.

"The door!" gasped Andy, as a gigantic roller bore down upon the reef.

Terence unfastened the cabin door, and as Mr. McKay appeared, holding
Ellerton and Quexo in his powerful grip, the yawl seemed to stand on
end.  Then, borne on the breast of the roller, the little craft was
tossed like a cork right over the rocks, her keel scraping the lee side
of the reef by barely a yard!

The next instant the vessel was rolling sluggishly in the sullen swell
within the lagoon, with two feet of water in her cabin, yet still
afloat and in comparative safety.

"Don't wait to bale out!" shouted Andy.  "You take the helm, pater.
Run her up into the wind and we'll anchor."

The ground swell inside the lagoon was too great to allow the yawl to
run alongside the usual jetty.  They would have to wait till low tide,
when the reef would be sufficiently exposed to serve as a breakwater.

Quickly Andy and Terence made their way for'ard to let go the anchor.

When within a couple of hundred yards of the beach the yawl was again
put head to wind, and with a splash the anchor plunged to the bottom of
the lagoon.  But just as Andy was checking the out-rushing cable, a
sudden blow from the staysail caught him unawares, and the next instant
he was struggling in the sea.

The waves carried the lad clear of the vessel, and in spite of his
utmost efforts he was unable to regain the boat.  His father hurled a
coil of rope, but the line, being wet, became entangled and fell short.

Andy saw that it was impossible to swim back, so with a cheery wave of
his arm he pointed towards the surf-beaten shore, and immediately
struck out for land.

For an instant Mr. McKay intended to plunge into the sea and accompany
his son on his perilous swim, till the thought of the possibility of
Blight recovering his senses occurred to him.  With Ellerton and Quexo
disabled, the margin of safety was not sufficient when only Terence
remained to guard the prisoner.

Both lads were surprised to see Mr. McKay rush into the flooded cabin
and return with a rifle and a belt of ammunition.

"Don't alarm him," said Andy's father hurriedly.  "But there may be
sharks about."

Placing the rifle on the fo'c'sle of the heaving vessel, Mr. McKay
watched the progress of the swimmer with the greatest concern, at the
same time keeping a sharp look-out for the expected appearance of the
dreaded dorsal fin of one of the tigers of the deep.

Steadily Andy swam shorewards, keeping up a slow yet powerful side
stroke.  Now he was in the grip of the ground swell.  Once his feet
touched bottom, but ere he could obtain a firm footing the "undertow"
swept him backwards.

The next instant he was lost to sight in a white-capped roller.  The
wave broke, then receded, but to the alarm of the anxious watchers
there were no signs of the swimmer.

Quickly the wide expanse of sand uncovered; then, just as another
breaker was preparing to launch itself upon the beach, Andy sprang to
his feet.

Knee-deep in water he rushed up the shelving shore, and managed to
grasp a ledge of rock ere he was again overwhelmed by the mighty
torrent.  Fortunately he was able to retain his grasp, and directly the
rock uncovered he ran beyond the reach of the waves and sank exhausted
on the beach.

"He'll be all right in a minute," said Mr. McKay with a sigh of relief.
"Now, Ellerton, you had better stay here while we get rid of the water;
the bunks must be saturated.  Come on, Terence, we've been through a
great deal, and now, thank God, we are safely home; but all the same,
we've plenty of work to do."

Thus exhorted, Terence assisted Mr. McKay to lower and stow the
mainsail and secure the fragment of the head sail that had caused so
much mischief.

This done, they plied buckets and balers till the level of the water
they had shipped sank well beneath the floor-boards of the cabin.  The
yawl was no longer sluggish, but rose buoyantly as each roller passed
under her.

"This is the second gale from this quarter," remarked Mr. McKay, as
they were partaking of a hastily cooked meal.  "It's taught me a
lesson.  Had our boat been in her usual dock she would have been dashed
to pieces.  At the first opportunity we'll lay down a heavy set of
moorings and keep her afloat.  Here, thanks to the reef, the seas can
never be really dangerous, though on shore they break heavily."

"When shall we be able to land, do you think?" asked Terence, for the
short, sharp motion of the boat as she pitched at her cable was
beginning to prove distressing, both to him and Quexo.

"In a matter of three hours Andy will be able to launch the other
tender.  We will then lay out another anchor, so as to make doubly
sure, and get ashore.  Is Andy still on the beach?"

Terence went out of the cabin, and on returning reported that his chum
was ascending the cliff path.

"Now we'll secure this fellow Blight once more.  I see he's coming
round," continued Mr. McKay.

Placing the prisoner again in the fo'c'sle he did not attempt to secure
his arms and legs.  He merely tied the man's thumbs with a piece of
strong but fine cord, so that his arms were kept behind his back.
Unless he attempted to struggle, the prisoner would feel but slight
inconvenience, while this method was a perfect means of keeping him in
a state of utter helplessness.

Shortly after this was done Mr. McKay went on deck "to have a look
round."  Gazing landward, he saw Andy standing on the edge of the lower
terrace, striving to attract his attention by means of a handkerchief
tied to a stick.

"There's Andy calling me up in the Morse code," said Mr. McKay.  "I
wonder what's up?  Terence, will you please hand me over that
signalling flag from the for'ard port locker?"

Andy, though not an expert signaller, knew the Morse system fairly
well.  Slowly he transmitted the startling message:

"_The house has been broken into!_"




CHAPTER XVII

BACK TO THE ISLAND

Without hesitation Mr. McKay replied:

"Do not go to the house.  Remain on beach till you can launch boat."

Andy gave the A.F., showing that he understood the signal, and
descending to the shore proceeded to divest himself of most of his
sodden clothing.

"There's something amiss ashore, lads," explained Mr. McKay.  "Andy's
just informed me that the house has been broken into.  Of course, it
may be another unfortunate party of shipwrecked mariners, or a hurried
visit of the crew of a passing ship.  All I hope is that there are no
natives on the island."

"I wonder if any remained after the canoe left," remarked Ellerton.

"Quite possible.  I never thought of that, by Jove!  They might have
slipped away in the night in order to steal all they could lay their
hands upon.  In that case there are only a few.  We may be able to hunt
them out without much trouble.  Still, I'm sorry it's happened."

From the cabin Mr. McKay produced his pair of marine glasses.  After a
prolonged examination he exclaimed:

"Yes, the door is ajar.  I feel certain I closed it when I left."

"We'll soon see what's amiss," said Terence.  "See, the reef is
uncovering and the wind is dropping."

"Yes, it is," assented Mr. McKay.  "Andy will be able to put off in the
boat in less than an hour.  Ellerton, I think you had better remain on
board."

"Why, sir?"

"Because of your arm."

"I'll take care of it.  Besides, I can use a revolver with my sound
limb if necessary."

"Very well, then; only don't blame me if anything goes wrong.  Quexo
must stay in any case.  There's no need to worry about Blight."

In less than the predicted time Andy succeeded in rowing the small boat
safely through the rapidly subsiding swell.  Directly he came
alongside, Mr. McKay and the two lads slipped on board, and with no
greater inconvenience than a thorough drenching--to which they were now
perfectly accustomed--the party landed at the natural quay at the foot
of the path leading up to the house.

Everything appeared quiet.  A hasty glance at the two storehouses on
the lower terrace revealed the astonishing discovery that nothing had
been disturbed.

"Strange," exclaimed Mr. McKay.  "One would have thought that these
would be the first places to be ransacked.  Now, carefully, lads!  Keep
your firearms ready."

Cautiously they scaled the cliff path and gained the terrace on which
the house stood.  Still no signs of human beings, except that the door
was half open.

Mr. McKay knocked quietly, then, pushing open the door, he entered.  A
strange sight met his gaze.  Everything movable had been upset or
pushed out of place; the floor of the living-room was littered with
bedding and the fragments of earthenware vessels.

"The brutes!" ejaculated Mr. McKay savagely.  "They've capsized
everything out of sheer mischief.  I hope I'll be able to lay my hands
on them."

The lads, not without feeling of mysterious awe at the scene of wanton
desolation, crossed the floor of the room and entered the sleeping
quarters.

Here the state of confusion was, if possible, greater than in the outer
apartment; but a clue to the mystery was afforded by the discovery of
the dead body of a sheep, its head wedged in between the bars of a
chair.

"Why," exclaimed Andy, "the sheep have broken out of their pasture!

"Yes," replied his father.  "They managed to find their way into the
house, though how I cannot imagine.  Something must have frightened
them and there was a mad stampede.  This poor brute contrived to get
his head jammed in the chair, and in his struggles he broke his neck.
We've had a rare fright, but, after all, there's nothing of consequence
that cannot be set right."

"Hadn't we better get Quexo ashore before it gets dark?"

"Certainly, and Blight as well.  I think the best place we can put him
is in the small store.  He'll be all right for one night, though I'm
sorry to keep him bound."

"The treacherous reptile deserves no consideration."

"My dear Andy, we are not Nicaraguan revolutionaries.  So long as he
remains our prisoner we ought to treat him with the same amount of
consideration that any other British criminal receives while awaiting
trial.  To-morrow we must find a place better suited for his reception."

"There's the farthermost cave, the one beyond those where we've stowed
the dynamite," observed Andy.  "There's not much in it at present; we
can build a partition over the opening and make a door."

"Yes, it will be far more comfortable than his quarters in Ni Atong.
We'll make a start to-morrow."

Accordingly Mr. McKay and his son put off in the dinghy--which, by the
way, was the larger though more awkwardly-shaped part of the _San
Martin's_ gig--and transferred Quexo to the shore.  The poor fellow was
in a bad state, though his wound showed no signs of complications.
Ellerton had had his hurts attended to as soon as the house was set in
order.  Beyond the inflammation caused by the searing-iron, his wound
gave no reason for undue anxiety.

"Now then, out you come," ordered Mr. McKay sternly, as Andy and he,
armed in case of emergency, returned to the yawl.

Blight obeyed.  Indeed, there was no option.  His face was a picture of
utter cowardice and terror.

"You ain't going to shoot me?" he whined.

"No!" replied Mr. McKay.  "I've already told you what I intend to do
with you.  So long as you behave yourself you'll be treated
properly--far better than you deserve."

With that the would-be assassin took his place in the boat, Mr. McKay
seated beside him with a revolver in his hand, while Andy rowed.

On arriving at the shore the captive's eyes were bandaged, and, still
secured by his thumbs, he was led up to the first terrace and placed in
the storehouse.  Mr. McKay then severed the cord that bound him, the
door was locked, and the rogue left to his own reflections.

The following day was an exceptionally busy one.  Ellerton, being
unable to do any hard work, was dispatched into the grove to "round up"
the sheep, while the three sound members of the establishment, after
having conveyed the prisoner his food and water, set off for the cave
that was to be prepared for his quarters.

It was situated on the extreme end of the upper terrace, where the
level stretch of ground tapered away till it ended in the sheer face of
a high precipice.

Outside the mouth of the cave was a belt of grass land about ten yards
in width, the cliff falling to a depth of about seventy feet, while
above the cave the rocks, too smooth to afford a foothold, towered to
nearly a hundred feet.

The cave was quite fifty feet in depth, and averaged ten feet in width,
while its height in places was over twenty feet.  Its entrance,
however, was barely four feet wide and six in height.

"There won't be much light for the poor beggar when once we've inclosed
the entrance," remarked Andy.

"That is so," replied his father.  "I really don't see why we couldn't
inclose a strip of land between the two cliffs, and let him have the
run of it."

"How inclose it?"

"I think we can spare enough of the galvanised iron sheeting to make an
unclimbable fence.  Each sheet is ten feet in height, is it not?"

"Certainly not less."

"Then we'll make a start.  Although we cannot possibly hope to complete
the work to-day, we may reasonably expect to finish it to-morrow
afternoon."

The soil proved to be fairly soft, so that it was necessary to sink the
base of the iron sheets at least two feet into the ground.  Strong
timber uprights with cross-braces of railway iron served to make the
fence secure, a doorway being left to afford means of communication
with the prisoner's quarters.

"I think we have taken every possible precaution," remarked Mr. McKay,
after the fence was completed and the bedding and the other necessary
articles for the ex-pearler's use had been placed in the cave.  "Of
course, this business entails a considerable amount of extra work, for
besides the feeding arrangements we must make a thorough examination of
the fence every day."

"Why?  He cannot possibly pull it down, and I'm sure he will not be
able to scale the wall."

"There are at least two ways he might manage to escape.  He could
either burrow under the fence, or he might manage to spring from the
top of a pile of furniture on to the upper edge of the wall.  If we
make a point of examining both sides of the fence twice a day, we shall
be able to detect any sign of a tunnel; while it is unlikely that an
effort to scale the wall will meet with any success, for the edge of
the iron sheets is sharp enough to cut through his hands should he make
a leap at it.  I'll talk to him pretty straight and let him know what
to expect if he does manage to escape, though, at the same time, it
will be an anxious business for us while he's at large--if he's fool
enough to try it."

That evening Blight was conducted to his new quarters, duly cautioned
as to his behaviour, and safely locked up; and from that day the
"prison yard," as Terence termed it, was carefully examined night and
morning.

It was, as Mr. McKay predicted, a severe strain on their time, for to
guard against a surprise it was necessary that two people, armed in
case of emergency, should make a visit to the prisoner twice daily.

At the first opportunity a strong set of moorings was laid down off the
little stone quay, sufficiently clear of the shore to be out of the
range of breaking rollers.  Here the yawl was to make her future berth,
the dinghy being kept on the beach well beyond the reach of the tide.

It was proposed to make a trip at an early date to the Marquesas, there
to hand over the criminal into the charge of the British Consular Agent.

The planning of this voyage necessitated much thought, for Mr. McKay
was loath to abandon the island entirely.

On the one hand he did not like to let Andy and Ellerton make the
voyage with the prisoner; on the other, he did not like to leave
Terence and Quexo, and, perhaps, Andy, alone on the island.

"I have been wondering," he remarked, "whether my brother and your five
cousins would care to join us.  There are boundless possibilities in
the place, and I don't think they would mind a change.  Once we have a
few more members of the little colony, we can spare a few months to
visit our respective homes.  Ellerton, I know, would be pleased to see
England again.  And you, Terence, would you not like to return to 'Our
Lady of the Snows'?"

"Rather!" replied Ellerton.  "I should be awfully glad to see my people
again; but, I must admit, I haven't had enough of McKay's Island.  I
should like to spend a great deal of my life here."

"And I, too," added Terence.

"Gently, lads, gently!" replied Mr. McKay.  "You must remember that,
although the island can be made self-supporting--for there's tons of
copra to be had, and I have no doubt that the bed of the lagoon is
covered with pearl oysters--the idea of living here is not altogether
favourable.  It wouldn't be good for us to have only each other's
company for long.  I'll not deny that this open-air, free-and-easy life
is splendid from a physical point of view, but isolation tends to
destroy one's mental powers."

"Then you advise me to get away from the island as soon as I can, and
never return to it?"

"Not at all.  You misunderstood me, Ellerton.  The island is as much
yours as it is mine, or Terence's.  What I meant to imply was that once
we can open up communication with the regular ports of call, so that we
can leave whenever we wish to, the better it will be for all of us.
But once abandon the island it becomes the property of the next comer.
To put the matter briefly, I intend to sit tight here; but should any
of you go away for, say, even three or four years, you will be welcome
to return and secure your part of the commonwealth--such as it is."

Finally it was decided that Blight should be kept on the island for the
present, and that Ellerton and Andy should attempt to navigate the yawl
to the Society Islands, communicate with their friends at home, and
also write to the Agent at Fiji requesting that a British gunboat be
dispatched to ratify the annexation of McKay's Island.

They could then return and await events.

A week or more passed.  Preparations for the voyage were pushed
forward, and at length everything was ready for the lads' adventurous
expedition.

"Now, lads, turn in early, for you may not get a good night's rest for
some days," observed Mr. McKay, on the evening prior to the day fixed
for their departure.

The advice was acted upon, but Ellerton could not sleep.  The night was
sultry, not a breath of wind rustled the leaves of the palm-trees.
Mosquitoes buzzed in and out of the room, while without the glow of the
fire-flies betokened a spell of fine weather.

Uneasily the lad tossed from side to side on his bed.  A stray mosquito
managed to pass the meshes of the mosquito-net, and settled down to
business, his object of attack being the lad's nose.

Ellerton knew that rest could only be obtained by killing the insect,
so sitting up he began his plan of campaign.

Suddenly his ear caught the sound of the long-drawn shriek of a
concertina, followed by a chorus of shouts and exclamations of surprise.

In an instant he was out of bed.

"Wake up!  Wake up!" he shouted, shaking the heavy sleepers with
unsparing hand.  "The savages are upon us!"




CHAPTER XVIII

A SURPRISE FOR THE INVADERS

Hastily throwing on portions of their clothing and seizing their rifles
and revolvers, which, by a general custom, were in variably kept
loaded, the four white men prepared to dash out of the house.

"Don't show a light on any account," cautioned Mr. McKay.  "We must let
the storehouses go and hold this terrace."

It was a complete surprise.  The natives, who had wrested Ahii from its
former owners, had followed up their success in driving off the
invaders by paying a return visit to Ni Atong.  The population of that
island had either been killed or reserved for a more lingering death,
and from one of the latter their captors learnt of the existence of
McKay's Island and its wealth of metal goods so prized by the South Sea
Islanders.

Accordingly ten large canoes set out on an expedition to raid the white
men's dwelling.

Arriving within sight of the peak of the island, they kept in the
offing till night, then with torches blazing aloft they found the
passage into the lagoon, and, paddling rapidly, landed on the beach
below the settlement.

Thereupon three hundred powerful savages, armed with club, bow, spear,
and knife, and bearing torches, began the ascent of the path that led
to the three terraces.

The lower storehouse was their first discovery.  Quickly finding that
no white men were within, the host of warriors resumed their advance.
Some, however, tempted by the various articles stored in the building,
began to help themselves.

Then it was that a savage laid hold of the concertina that Ellerton had
brought from the wreck and had hitherto been left neglected in the
store.  The native was examining his prize in the torchlight, when,
happening to come into collision with another plunderer, the concertina
gave out a startling screech as if to atone for its days of idleness.

Dropping the musical instrument of torture like a live coal, the savage
rushed from the building, his yells of terror being taken up by his
companions.  This diversion was the cause of alarming Ellerton, and
consequently saving the inhabitants of McKay's Island from a massacre.

"Aim low, lads!" shouted Mr. McKay.  "Let 'em have it!"

The conflict was short and sharp.  Although many of the attackers got
within throwing distance, not a single native succeeded in gaining the
top of the steep and narrow path.

They fled hurriedly to the shore, where they rallied to await the dawn.

"Anyone hurt?" inquired Mr. McKay.

There was a general reply in the negative, though in the heat of the
firing there had been several narrow escapes, for the ground was
bristling with spears and littered with stones, which, had they struck
anyone, would have caused serious if not fatal wounds.

In the excitement Ellerton had forgotten his crippled arm, and had used
a rifle equally as well as his comrades; but the exertion had caused
the blood to flow afresh.

"Rotten luck, I call it," he grumbled as Andy readjusted the bandage.
"You must load at least a dozen revolvers for me.  Thank goodness it's
my left arm."

"It's a fair surprise," remarked Mr. McKay.  "We've our work cut out to
drive them off.  Won't they play old Harry with the storehouse--and the
yawl."

"Oh!" exclaimed Andy in dismay, at the thought of his particular
treasure being in the hands of the savages.  "Whatever can be done to
save it?"

"Nothing, I'm afraid," replied his father.  "Perhaps if the mischief is
not already done and the vessel holed, we can keep them off with a long
range fire, though I can hold out no strong hopes in that direction.
The plain truth is, that we are in a tight corner, and we must make the
best of it."

For some minutes the defenders kept silence, listening to the subdued
sounds of their foes.

"Look here," said Mr. McKay, "it's no use sitting here and doing
nothing.  Terence, will you go back to the house and bring three or
four spades?  We'll dig a shelter trench along the edge of the cliff so
as to be able to command the path without unduly exposing ourselves to
the rascals.  Andy, you had better go with him and bring some more
rifles and some ammunition."

Upon the lads' return, the little band set to work to throw up their
defences, and barely had the work been completed ere the day broke.

"There are not so many of them after all," remarked Andy, when the full
strength of the attacking party was revealed.  "We had greater odds at
Ahii."

"And a worse position," added his father.  "We can hold out here, I
fancy, but we cannot prevent the damage to our stores and gear.  See,
they've begun again."

Numbers of the savages were engaged in looting the store, while others,
to Andy's great disgust especially, had paddled off to where the yawl
lay at her moorings.

"Now," exclaimed Andy, setting the backsight of his rifle.  "Eight
hundred yards!"

"That's about the range," assented his father, and four rifles opened
fire upon the daring natives, Ellerton contriving to rest the barrel of
his weapon upon the ridge of the earthwork, so as to avoid using his
damaged arm.

The bullets all fell close to the yawl, several of the natives being
hit; but possibly in their hour of triumph the savages scorned the
white men's weapons.  Casting off the moorings, they leisurely towed
the yawl out towards the reef and plundered her.

Great was the defenders' rage to see the blacks hacking at the rigging,
sails, and cordage, throwing the contents of the cabin-lockers into the
bottom of their canoe, and wrenching the metal cleats, hinges, and
shroud-plates from her hull.  This done, a powerful savage stove a hole
in the craft, and slowly sinking by the stern, she at length plunged to
the bottom of the lagoon.

"It's hard lines, Andy," exclaimed his father as he paused to recharge
his magazine.  "But I'm afraid we shall have to make greater sacrifices
before this affair is over."

"We seem to have horrible bad luck," replied Andy savagely.  "First at
Ahii, and now here."

"Remember we were saved by the merciful intervention of One above,"
added Mr. McKay.  "And if it please Him, we'll come out of this in
safety.  We've had a lot to be thankful for."

"I know, but all the same it's hard lines.  Take that, you brute!" Andy
added, pressing the trigger.

It was a splendid shot.  A group of natives had begun to batter the
yawl's tender to splinters.  They were a good four hundred yards away,
but Andy's shot struck a tall savage, clad in a gorgeous cloak of white
and red feathers, fairly between the shoulder-blades.

Andy had laid aside his rifle immediately after discharging it, and had
snatched up a pair of field-glasses.  The effect of the chief's
death--for a chief he evidently was--caused the wreckers to abandon
their task, and they fled to join their fellows under the shelter of
the lowermost cliff.

"They are preparing for another rush," observed Terence.

"Yes.  I wish we had a Maxim or two," replied Andy.  "That would stop
them."

"I have an idea," exclaimed Ellerton.  "I can best be spared, so I'll
run over to the caves and bring back a few sticks of dynamite and some
detonators."

"Good!  Good!" replied Mr. McKay.  "You're a wonder, Hoppy.  Mind how
you come back, and don't stumble, or we won't be able to find even your
fragments."

Ellerton set off on his self-imposed mission, and presently returned
with about fourteen pounds of dynamite and half a dozen time-fuses.

"What do you propose to do?" asked Terence.  "Make a bomb and roll it
over the cliff?"

"No!" replied the youth.  "We can load up one of those trucks, set the
time-fuse, and turn the thing adrift."

"It will mean good-bye to our storehouse," observed Mr. McKay.  "But
that cannot be helped, so let's to work; they'll be rushing us in a few
minutes."

At the top of the cable-railway stood three empty trucks.  In ordinary
circumstances these would be filled with water, and their increased
weight would cause them to descend and, at the same time, bring up the
loaded trucks from the shore or the storehouse.  Half-way down the
line, and almost abreast of the building, were three other trucks,
waiting to be loaded should occasion require.  Around these trucks,
which were invisible from the upper terrace, were most of the savages,
who were massing for the attack at the base of the second terrace.

"You are quite sure you can unshackle the thing easily?" asked Mr.
McKay.  "If there's a hitch we shall be the ones to be blown to
smithereens."

"I'll make sure of it," replied Ellerton, and securing the lowermost of
the three trucks to the second one by means of a piece of rope, he
unfastened the proper connecting shackles.

Then placing the explosive in the truck he asked Mr. McKay to take the
time.

"It's set for four minutes," he announced.  "Half-a-minute will be
quite enough, so at three and a half minutes from the time the fuse is
lit I'll cut the rope and off she'll go."

"Stand back, you fellows!  If it goes wrong we need not all be blown
sky-high.  Are you ready?  Stand by!"

The fuse began to hiss and splutter.  Ellerton, knife in hand, kept his
eyes fixed on Mr. McKay, who, standing fifty yards off, held his watch
before him.

"Precious long three and a half minutes," thought the lad.

It was not a pleasant task standing within two yards of a
highly-charged explosive.  More than once he felt tempted to cut the
rope and let the truck go.

"Time?" he shouted huskily, for his heart seemed literally in his
throat.

"No, not yet," replied Mr. McKay.

Realising the strain on the plucky youth, he began to walk slowly in
the direction of the truck.

"Stand back, sir!"

Mr. McKay stopped and slowly raised his hand.

"Stand by!  Let go!"

One swift sweep of the sharp blade and the cord was severed.  Slowly
the truck began to gather way, then moving with increased speed it
plunged on its headlong course.

Ten seconds later--before the fuse had time to complete its work--the
descending truck crashed into the stationary ones.  There was a
deafening roar, a cloud of dust, in which was mingled a number of
heavy, shapeless objects, and then an ominous silence, broken only by
the crash of some fragments of wood and metal hurled high in the air by
the explosive.

Rushing to the edge of the cliff the four defenders gazed upon the
result of their stratagem.

Where the trucks had stood gaped a pit six feet in depth, for one of
the peculiarities of dynamite is that it shows its power mainly where
it meets resistance.  Of the storehouse scarce a vestige remained,
while the double line of rails had been uprooted for a distance of
nearly twenty yards.

The havoc wrought amongst the savages was appalling.  So many were
killed that had the white men so wished it they could have fallen upon
the survivors and exterminated them; but such was not their intention.

"We must act with prudence or we shall be left with fifty wounded
savages on our hands," said Mr. McKay.  "Those who are unhurt will take
to their canoes, and leave the others to their fate, and that won't do!"

"How can we stop them taking to their canoes?" asked Andy.

"By taking advantage of their cowed condition and disarming them.
Come, let's to work."

Fearlessly the four defenders descended the path to the lower terrace.

"We'll begin with those fellows first!" exclaimed Mr. McKay, pointing
to a group of natives cowering, with their hands over their eyes,
against a spur of the cliff.  "Stand by with your revolvers in case
they resist."

There was no resistance.  Passively the savages allowed Mr. McKay to
remove their weapons, which had fallen from their nerveless grasp.

Seizing one man firmly but gently, Mr. McKay dragged him from his
companions.  The native's face bore a strong resemblance to that of a
sheep led to the slaughtering-block; no doubt he thought he was to be
slain.

Escorted by the three lads the prisoner was taken to the fringe of the
cocoa-nut grove, where Mr. McKay presented him with a branch of a
palm--the almost universal emblem of peace.

At this the native began to see a chance of having his life spared, and
Mr. McKay, pointing to the canoes and then to the wounded savages, made
signs to the man that they desired their crippled enemies to be placed
in the native craft.

This experiment was tried upon some of the other unharmed savages, with
equally good results, and quickly recovering their senses the natives
set to work with a will.

One powerful-looking savage, however, refused to deliver up his club,
but instead made a sudden rush at Mr. McKay with the evident intention
of knocking him over the head.

Mr. McKay had discarded his rifle, and his revolver was in the side
pocket of his pyjama coat.  Coolly his hand sought his pocket, and
without attempting to withdraw the weapon he discharged it at his
assailant, who was barely five yards off.

The heavy bullet, striking the man full in the chest, laid him dead on
the ground, while the other savages, awestruck at the sight of one of
their number being killed by no visible agency, were again thrown into
a state of panic.

At length all the wounded were distributed between five of the canoes.
Then Mr. McKay made signs for the rest of the natives to embark,
keeping the other five canoes on the beach, and within an hour of the
explosion the sorry remnant of the invaders was paddling back towards
the island of Ahii.




CHAPTER XIX

THE PRISONER'S ESCAPE

"Do you think they will ever return?" asked Terence.

"I think they have had enough," replied Mr. McKay.  "They've had a
lesson."

"And so have we," added Ellerton, dolefully regarding the fragments of
the storehouse and the shattered line of rails.

"And our boat; how shall we be able to leave the island now?" asked
Andy.

"Perhaps the damage done to that is not so great as we imagine.  With
the help of these canoes we may be able to raise her.  But we'll go
into that question later.  At present I feel as if I could enjoy a good
square meal."

So back to the dwelling-house they went, where Quexo, who had been
quaking all the time, was reassured.

"Don't you think we could rig up an electric alarm?" said Terence
during the progress of the meal.  "There's plenty of insulated copper
wire in the small store."

"It would be as well," replied Mr. McKay.  "We might have a return
visit; though, as I said before, I don't anticipate one."

"But some natives from another island might try and surprise us," said
Andy.  "News travels quickly, and perhaps we might again be favoured
with the unwelcome attentions of these savage gentry."

"And I tell you what," continued Terence, waxing enthusiastic, for
electrical engineering was his strong point, "we brought one of the
_San Martin's_ searchlights ashore.  I'll try and fix it up and connect
it with the dynamo."

"We'll see what's to be done.  But now, how about Blight?  It's time we
paid him a visit."

"I guess he's been wondering what the dust-up was about," remarked
Andy, as he prepared the prisoner's daily ration.

Andy and Terence were deputed to visit the prisoner, and, armed as
usual and carrying a supply of food and water, they set off for the
fenced-in dwelling.

From the elevation of the upper terrace they could see the distant dark
brown sails of the canoes, for the wind was light and their progress
had been slow.

"They'll have a nice yarn to pitch into their friends when they
return," observed Terence.

"They stood a good chance of pitching into us," replied Andy grimly.
"The rascals!"

For his mind was still sore on the subject of the scuttled yawl.

On arriving at the fence Andy put down his load, and producing a key
unlocked the door.  The space without the cave was deserted.

"Strange," muttered Andy.  "Blight is generally anxious for his food."

Carefully relocking the door, the lads made their way to the mouth of
the cave.  Here, too, silence reigned.

"Blight!  Where are you?"

There was no answer.  Andy repeated the call, but without result.

"Is he asleep, or is he dead?" asked Terence, and gripping their
pistols the two lads entered the cave.

Contrasted with the brilliant sunshine without, the apartment seemed
plunged into utter darkness, but by degrees the lads' eyes grew
accustomed to the gloom.

"Be careful," whispered Andy.  "Perhaps he's up to some of his tricks."

"You locked the door in the fence?"

"Yes."

"Then let us explore the cave thoroughly."

This they did, penetrating into the cavern and examining every recess
as they advanced, till the daylight which filtered in was insufficient
to allow them to continue their search.

"Where's his lamp?  I know the pater let him have one."

"I saw it on a ledge close to the entrance.  Have you any matches?"

Andy had; matches were becoming scarce on McKay's Island, and whenever
possible a burning glass was used for obtaining fire.  Being, in this
case, without his magnifying glass, Andy had to use one of the precious
hoard of matches that he kept in a watertight gun-metal case, and
lighting the lamp the two explorers resumed their search.

"He's gone right enough," exclaimed Terence, as they "drew blank."

"But where?  And how?"

"Goodness only knows.  Let's run back and tell the others."

Mr. McKay was greatly upset at the news, and seizing a light rifle he
strode off towards the prisoner's quarters, accompanied by the three
lads.

"Did you leave the door open?" he inquired, as they came in sight of
the fence.

"Yes," replied Andy.  "I was in a hurry to tell you, and what does it
matter now that the man has escaped?"

"For all we know he might have been lying concealed within the fence
the whole time you were looking for him, and finding the door unlocked
after you left he coolly walked out.  Andy, I'm surprised at such
carelessness."

It was seldom that Mr. McKay was annoyed with his son, but the apparent
laxity was enough to justify his displeasure.

With Blight roaming about the island, the existence of the others would
be a continual round of anxiety.  The man was no ordinary criminal.  He
was versed in all the wiles of the savage life, possessed of
considerable strength, skill, and reliance, and was not above resorting
to treachery and murder to gain his ends.

A careful examination of the outside of the fence revealed no signs of
a burrow under the iron sheeting, but close to the part of the wall
that touched the cliff there were unmistakable signs of a man's feet.

"There you are!  He did not escape by the door after all, Andy,"
remarked his father.  "See, these two footprints close together show us
that he jumped, and, what is more, jumped skilfully, for there are no
traces of his heels.  We'll find out how he scaled the fence by
examining the other side."

Entering the door, the gaolers found that Blight had cut a number of
niches in the rock and had thus managed to climb to the top of the
fence.  The cutting of these footholds must have taken a considerable
time, and in spite of the daily examination of the ground for any sign
of a tunnel, the niches had escaped observation.

"You see how he hoodwinked us," said Mr. McKay, pointing to the little
heap of dried grass and mud.  "He dug out those footholds and filled
them up with grass and clay, so that they presented the same appearance
as the rest of the cliff.  Now, lads, we must find him, and the sooner
the better."

Accordingly they returned to the house, where Terence was told off to
remain on guard with Quexo in the event of the escaped prisoner
breaking in and securing arms.  The mulatto, though far from having
recovered from his injuries, was strong enough to use a pistol, so the
two could hold the dwelling-house against a surprise.

Having supplied themselves with enough provisions for the day, the two
McKays and Ellerton set out on the trail of the fugitive.  Mr. McKay
and his son took rifles and revolvers and also an axe to "blaze" the
palm-trees, while Ellerton, by reason of his damaged arm, carried a
revolver only in addition to his canvas knapsack containing his share
of provisions.

Tracking was a new experience to the English lad, and he could not help
wondering at the keenness displayed by father and son as they followed
the scantiest trail.

Andy would walk with considerable speed for a hundred yards, his eyes
fixed upon the ground; while Mr. McKay would follow at his heels, at
the same time keeping a sharp look-out on all sides in order to guard
against a sudden attack.

Then the order would be reversed, Mr. McKay following the trail, and
his son acting as a cover to his father.

For nearly a mile the track was fairly well-defined, though Ellerton
had to confess that he would have failed to notice it.

The fugitive had skirted the base of the cliff, then plunging into the
palm grove, he had gone by a round-about way towards the left; and was
evidently heading for the thickly-wooded belt of land surrounding the
base of the highest peak of the island.

Then the pursuers met with an unexpected rebuff.  The trail led up to a
broad tract of barren country, the surface of the land consisting of
rocky mounds covered with a deposit of lava--the result of volcanic
action many years previously.

"This kind of stuff extends right up to the base of the peak," said
Andy.  "We had a rough scramble when Quexo and I climbed the mountain.
I know what it's like.  There are hundreds of rifts where a man might
hide himself."

"He's covered his tracks," announced Mr. McKay.  "See, he's gone in
that direction, then back again and off in entirely the opposite way."

"And the trail is getting very much fainter," added Andy.

"It's my belief that he's lying low within a few yards of us,"
continued his father.  "It's an admirable hiding-place, but it's
certain that he must have food, so he's bound to make for the cocoanuts
and bread-fruit trees sooner or later.  That's why he's doubled on his
tracks."

"We must double on our tracks before long," replied Andy.  "That is, if
we don't want to spend a night in this wilderness."

"That's what I intend to do," said his father in a low voice.  "I want
you two to go back to the house.  Make plenty of noise, and grumble at
having been unsuccessful.  I'm going to remain here."

"Alone?" queried Andy.

"Hist!  Don't speak so loud.  Yes, alone.  You don't imagine I'm afraid
to tackle an unarmed man, do you?  Now, listen to what I have to say.
It will be dark in an hour or so, but the moon will rise at nine
o'clock.  Make your way here at sunrise to-morrow, and I'll warrant
you'll find me safe enough--and not alone, I hope."

Andy knew that it was no good arguing, and the two lads set off towards
their home.  The blazed track was followed without difficulty, and just
as the sun set they emerged from the forest and gained the terrace on
which the house stood.

"Where's Mr. McKay?" asked Terence.

"Left behind."

"Left behind?  What for?  Has anything gone wrong?"

"I hope not.  He insisted, so there was no help for it.  We've to
rejoin him at sunrise to-morrow," replied Andy.

All that night the lads did not attempt to sleep.  Filled with anxiety,
they listened intently for the sound of a rifle shot.  The air was
perfectly still, and though the strained nerves of the watchers caused
them to hear a variety of imaginary sounds, no reassuring report of
firearms broke the echoes of the palm-groves.

"Look here," exclaimed Ellerton, after hours of weary vigil, "the
moon's up quite enough to allow us to find our way; so let's make a
start."

Andy shook his head.

"You ought to know the pater well enough by this time, Hoppy.  It's
rotten hanging about here, I admit, but it's part of the game.  So
let's make the best of it."




CHAPTER XX

THE ENEMY IS CORNERED

Mr. McKay, left to himself, prepared for his all-night watch.  His
hiding-place consisted of a crevice which commanded a view of the route
his companions had taken.  Standing upright he could also see over the
rock in which he was concealed, though prudence urged him not to show
his head above the gaunt stone walls of his lair.

He rested himself on a convenient ledge, and waited, with his rifle
across his knee.  Then, as the sun set and intense darkness brooded
over the land, he braced himself for his task.  Instinct told him that
the fugitive would skulk in the rocks till the moon rose; then in all
probability he would prowl for food.

More than once Mr. McKay fancied he heard the crunching of a boot upon
the pumice stone.  Twice he grasped his rifle, as a dark shadow seemed
to loom up against the darkness.

"Imagination," he remarked to himself.  "What is the matter with my
nerves?"  But a finger pressed upon his wrist showed him that his pulse
was beating regularly.

Then came a sound that could not possibly be mistaken--a smothered
sneeze.

Blight was within a few yards of Mr. McKay, but in which direction the
latter was unable to decide.

Then came the scuffling of feet.  The fugitive was scuffling blindly
across the rock.  At any instant he might pitch into the crevice right
into the arms of his pursuer.

Nearer and nearer he came, cursing under his breath as his feet came in
contact with the ruts and sharp corners of the rocks.  Mr. McKay could
even hear the laboured breathing of his quarry.

Realising the danger of making his way over the pitfalls, Blight sat
down, muttering angrily at being baulked, at the same time abusing the
moon for its tardy appearance.

Mr. McKay waited, rifle in hand, feeling almost pleased.  He pictured
the fugitive's consternation when the moonlight revealed his tracker
covering him at ten paces.  It was the old animal instinct, the joy of
the chase, whether hunter and hunted be human beings or mere beasts of
the field.

Above the tops of the distant palm-trees a pale yellow light dawned in
the eastern sky.  Stronger and stronger it grew, till the golden disc
of the queen of night appeared, the brilliant light throwing the rocks
into strong relief.

The escaped prisoner, now that his path seemed clear, prepared to make
his journey towards the trees once more, and obviously fearing no
danger, he scrambled over a flat-topped boulder.  Barely had he stood
erect when Mr. McKay, rifle to shoulder, shouted:

"The game's up once more.  Throw up your hands!"

So great was Blight's surprise that he stood stock still, with mouth
agape, staring at the silhouetted form of his enemy; then, recovering
himself, rushed wildly towards Mr. McKay, shrieking:

"You'll never take me alive, bad luck to you!"

It was the act of a madman.  Ere he could cover the intervening apace,
Mr. McKay could have shot him dead on the spot.  But the Australian was
loath to be the rascal's executioner; the business seemed to him to be
mere butchery.

Turning down the muzzle of his rifle, the solitary tracker aimed the
weapon at his enemy's feet.  This action had a most restraining effect
upon the rogue.  He would welcome a swift and almost painless death,
but to be deliberately crippled, secured at leisure, and dragged back
to his prison, did not appeal to him.  He turned swiftly and, dodging
from side to side as he ran, he sped rapidly across the rocks.

Mr. McKay fired, but the shot went wide.  He could have perforated the
man's body between the shoulders with the greatest ease, but a pot-shot
in the moonlight at a pair of swiftly-moving legs afforded plenty of
opportunities of missing.

The fugitive uttered a yell of defiance, and sped onwards.  Another
fifty yards and he would be lost to sight in the midst of a labyrinth
of fantastically-shaped rocks.

Mr. McKay did not attempt to fire a second shot.  The success of his
long vigil depended upon keeping the chase in view.  Laying his rifle
on the ground and making sure that the flap of his pistol-holster was
loose, he vaulted upon the rock and set off in pursuit.

Although "hard as nails" and sound of wind, Mr. McKay forgot for the
time being that the result of his accident on board the _San Martin_
had left him somewhat weak in his lower limbs.

With elbows pressed close to his sides he ran, but ere forty yards were
covered he found himself lurching dangerously.  Setting his jaw firmly,
he persevered, keeping his eyes fixed upon the form of the fugitive,
yet he was forced to confess that he was losing ground.

Blight was now within twenty yards of the sheltering rocks.  Dare the
pursuer use his revolver and stop this headlong flight?  The odds were
too great, for with the exertion of running his aim would be erratic.
No, he must continue to run and trust to chance that his quarry might
be cornered somewhere.

Suddenly Blight stumbled, kicking up a cloud of pumice dust that looked
silvery in the moonlight.  Two yards he traversed ere he fell headlong
in the soft lava, and before he could stagger to his feet his pursuer
was almost within arm's length.

"Give in, you idiot," shouted Mr. McKay, drawing his revolver.

For answer Blight laughed, and, bending low as he ran, he doubled away
to the right, where the ground sloped downwards towards a line of
irregularly-shaped cliffs.  He was crippled.  He had twisted his ankle,
and everything was in Mr. McKay's favour.

Unwilling to close with the desperate fugitive, Mr. McKay prepared to
maim him with a bullet through his leg; but even as he levelled the
weapon, Blight disappeared from sight with a shriek of terror.

Instinctively Mr. McKay threw himself flat on his back, digging his
heels into the soft yielding dust; but surely and gradually he found
himself slipping towards the mouth of a gaping abyss.  The very ground
on which he was sprawling was moving.  He could hear the rustle of the
sand and small stones as they dropped over the ledge into the
apparently fathomless chasm.

Desperately Mr. McKay plunged his arms into the sliding sand; but his
efforts were unavailing.  He was being launched towards the yawning
gulf, the horrors of which seemed worse in the moonlight.

Just as he was on the point of slipping over the edge--his heels were
already over the abyss--his hand, buried arm's length in the pumice,
came in contact with a piece of hard rock.

Would it hold? he wondered.

Slowly his outstretched arm began to change from a vertical to an
almost horizontal position as his body still continued its downward
motion.  The rock afforded but a slender hold: either the fabric might
become loosened, or his hand might be unable to keep up the strain, and
then----?

Mr. McKay ceased to struggle.  He could feel the sand slipping from
under him, streaming past like a solid cataract.  So long as he kept
quiet he was comparatively safe, but directly he commenced to find a
foothold, his peril increased threefold.  Yet he knew that every moment
his grip upon the small pinnacle that stood between him and instant
death was gradually becoming weaker.

In those awful moments of peril he could hear the laboured breathing of
his enemy, coming apparently from a great depth beneath his feet.
Blight, then, was still alive, but his gasping breaths sounded ominous.

At length, regaining his self-possession, Mr. McKay put forth a final
effort in an endeavour to draw his feet clear of the awful chasm.

Inch by inch he worked himself upwards, against the increasing torrent
of sand, when suddenly the rocky ledge was wrenched from its base, and
the next instant he was swept into the gulf.

Amidst a shower of dust and stones he felt himself hurtling through the
pitch dark air, then everything became a blank.

      *      *      *      *      *

The first rays of the rising sun filtering through the narrow neck of
the inverted funnel-shaped chasm strove to disperse the darkness.

Stretched upon the thick carpet of powdered pumice were two motionless
figures, partially covered with the flow of dust that trickled from the
open air like the sand of a gigantic hour-glass.

The head and shoulders of one of the victims were pillowed upon the
body of the other, who lay, with arms outstretched, gazing upwards with
sightless eyes at the narrow slit of sky that was visible between the
lips of the abyss.

Blight had gone to his last account.

Slowly opening his eyes, Mr. McKay blinked stupidly at nothingness for
a few seconds, then stretched out his arms.  It was the action of a man
awakening from slumber.  He felt no pain; he had no idea of where he
was, or of what had occurred.

With the intention of going to sleep again he turned his head on its
ghastly pillow, but on drawing up his arms to compose himself, his head
came in contact with the cold face of his companion in misfortune.

The touch acted like an electric shock.  In an instant the details of
the tragedy flashed across his mind.  He stumbled to his feet, but
overcome by weakness, he sank once more upon the dust-covered floor.

How long had he been in this hideous deathtrap? he wondered.  Was it a
night, or many days and nights?  Had his comrades searched in vain and
had they abandoned their quest and left him to his fate?

For quite half-an-hour Mr. McKay sat and thought, striving to collect
his mental and physical powers.  He went over the events leading up to
the final tragedy--the ambush, the pursuit, Blight's disappearance, and
his own terrible ordeal on the sliding sand.  Then he reflected that
his trail would be fairly well-defined, and that help must be
forthcoming.  His watch was still going, so that he knew that it was
only the morning following his night's vigil.

Overhead a dazzling ray of sunlight shone obliquely through the
opening, illuminating the shaft-like sides of his prison, but so dead
black was the colour of the rock that hardly any light was reflected to
the bottom of the pit.  He could, in fact, just see his own hands and
the grey features of his ill-fated companion.

Mr. McKay groped about the floor.  At first his fingers encountered
nothing but dust.  He plunged his arm up to the elbow in the soft
yielding deposit; but nothing solid met his touch.

Fearing that he might be lying on a ledge overhanging a pit of
fathomless depth, Mr. McKay extended his field of exploration, making
wide sweeps with his arms.  Presently his fingers encountered a metal
object.  It was his revolver.

"At least," he thought, "I can signal for aid."

But on second thoughts he hesitated.  Then he remembered his box of
matches.  Fumbling in his pocket he found the little case, and eagerly,
like a miser counting his gold, he passed the little sticks one by one
through his fingers.  Ten--ten priceless matches.

He struck one.  For the moment his eyes were dazzled by the yellow
fire, but ere it burnt out he made sure of two things.  He was not
lying on the edge of another precipice; that was reassuring.  His
second discovery was disconcerting.  His trusty revolver was choked
with fine dust, and had he discharged it he would have assuredly been
injured by the bursting of the barrel.

The match flickered out, and to the imprisoned man the darkness seemed
denser than ever.  It pressed upon him like a real substance, till he
felt tempted to shout in his distress.

By degrees he grew calmer, and staggering to his feet he moved his
limbs with extreme caution.  To his satisfaction they were still sound,
though he was beginning to feel stiff and bruised from head to foot.

The light of a second match showed that Blight was indeed beyond all
human aid, so, placing his handkerchief over the face of the corpse,
Mr. McKay retired a few steps till a third match became necessary.

He found himself within a few feet of one of the walls of his prison.
The stone, divided by volcanic agency, was almost vertical at the
point, though at others it receded so that the base of the abyss was
several yards beyond the perpendicular height of the shaft.  Close to
him was a deep crack in the wall, known by mountaineers as a "chimney."

It might be possible to scale the rock, he thought, but the knowledge
that the edge of the shaft was "rotten" compelled Mr. McKay to abandon
that attempt.  He must wait; yet, unwilling to remain idle, he resolved
to sacrifice four more of his precious matches in exploring the
immediate vicinity of the chasm.

Keeping close to the wall, Mr. McKay proceeded with the utmost caution,
till he reached a yawning cavern that descended abruptly.

For a moment he hesitated, fearing the presence of carbonic acid gas,
but on holding the lighted match close to the ground the flame burnt
clear and bright.

To his surprise Mr. McKay found his hand resting on the butt of a
musket.  The weapon was lying on the hard, rocky floor of the cave, for
here no dust had penetrated.  Another match revealed the fact that the
firearm was of an ancient pattern, the combined flint and matchlock
being of not later date than the end of the seventeenth century.

"By George!  This is a find!" exclaimed Mr. McKay.

For the time being he forgot his surroundings, interest being centred
in this relic of bygone days.

Then, unwilling to risk using his remaining stock of matches, yet
mentally resolving to explore this part of the cavern at the earliest
favourable opportunity, he retraced his steps to that part of the chasm
that lay beneath the narrow shaft.  Here he sat down and waited, hoping
for the speedy arrival of Andy and Ellerton.




CHAPTER XXI

THE BUCCANEERS' CAVE

It could not have been more than a couple of hours after Mr. McKay
returned to consciousness that the two lads emerged from the forest and
gazed wonderingly upon the rock-strewn plain.  Not knowing the course
of events, they had left Terence and Quexo to guard the dwelling-house
against a possible attack.

"Steady, Hoppy!" cautioned Andy, as Ellerton was about to rush towards
the spot where they had left Mr. McKay on the previous evening.  "I
don't like the look of things.  Suppose that rogue has got the upper
hand?  You would be potted to a cert if you rushed into the open in
that reckless style.  You work round to the right and I'll go by the
left."

Accordingly the lads, taking advantage of every bit of cover, advanced
with the utmost caution towards the little rift in the dark rock where
Mr. McKay had made his ambush.

There was his rifle, lying on the ground, with no sign of an empty
cartridge to show that the weapon had been discharged.  Andy removed
the magazine and found that the cartridges were still intact.

"I can't understand it," he exclaimed.  "The pater was evidently in a
hurry, for, you see, the rifle was not placed against a rock, but was
thrown down on the ground.  He's too careful, in ordinary
circumstances, to do a thing like that."

"Well, where is he?  If Blight had managed to get the better of him he
would have taken away the rifle."

"He may have chased him right across this island.  Come on, it's no use
wasting time here; let's try and pick up the trail."

Andy leapt upon the flat top of the rock and assisted his chum to
follow his example.  Both took it for granted that there was no further
need for concealment.

From where they stood the ground had the appearance of a broad belt of
flat rock, divided in all directions by narrow crevices, most of which
could be jumped across with the greatest ease, while ahead was the
first of a series of cliffs, which incircled the base of the peak of
the island.

"Look!" exclaimed Ellerton, pointing to a little heap of brown canvas
which was lying on the rock about thirty feet away.  "There's your
father's haversack."

The lad was right, for Mr. McKay had discarded the article as he
commenced the pursuit of the fugitive.  From this spot the mingled
tracks of the hunter and the hunted were easily traced, by reason of
the deposit of lava dust, which grew thicker as the lads advanced.

Suddenly they came to an abrupt halt.  Almost at their feet began the
treacherous slope, ending in the horrible fissure which had been the
cause of Blight's death and Mr. McKay's disaster.

Although the still sliding dust and sand had almost hidden the traces
of Mr. McKay's desperate struggle to save himself from the yawning pit,
there remained sufficient evidences of the disappearance of the
fugitive and his pursuer.

The faces of both lads grew pale.  Andy was about to rush towards the
brink of the abyss when Ellerton's detaining hand was laid upon his
shoulder.

"It's nothing more or less than a trap," said he.  "You'll----"

The sentence remained unfinished, for from the depths of the chasm a
hollow voice that the lads hardly recognised as Mr. McKay's repeated
the warning:

"Stand back, lads!"

"Are you all right, sir?" shouted Ellerton.

"Yes, but you cannot get to my aid without a rope.  Hurry back to the
house, and bring all hands with you.  A lantern will also be useful.
Be as quick as you can, for it's pretty doleful down here."

"All right, sir, we'll make haste; but stand by!"

And as a parting gift Ellerton dexterously threw Mr. McKay's haversack,
still containing an ample supply of food, into the pit.

Andy, however, hesitated.

"Are you sure you are all right, dad?"

"Ay, my boy.  Why do you ask?"

"Because your voice sounds so strange.  I suppose it's the rocks that
affect it.  How far did you fall?"

"I hardly know; about thirty feet, I expect; luckily the ground's soft."

"Seen anything of Blight?"

"Dead!" replied Mr. McKay.

With the utmost despatch Ellerton and Andy returned to the house,
where, having told the others all they knew about the accident, they
collected a couple of coils of rope, some lanterns, two strong
crowbars, a hammer, and, at Ellerton's suggestion, two six-inch pulleys.

The four lads--for even Quexo insisted on coming, though he was still
in a weak state of health--set off for the scene of the disaster, Andy
and Terence carrying the bulk of the appliances, while Ellerton and the
mulatto took only what they could place in their belts.

Cheering up the prisoner with a lusty shout of encouragement, the
rescuers proceeded to drive the crowbars into a convenient crevice in
the rocks, so that one was about ten feet nearer to the chasm than the
other.

From the base of the outside bar to the top of the inner one, Ellerton
lashed a piece of rope, then making sure that the "crows" would bear
any strain that was likely to be put upon them, he attached a pulley to
the base of the innermost.

Through the block was rove one of the coils of rope, one end of which
he tied round his waist.  Then, taking the lighted lantern in his hand,
he walked cautiously towards the brink of the pit, the others paying
out the rope as he went.

Before he had gone a distance of five yards the pumice dust began to
slide away from under his feet, causing him to sit down on the slope,
while the avalanche nearly blinded Mr. McKay as he was looking upwards
for the expected relief.

"Come back, Hoppy!" shouted Andy.  "Remember your arm."

"I do," replied Ellerton with a laugh.  "It's giving me good cause to
remember it, but I mean to make the best of it.  You fellows can do
more good by hauling on that rope than I can, so slack away."

Terence and Andy accordingly "slacked away," and Ellerton slid another
yard or so towards the brink.  He was then able to lower the lantern to
Mr. McKay, and at the same time he made the discovery that the shaft
was too rugged to allow a man to be hauled up by a rope without serious
danger of the rope being chafed through by the sharp projections.

He explained the situation to Mr. McKay, who fully realised the force
of his remarks.

"Never mind, we'll manage it right enough," concluded Ellerton
cheerily, and giving the word he was hauled back to where his
companions stood.

"We must have one of those trees down," he said, pointing to the
distant palms.

Accordingly the lads set off for the forest, where without much
difficulty a stout trunk, thirty feet in length, was felled.  The work
of transporting it to the brink of the pit was a more tedious business,
and an hour elapsed ere they succeeded in slinging the timber across
the yawning gulf, where it rested with about ten feet imbedded in the
soft lava on either side of the hole.

"Now you can do this part of the work better than I," said Ellerton to
Andy.  "Lash this block to the centre of the trunk, and reeve a rope
through it."

This Andy managed to do.  He also lashed a smaller piece of timber at a
distance of about four feet below the tree-trunk, so as to form a
platform to enable Mr. McKay to obtain a clear spring when hauled up as
far as the pulley would permit.

"All ready, pater?" asked the son.

"Wait a moment, Andy.  Could you manage to come down here, do you
think?"

"I'll try.  I say, you fellows, I'm going down, so pay out the rope."

Andy swung himself from the main beam upon the lower piece of timber,
and, summoning up his courage, launched himself off from the swaying
perch.

Slowly he descended, spinning round on the straining rope like a joint
on a meat-jack, while at almost every second his shoulders or hips came
into contact with the jagged walls of the shaft.  To avoid the dust he
kept his head bent downwards, and as he did so he saw the glimmer of
the lantern from beneath.

"Thirty feet, do you call it?" he asked, as his feet touched the floor
of the pit, and his father grasped his hand.  "It's sixty at the very
least."

"I don't think so," was the reply.  "You see, looking down from a
height the distance always appears greater.  Had the floor been hard
rock, I should have been killed or at least seriously injured.  But to
change the subject, look here."

Mr. McKay had, during the long interval of waiting since Ellerton had
lowered the lantern, made another tour of exploration, and now he led
the way towards the tunnel where he had found an old musket.

He had made a strange discovery.  At no very distant date a long cavern
of varying height and breadth existed here.  Where its entrance was Mr.
McKay had not found out; but a volcanic disturbance had caused a mighty
fissure to divide the original cave in two, as an examination of the
strata proved conclusively.

Casting off the rope from around his waist, Andy followed his father
into the tunnel-like cavern, stooping as he did so, for its mouth was
barely five feet in height.

At ten paces from its mouth the passage turned almost at right angles
to its former direction, and expanded into a broad and lofty chamber.
Almost covering the width of the four sides was a range of arm-racks
filled with old-time weapons.  The candle-light flashed upon the bright
barrels of musket and pistol, and glittered on the steel of bayonet,
cutlass, sword, and pike, for so dry was the atmosphere that a couple
of centuries had not left any appreciable trace on the metal.

"Great Scott!  How did these get here?" asked Andy, after he had
recovered from his astonishment.

"It's the armoury of some long-forgotten buccaneer," replied his
father.  "I've had plenty of time to look round since you first sent me
the lantern, and none of these weapons are later than the earlier part
of the eighteenth century, or the last part of the seventeenth.  See,
these muskets have Vauban locks, a combination of flint and matchlock.
These kinds of muskets were used at the battles of Steenkirke and
Landen.  You can also see that all these bayonets are the plug variety,
that is to say they were plugged into the barrel of the musket, thus
temporarily converting it from a firearm to a pike.  These are
evidently the original bayonets used in the reign of James II., so that
we can fix the period at which they were stored here to within a few
years, since the socket type were introduced early in the reign of
William III."

In this strain Mr. McKay continued, forgetful of time and place, till
Ellerton's voice was heard shouting to know of anything was amiss.

"We had better retrace our footsteps," observed Mr. McKay, "or the
others will be getting alarmed.  When we've found an easier way of
descending into this pit--for I do not want another fall like that, I
can assure you--we'll make a thorough exploration of the place."

Accordingly father and son made their way back towards the shaft, but
as they turned the bend of the passage they found themselves confronted
by Terence and Ellerton, each of whom carried a lantern.

"Hullo!  How did you descend?" asked Andy, who was very astonished at
seeing his friends down there.

"I lowered Terence, and then let myself down," replied Ellerton.

"Then, how in the name of goodness, do you expect to get back?"
demanded Andy.  "Quexo cannot haul us up."

"By the same means as I came down," replied the young sailor calmly.
"It's easy enough with a bos'un's chair."

"Then all I can say is that I hope you lashed the pulley on securely,"
rejoined Andy with evident concern.  "If that goes wrong, we're
trapped."

"Don't worry," replied Ellerton, somewhat ruffled at the slur cast upon
his work.

"Come, come," observed Mr. McKay good-humouredly.  "Don't quarrel.  Now
we are here we might as well continue our exploration."

Once more the armoury was inspected, the lads showing the greatest
interest in the weapons, snapping the flints in order to see the sparks
fly from the steel.

"Be careful, some of these muskets may be loaded," cautioned Mr. McKay.
"Always make it a practice to point a weapon away from anybody when
fooling about like that."

Hardly had he spoken, when a tremendous explosion shook the cave, the
noise being intensified by the confined space, and Terence sat on the
floor rubbing his shoulder, while a smoking musket lay by his side.

"You're a young ass," observed Andy.  "Are you hurt?"

"Didn't know it was loaded," replied the youth, still clapping his hand
to his shoulder.

"That's what they all say after an accident has occurred," said Mr.
McKay.  "By some means or the other the musket was stored without the
charge being drawn.  However, thank goodness it's no worse, though the
concussion might have brought the roof down on our heads."

Presently Ellerton, who had wandered behind one of the arms-racks that
stood about three feet from the wall, exclaimed:

"Here's another passage."

"Hold on, then," cautioned Mr. McKay.  "Wait till I come.  There might
be a pitfall."

Carefully examining the floor of the tunnel, the explorers advanced
about ten yards, when further progress was prevented by a door covered
with flat iron bars.

"H'm!" ejaculated Mr. McKay.  "What have we here?"

Terence was dispatched to bring a dagger and a pike from the armoury,
but on further thoughts Mr. McKay forbade the lads to tamper with the
door.

"Then we are done for the time being," remarked Andy.  "Shall we go
back for our axes?"

"A crowbar would be the thing," replied Ellerton.  "But we want the two
we brought."

"Probably it's as well we haven't got them," added Mr. McKay.  "To tell
the truth, I have my suspicions of that door, so we'll defer the
opening of it till a more convenient time."

Reluctantly the lads retraced their steps to the open chasm, where
Blight's body lay.

"We must bury him as soon as possible," said Mr. McKay.  "There's no
place here, so we must haul the body to the surface, and dig a grave in
the soft earth."

"There's no soil nearer than the edge of the palm-forest," observed
Andy.

"I know, but it cannot be helped."

"Isn't there a rift or a hole in the floor where we could bury him?"
asked Ellerton.  "After all, where does it matter, so long as he
receives Christian burial?"

"We may as well look," assented Mr. McKay, and taking one of the
lanterns he commenced to explore that side of the chasm which lay
opposite to the tunnel leading to the buccaneers' armoury.

The first ten or twelve paces were knee deep in the pumice dust, but on
approaching the wall of the abyss the floor was fairly hard, being
protected from falling dirt and sand by the overhang of the shaft.

On reaching the stone face of the rift the explorers followed its
general direction without discovering any crack or crevice likely to
suit their purpose, till they stumbled upon another tunnel-like shaft,
similar and almost opposite to the one they had already traversed.

This tunnel was about six feet in height and four in width, and ran in
a slightly upward direction.  Evidently it was at one time a
continuation of the other passage.

"Let's see where this leads to," exclaimed Ellerton, full of curiosity
and enthusiasm.  "I believe it leads to the open air."

"I think not," replied Mr. McKay, pointing to the smooth, even steps in
the floor of the tunnel.  "See, the floor is as dry as a bone, and
covered with a thick deposit of dust.  If this tunnel is open, the
tropical rains would have washed the dust away."

"Then where does it lead to?" continued Ellerton.  "Those arms must
have been brought in by some means."

"We'll carry on and see who's right."

It was a long walk.  Up and up ran the tunnel, turning slightly to the
right, yet maintaining a uniform height and breadth throughout its
entire length.

"This passage has been hewn out," announced Mr. McKay.

"Hasn't the other?" asked Andy.

"Only in parts.  The armoury is a natural cave.  Perhaps there was a
smaller tunnel here before, and the people who discovered it enlarged
it.  It's about time we came to the end."

"Now who's right, sir?" exclaimed Ellerton triumphantly, as the pale
gleam of daylight was visible from a curve of the tunnel.

"Not this child," replied Mr. McKay, without the faintest trace of
chagrin.  In fact, he was glad to know he was in the wrong, for he did
not relish the task of tackling the shaft and the treacherous,
dust-covered slope at its edge.

A few sparse bushes masked the mouth of the tunnel, and upon these
being thrust aside, the adventurers found themselves at the foot of the
lowermost range of cliffs and within a hundred yards of the abyss which
had been the cause of their presence in the tunnel.

Standing close to where the crowbars were driven into the rock was
Quexo, looking the picture of misery, for he was perfectly convinced in
his own mind that all his companions had met with disaster.

"Quexo!" shouted Andy.  "Quexo!  Here we are!"

The mulatto's joy was curious to behold.  He danced, swung his sound
arm over his head, and cut fantastic capers, the tears running down his
cheeks the while as he blurted out unintelligible sentences in mingled
English and Spanish.

"Well, we're safe once more, thanks to Providence," exclaimed Mr. McKay.

All the explorers looked rather disreputable, but Mr. McKay in
particular was little better than a walking scarecrow.  His clothes
were in rags, his face clotted with dried blood and dust, while, now
the excitement was over, he once more began to feel stiff and bruised
from head to foot.

"By Jove, we've forgotten what we went to look for!" exclaimed Andy.

"Yes," replied Mr. McKay.  "We must bring the poor fellow's body up
after all."

"By the tunnel?"

"No, by the shaft."

"Then here goes," said Ellerton quietly, and drawing up one of the
ropes he fastened it round his waist.  Lantern in hand he slid down the
sand, and getting astride the tree-trunk, edged his way along till he
reached the swaying piece of timber.  The next minute he was lowering
himself into the abyss.

"He's a plucky chap," commented Mr. McKay as they awaited Ellerton's
signal.

"And with an arm like that," added Terence admiringly.  "He really
seems to make light of it."

The watchers had not long to wait.

"Haul away!" shouted Ellerton, and heaving slowly on the rope they
brought the body of the unfortunate Blight to the surface, where the
young seaman soon rejoined the others.

Between them they bore the corpse across the rocky plain to the edge of
the palm-forest, where they dug a shallow grave with their axes.

Here the body of the ex-pearler was laid to rest, Mr. McKay recited a
few prayers, and the earth was heaped over the corpse, a pile of heavy
stones being placed over the grave to mark the spot.

This depressing task completed, they hastened homewards to enjoy a
welcome meal and a still more desired rest.

For the next two or three weeks all hands were too busy to think of
making a further exploration of the buccaneers' cave.

The damage wrought by the savages required a considerable amount of
patience and hard work to set to rights.  A new storehouse had to be
constructed, and the various stores that had not been totally destroyed
were collected and placed once more under cover.

Terence had, with considerable ingenuity, contrived to erect an
electric alarm, so that the moment a foot was placed upon the lowermost
path leading up to the house, a bell would ring in the sleeping
quarters.

He also succeeded in rigging up the searchlight salved from the wreck,
and after many failures the apparatus worked to perfection.

Thereafter every night its great beam was directed skywards, the
International Signal, "N.G." (want immediate assistance), being flashed
in the hope of attracting the attention of any vessel within seventy
miles of the island.

The little party was now completely isolated from the rest of the world.

Before the destruction of the yawl they had the means of making even a
fairly long passage, but now this was denied them, for it would be
utter madness to attempt to go to sea in one of the captured canoes.

So, realising that the sooner they were in possession of a seaworthy
craft the better it would be for them, the inhabitants of McKay's
Island debated whether it would be advisable to construct a new decked
craft, convert one of the canoes into a cabin boat, or to salvage the
wreck of the yawl and patch her up sufficiently to enable them to reach
Tahiti.

Even with the appliances at their command, Mr. McKay reckoned that it
would take a twelvemonth to make a boat large enough for their
requirements.  As regards reconstructing one of the canoes, he came to
the conclusion that the work might be done, but the canoe being without
a keel would be a bad craft in a sea-way; while her light construction
would not allow a keel to be fixed without a grave risk of straining
the vessel in the first breeze she encountered.

Finally, it was decided that the captured canoes should be utilised to
attempt the salvage of the yawl, and on the first fine day the actual
work was put in hand.

By means of rollers and a powerful jack, three of the canoes were
launched and taken to the scene of the savages' wanton act.

The wrecked boat could be clearly discerned lying on the sandy bed of
the lagoon in six fathoms of water, with a slight list to starboard.

Anchoring two of the native craft close to the sunken yawl, Ellerton
and Andy contrived to pass the bight of a chain under her bows, the
ends of the chain being made fast to two stout cables.  A similar
device was employed to engage the stern of the wreck, although the fact
that her keel was imbedded in the sand added to the difficulty of the
task.

Two massive trunks of palm-trees were then placed across the gunwales
of both canoes, converting them into a kind of pontoon.

These preparations being completed, all that was at present necessary
was to wait till dead low water.

All hands knew that it would be a tedious job, for the rise of the tide
was but five feet at springs and only two feet at neaps, so what work
had to be done must be performed during the spring tides.

At dead low water all the slack of the four hawsers was taken in, and
once more came a tedious wait for the rising tide.

Gradually the strain on the ropes increased, till the timbers groaned
under the weight of the sunken boat and the canoes sank lower in the
water.

"Hurrah!  She's lifting!" shouted Ellerton, and allowing sufficient
time for the yawl to be lifted clear of the bottom, Mr. McKay and his
assistants began to haul on an anchor cable which had been previously
laid towards the shore.

Slowly the ungainly pontoon with its heavy burden began to move
shorewards, when suddenly the bows of the canoes rose high in the air,
throwing their occupants on their backs.  One of the hawsers had
slipped, and the work of six long hours was wasted.

"Hard lines!" exclaimed Terence dolefully.

"It is, I admit," replied Ellerton cheerfully.  "Still, we must not
expect to have everything our own way.  Try, try, try again, as the old
saw says."

"We can do no more to-day," said Mr. McKay.  "We'll leave the canoes
moored to the yawl, however.  That will save time to-morrow."

"I think, if you don't mind, sir, we'll try and slip the sling under
her again," said Ellerton.  "You see, if we do that there won't be so
much chance of the canoes drifting and consequently slipping the other
sling."

"Quite so," replied Mr. McKay.  "It may save us some hours of hard
work."

So directly the water cleared, for the settling of the wrecked boat had
churned up the sand till she was practically invisible, the chain sling
was again placed in position.

This time this part of the business was done more satisfactorily, as
the yawl was resting on a hummock of shell and sand amidships, so that
above five feet of the after part of her keel was clear of the bed of
the lagoon.

"I hope it doesn't come on to blow to-night," remarked Ellerton, as the
party rowed ashore.  "If it does, then good-bye to the yawl."

"The glass is steady," replied Mr. McKay.  "If it should pipe up, we
must slip the slings and let the canoes take their chance."

That afternoon Ellerton and Andy were busy preparing additional slings,
for the former was resolved not to have a repetition of the morning's
failure if it could be avoided.

Just before low water on the following morning, the salvage party set
out for the wreck.  As Mr. McKay had predicted, the weather was fine,
there being no swell to speak of within the lagoon, though as usual the
breakers were lashing themselves into milk-white foam upon the outer
fringe of the reef.

Once more the slings were hove tight, and as the tide rose, the wrecked
craft was again lifted from her ocean bed.  Directly the yawl was
"lively," as Ellerton expressed it, two more slings were passed
underneath her keel so as to make doubly sure of her being swung
properly.




CHAPTER XXII

THE TREASURE CHAMBER

At high water the wrecked craft was moved for a distance of nearly a
hundred yards towards the shore ere she grounded.  This completed the
day's work, and on the following morning at low tide the "slack" was
again taken in so as to enable the rising tide again to lift the yawl
clear of the bottom.

This time, owing to the bed of the lagoon shoaling more rapidly, only
twenty yards were gained.

"It will be a tiring and tedious job, I can see," said Terence.  "How
are we to manage when the hull is brought close in shore?"

"We'll have to be content to move her a few feet at a time," replied
Ellerton.  "It's slow work, I admit, but we are making very
satisfactory progress."

With the arrival of the neap tides, the work came to a standstill, the
rise of water being insufficient to justify the time and labour spent
on it; so the slings were cast off and buoyed, and the canoes brought
into the little natural harbour, where they would be safe from all but
an exceptional on-shore gale.

During the interval, the lads utilised several spare lengths of rails,
and spiking them into rough sleepers, formed a temporary hauling-up
slip.

Two of the wagons were dismantled, and the axles and wheels attached to
a cradle, while a winch was firmly bolted to a secure foundation on the
shore at twenty yards above high-water mark.

The rails were to be laid down at low water as far seaward as possible,
and the sleepers sunk by means of heavy stones.  Andy hoped to avail
himself of a high spring tide to float the yawl right over the cradle,
then, casting off the lashings that supported her, they could haul the
wreck up by means of the winch and effect the repairs at their leisure.

Unfortunately, with the return of the spring tides a strong on-shore
breeze sprang up and continued with unremitting freshness for over a
week, so that the members of the salvage party were compelled
temporarily to abandon their enterprise.

"Never say die," exclaimed Mr. McKay encouragingly.  "Another fortnight
and I hope we shall be able to resume the work.  In the meantime, lads,
what do you say to a kind of picnic?"

"A picnic?" asked Ellerton.  "Where to?"

"I am thinking of paying another visit to the buccaneers' cave.  I'm
very curious to know what is on the other side of that iron-bound door,
and I've no doubt you are equally so."

"Hurrah!" shouted the lads in chorus.  "When shall we start?"

"In an hour," replied Mr. McKay promptly.

"Bursting open the door will be a tough job," remarked Andy.  "How do
you propose to do it?"

"I hope to manage it by means of an explosive," replied his father.

"Dynamite?"

"No, there's too much risk in carting a few sticks of that stuff
through a tunnel a hundred yards in length or more.  One slip and it
would mean sudden death to the lot of us.  I want a couple of fuses,
however, so while we are getting ready you can run up to the magazine
and obtain them."

While Andy was away on his errand, Mr. McKay opened a few cartridges
and extracted the cordite.

"This stuff is safe enough with reasonable precautions," he remarked to
Ellerton, who was watching Mr. McKay with no little fear.  "So long as
it is not under compression cordite can be lit without the faintest
danger.  In the open air it merely fizzles like a damp squib."

"Couldn't we smash the door with an axe?" asked Ellerton.

"We could, but I prefer not to.  In the first place there's not much
room to wield an axe; in the second, as I mentioned before, I have my
suspicions regarding that door."

"What suspicions, sir?"

"Wait and see!" replied Mr. McKay with a laugh.

On the arrival of Andy with the fuses, the little party set out for the
cave, each member carrying part of the equipment.  On gaining the
summit of the hill overlooking the house, Mr. McKay scanned the horizon
with his glasses to satisfy himself that no canoes were approaching the
island, then, having reassured himself on that point, he gave the word
to step out briskly.

"I don't want to spend a night away from the house in case anything
happens," he explained.

"But do you expect another crowd of savages?"

"I didn't expect the last lot," he replied grimly, "but they came all
the same."

The journey through the forest and across the rock-strewn plain was
performed without incident, and within a couple of hours after leaving
the house the party drew up at the mouth of the tunnel.

Here each member lit a lantern, and in a comparatively bright light the
passage of the tunnel commenced.  Quexo, however, remained in the open
air.  Nothing could prevail upon him to descend into the bowels of the
earth.

Once or twice someone stumbled, Terence falling heavily and barking his
shins, while Mr. McKay's head came in contact with the roof much too
often for his liking; but in high spirits the explorers crossed the
floor of the abyss, traversed the second tunnel, and gained the
armoury.  Here they rested ere commencing the final stage of their
journey underground.

At length the explorers came face to face with the mysterious
iron-bound door.  In spite of themselves they felt a strange sensation
as they gazed upon the relic of bygone days.  What lay behind it?  What
secret did it guard so well?

"Stand back a bit, lads, and hand me another lantern," said Mr. McKay.

Dropping on his knees, he carefully examined the floor and the
iron-shod threshold of the door, probing the narrow slit with his
knife.  This done, he turned his attention to the walk and the crown of
the arch next to the woodwork, tapping the stone with the blade of his
knife with the greatest caution.

The others looked on with interest not unmingled with curiosity and
awe.  At length, apparently satisfied with the examination, Mr. McKay
rose.

"I want you to bore a hole here," said he to Andy, pointing out a place
in the door barely two inches from the floor.

Andy, armed with a ratchet-brace, began his task, and the subdued
silence of the underground passage was broken only by the rattle of the
pawl and the sharp burr of the bit as it wormed its way steadily
through the stout oaken plank.

"It's hot work," exclaimed Andy, who in order to use the brace in that
most inconvenient place was obliged to lie full length on the floor.

"I know, but keep it up," replied Mr. McKay, who, grasping a crowbar,
was standing astride his son's feet.

"Stand a bit farther back," he continued, addressing Ellerton and
Terence.

The two lads instantly obeyed, though they wondered at Mr. McKay's
alert and expectant attitude.

Suddenly, like the tongue of an enormous serpent, a double-pronged barb
of steel flashed dully in the candle-light, passing completely across
the passage and about three feet above and over Andy's prostrate body.

In an instant Mr. McKay's powerful arm brought the crowbar upward in a
resistless sweep, and with one blow severed the dreadful device of
death.

The lads, pale with the excitement and horror of the incident, could
only utter an exclamation of astonishment while Andy hurriedly backed
away from the well-guarded door.

"Pleasant, isn't it?" remarked Mr. McKay in a cool matter-of-fact tone,
as if such incidents were of an everyday occurrence.  "I had my
suspicions, as I said more than once before.  That device was cunningly
contrived to salute marauders in a very forcible manner.  Had either of
us been standing in front of the door we should have been transfixed in
a jiffy.  Now, carry on, Andy.  I don't think there's anything more to
be feared on this side of the door, at any rate."

But Andy was not equal to the task.  The risky experience had, to use
his own words, completely knocked the stuffing out of him.

"Let's quit; the game's not worth the candle," said Terence.

"Rather not!" replied Mr. McKay, resolutely.  "There's something worth
securing behind that door, or the former owners would not have taken
such elaborate and crafty steps to guard it.  Here, Ellerton, stand by
with the crowbar in case of accidents, and I'll finish boring the hole."

So saying, Mr. McKay took up a position similar to that formerly
occupied by his son and plied the brace vigorously.

Ere the bit had sunk another quarter of an inch there came a dull
metallic sound from the remote side of the door.

"What's that?" gasped Andy breathlessly.

"Another surprise for trespassers," replied his father without ceasing
in his work.  "I've released another secret spring, I suppose.
However, we are on the right side of the door this time."

Having bored the hole sufficiently deep for his purpose Mr. McKay
proceeded to insert the cordite, ramming it tightly home with the end
of the crowbar.  The rest of the explosive he laid close to the base of
the door, covering it with stones and pieces of rock brought from the
floor of the chasm.

"Now let's go back to the other tunnel," he continued, after the
detonator and the fuse had been inserted and the latter fired.
"There's no hurry; the explosion will not take place for five minutes."

As the moments sped, the lads awaited in breathless silence the sound
of the detonation.

Presently a dull rumble echoed through the rocky passage, followed by a
blast of air mingled with the acrid fumes of the cordite.

"Not so fast!  Not so fast!" cautioned Mr. McKay, as the lads began to
run towards the hitherto baffling barrier.  "Some of the rock may be
dislodged."

As it was, they were obliged to wait some considerable time, as the
atmosphere in the tunnel was so vile that it was impossible to breathe
with comfort.  Then as the mist gradually cleared, the dull yellow
glare of the lanterns revealed a mass of shattered woodwork where the
door had stood; while a foot beyond was a barrier of steel rods, which,
serving the purpose of a portcullis, had fallen from above.

"That's what we heard fall," observed Mr. McKay.  "The idea was, I
suppose, that any unauthorised person who escaped the lance-thrust on
this side of the door would, on opening it, be impaled by the weapons
concealed in the roof.  Now to settle with this obstruction."

A few powerful strokes with an axe shattered enough bars to enable Mr.
McKay to squeeze through, and, followed by his eager companions, he
entered the mysterious cavern.

At first there was little to attract the attention of the explorers.
The cave was of irregular form, being about fifty feet in length,
thirty in breadth, and varying in height from twenty-five to six feet.

On the floor were six wooden chests, ordinary in appearance and
apparently of simple construction; they would have easily been mistaken
for seamen's chests placed in a lumber-room.

Striding up to the nearest one, Mr. McKay raised the lid.  There was no
creaking of rusty hinges, no glitter of gold and jewels to dazzle the
eyes.  The chest was empty!

"Well, this is a sorry trick to have played on one another after so
much trouble," commented he with a forced laugh.  He was visibly
disappointed, and his discouragement was shared by his companions.

"No doubt this has been the hiding-place of some great hoard," he
continued.  "But the buccaneering rascals have evidently removed their
booty.  I've drawn a blank, so you, Ellerton, try your hand."

The second chest was opened with equal ease, but to the unbounded
delight of the whole party the coffer was two-thirds filled with yellow
metal ingots, which flashed dully in the light of the lanterns.

"Gold!" was the chorus of exclamation.

"Gold it is," added Mr. McKay.  "But a deal of good it will do us in
our present state!  However, let's continue the examination."

The remaining four coffers gave more trouble, the lids being secured by
stout iron screws.  Two were filled with gold and silver ornaments,
cups, vases, and plates--the plunder, doubtless, of many a rich city of
Spain's colonies on the shores of the Pacific.  The remaining two were
laden with virgin gold.

"Well, lads," exclaimed Mr. McKay, when the last coffer had been forced
to disclose its contents, "once we get this stuff safely to a civilised
country we shall be rich beyond our wildest imagination.  We'll share
and share alike, of course."

"What is the value of the treasure?" asked Ellerton in an awestruck
voice, for the sudden avalanche of untold wealth had wellnigh upset him.

"Goodness only knows!  There's enough to enable you to go through life
without doing another stroke of work.  That is, of course, when you are
home in England once more.  But, my lad, don't look upon it in that
light.  Take my word for it that idleness is a curse, and the wealth,
if used solely to promote idleness, would serve a better purpose if it
lay a thousand fathoms deep on the bed of the ocean."

"If ever I take my share back to my home, I trust I'll use it to a good
purpose," said Ellerton.

"I trust so, too," added Mr. McKay.  "Now, let us see if there's
anything else of interest here.  I am anxious to examine these
murderous devices.  Ah!"

Mr. McKay pointed in the direction of the shattered door.  On either
side, but separated from the entrance tunnel by a massive wall composed
of the solid rock, was a narrow and lofty passage, both running
parallel with the tunnel.

Lantern in hand, Mr. McKay stooped down and entered the right-hand
recess, and to his surprise he found no fewer than six steel lances,
each accompanied by a tightly coiled spring, while a seventh had
uncoiled itself, the spiral spring stretching from wall to wall.

"Great heavens!" he exclaimed with thankfulness.  "We've had a
fortunate escape.  Each of these fiendish contrivances is set to launch
itself into the tunnel on the outside of the door.  The one we released
is the nearest."

"Then we must have passed them?" asked Andy.

"Yes, and by the intervention of Providence they failed to act.  Watch!"

And touching a slender steel rod that passed from the front of one of
the springs to the floor, Mr. McKay gave it a sharp upward jerk.

Instantly the hidden coil released itself, and the dread weapon
disappeared through the rock which separated the cave-like recess from
the tunnel.

"The whole contrivance, though deadly, is comparatively simple,"
explained Mr. McKay.  "Underneath the floors of both chambers are a
number of levers.  The weight of a person treading in the tunnel would
cause the lever to move a rod, which in turn releases a finely set
trigger which controls the springs.  Owing to years of idleness the
levers failed to act, and only Andy's continuous exertions as he lay on
the ground in front of the door caused one of the springs to be
released.  I bargained for one, but not a dozen or more, by Jove!"

"A dozen?" echoed Terence.

"Aye, a dozen at least.  We'll find six or seven more on the other side
of the tunnel."

One by one the remaining springs were released, and on entering the
left-hand cavity a similar state of things was revealed.

"I don't think we need fear these any longer," continued Mr. McKay, as
the sound of the releasing of the last spring vibrated in the confined
space.  "Now the question is, what is to be done with the stuff?" and
he indicated the coffers with a wave of his hand.

"Leave it here," suggested Andy.

"I would but for one reason.  If we are taken off the island by a
passing ship, the captain would not feel inclined to waste time while
we were bringing these chests from here to the shore, for, of course,
we could not reveal the nature of their contents.  No; I propose to
cart the whole of the treasure back to the house, stow it away in small
boxes that are convenient to handle, and bury the boxes a few feet
under the floor."

Each member of the party thereupon filled his haversack with as much
gold as it would hold, until the stout canvas straps cut into the
shoulders of the wearers; and thus laden they retraced their steps,
arriving on the surface in a breathless and exhausted condition.

Here the loads were redistributed, and making better progress, the
wearied adventurers arrived at their dwelling just as the sun dipped
beyond the lofty peak of the island.




CHAPTER XXIII

"A SAIL!  A SAIL!"

Twice daily on each of the succeeding days Mr. McKay and his companions
paid a hurried visit to the treasure-cave, and at the end of that time
the bulk of the buccaneers' spoil was safely hidden in the spot chosen
for its reception.

Then, with the return of the spring tides, the work of salving the yawl
was resumed.

Slowly, yet without a hitch, the sunken craft was moved towards the
cradle which awaited its burden, till the falling off of the tides
found the yawl within ten yards of low-water mark.

"I have been thinking, pater," observed Andy one day, as they were
preparing to revisit the cave.

"Thinking what, my boy?"

"Why, every journey we make to the cavern we perform practically
empty-handed.  Would it not be well to carry a supply of provisions
with us and store them in the cave?  You see, if those savages should
return we might be glad of a retreat."

"Quite true, though I sincerely hope we shall not be put to such
straits.  However, we'll take a few barrels of provisions and some
rifles and ammunition as well."

"And water?"

"Ay, but that's the rub.  Water is heavy to carry about, and as far as
I can see there's no spring or brook within a mile of the entrance to
the cave."

"I wonder if there's water to be found above the cliffs in which lies
the mouth of the tunnel.  I noticed several small streams when I
climbed the mountain, though, of course, I didn't ascend on that side.
I think I'll explore that slope as soon as possible."

"Why not to-day?  Ellerton and you can do so while we are making our
midday trip back to the house."

Accordingly, instead of ascending the tunnel with Mr. McKay and
Terence, the two chums clambered up the face of the cliff.  At the top
they found that the land sloped steeply towards the peak, the ground
being thickly covered with stunted bushes and occasional clumps of
palms.

"Look here, Hoppy," remarked Andy, as they sat down to recover their
breadth after their fatiguing climb.  "It's all very well living on an
island when everything goes well, but we can't say that it is now.
Perhaps it's a useless fear, but I fear that there's always the
possibility of those savage brutes coming back here in overwhelming
numbers and wiping us out.  That does not tend to make things
comfortable, although it may tend to liven things up."

"But they had such a terrible smashing last time," replied Ellerton.

"True!  But didn't we give them a good licking when they pursued us in
their canoes?  That didn't prevent them repeating their unwelcome
attentions."

"I hope you don't mean to show the white feather, Andy?"

"Not I.  If there's a dust-up, I'll do my best; but, at the same time,
I shan't be sorry to get the yawl repaired and say good-bye to the
island.  The treasure can wait till we charter a steamer to fetch it."

"Well, the savages haven't returned, so we can still make the best of
things," replied Ellerton cheerfully.  "But we must be moving or we'll
find no water."

The two lads had not gone fifty yards ere they came across a small
stream.  Andy bent down, and raising some of the water in the palm of
his hand applied it to his lips.

"Fresh as one could wish," he pronounced.

"Good!  Now we'll follow its course and see if it approaches the mouth
of the cave."

The rivulet, for it was nothing more, wended its way in an almost
semicircular direction, till, at about two hundred yards from where the
lads had struck it, it emptied itself into a rift in the rocks, the
splash of its fall echoing dimly from apparently unfathomable depths.

"Look!  We are not very far from that part of the cliff that overhangs
the mouth of the cave," exclaimed Ellerton.  "What is to prevent us
from digging a shallow trench and conducting the water right to the
entrance to the tunnel?"

"It's fairly hard rock," objected Andy, "It will be no end of a task
cutting a new watercourse."

"Then we can use some of the cast-iron pipes we brought ashore,"
continued the young seaman, determined not to be overcome by early
difficulties.  "There are more than enough to cover this distance, and
by damming the stream we can----"

"Yes, that's all very well, but if we are compelled to beat a retreat
to the cave the savages will find the pipes and so discover our
hiding-place."

"I'm afraid that will make but little difference.  The trail from the
house up the mouth of the tunnel is so well defined that a blind man
might follow it.  Why, whatever is the matter with you, Andy?  You seem
to throw cold water on every suggestion that is made.  You are not
always like that.  Are you ill?"

"I believe I am," replied Andy.  "At least, I do not feel quite up to
the mark."

"Then let's get back," said Ellerton, and assisting his chum over the
rough ground the pair returned to the mouth of the tunnel just as the
others were emerging.

"Any luck?" asked Mr. McKay cheerfully; then realising that his son
looked ill, he exclaimed: "What have you been doing, Andy?"

"I don't know, father.  I feel absolutely rotten."

They managed to get him back to the house, his teeth chattering with
the cold; but before night he was in a high fever.  His father
administered liberal doses of quinine, of which there was a plentiful
supply; but, in spite of this remedy, the lad's illness increased, and
before morning he was in a delirium, raving about the sunken yawl and
the savages.  More than once he attempted to leave his bed and seize a
rifle, and it required the united efforts of Mr. McKay, Ellerton, and
Terence to hold him down.

It was an anxious time.  Mr. McKay had had experience of this kind of
malady, and knew that should the patient leave his bed and take cold,
he must die.

For forty-eight hours Mr. McKay, the two lads, and Quexo kept ceaseless
watch, the mulatto being particularly attentive in his duties; but at
length the feverish state was succeeded by a profuse sweat, and Mr.
McKay knew that for the present the dreaded disaster was averted.

During the lengthy period of convalescence, someone had to be within
call of the patient, but the others resumed their outdoor occupation.

Most of the traces of the last visit of the savages had been removed;
the cliff-path leading up from the shore had been fortified by the
erection of a loop-holed palisade, so as to command the approach by
rifle-fire; while the remainder of the treasure had been brought from
the cave to the house, and the former was well provisioned in case of
emergency.

Ellerton also found time to carry out his project of conducting fresh
water into the cave.  By the aid of Terence and Quexo he contrived to
lay a line of pipes from the stream down the slope to the edge of the
cliff overhanging the entrance, whence a tiny cascade fell over the
rocks within a few feet of the tunnel.

Later on, at Mr. McKay's suggestion, the line of iron pipes was
continued down the face of the cliff, though concealed by the bushes,
and carried a few yards into the tunnel.  For most of that distance the
pipes were covered by the thick dust, till sufficiently far from the
entrance to enable the occupants to defend the end of the aqueduct if
necessary.

The water, on escaping, ran down the incline, till absorbed by the
pumice dust, although by degrees it cut for itself a channel close to
the sides of the tunnel.  Thus a plentiful supply of the precious
liquid was assured, and at the same time no inconvenience was caused by
the waste turning the floor of the passage into a swamp.

The rainy season was shortly due, and unable, on account of Andy's
weakness, to complete the salvage of the yawl, since every available
hand was necessary, the wrecked boat was again rafted farther out into
the lagoon and allowed to sink to the bottom, so as to lie in safety
during the on-shore gales.

One morning Ellerton set out as usual to attend to the sheep, which
were in a thriving state, having so increased in numbers that new
pasture grounds had to be provided for them.

It was then blowing strongly from the north-east and almost dead on
shore.  Happening to glance seaward, he was surprised to see a topsail
schooner, under close-reefed canvas, running past the island.

For a moment or so he remained gazing with astonishment at the unwonted
sight: then, recovering himself, he ran as hard as he could to the
house.

"A sail!  A sail!" he exclaimed breathlessly.

[Illustration: "A SAIL!  A SAIL!" HE EXCLAIMED BREATHLESSLY]

Everyone, including Andy, ran out of the house, and, as Ellerton had
announced, there was the schooner now abreast of the entrance of the
lagoon, but still keeping on her course to the south-west.

"Bring out the signal-book and the flags," ordered Mr. McKay.  "And
you, Quexo, make a fire."

Ellerton soon returned with the bunting, and the Union Jack was hoisted
to the masthead.  The mulatto procured some dry wood from the store,
and set it in a blaze.  When well alight, he piled a quantity of damp
leaves upon the fire, causing a thick smoke.

Unfortunately the strong wind prevented the vapour from rising, the
smoke drifting over the ground in thick, suffocating columns, but to
the castaways' great joy the vessel hoisted her ensign.  It was the
French tricolour.

"Hurrah!" shouted Mr. McKay.  "Now lads, hand me N and C."

The next instant the N and C flags, signifying in the International
code, "_Want assistance_" were fluttering from the mast.

Through the telescope the inhabitants of McKay's Island could see the
oilskin-clad figure of the French skipper, his neatly-trimmed moustache
and imperial as correct as if he were on the boulevards of Paris,
rushing hither and thither, and giving his orders with much waving of
his arms.  Then, as a string of flags ran up to her main truck, the
schooner was hove-to.

"_D.C.--Are coming to your assistance_," read Mr. McKay, referring to
his signal-book.  "By Jove! that won't do, the boat will be swamped,"
for already some of the crew were manning the falls.

"Sharp there," he continued, "'_E.Y.--Do not attempt to land in your
boat_.'  That will stop them; but there's no denying that they are
plucky fellows."

In obedience to the signal, the crew of the French schooner gave up
their attempt, and a lengthy interchange of signals was kept up, the
Frenchman promising to report the presence of the castaways at the
first port she touched; then, with a farewell dip of her ensign, she
flung about, and half an hour later she was lost in the haze.

"That's a load off our minds," remarked Mr. McKay.  "We can reasonably
expect help in a month at the very outside."

"Unless she is blown out of her course, for a gale is freshening,"
replied Ellerton.

"Nevertheless, the chances are greatly in our favour, though at the
same time we must not cease our efforts to work out our salvation.
This gale will doubtless mark the end of the rainy season, so we can
hope to renew our efforts to salve the yawl within the next few days."

But, contrary to Mr. McKay's expectations, the weather continued bad
for nearly a month and, although a sharp look-out was kept by day and
the searchlights flashed nightly, no vessel appeared in sight.
Alternate hopes and fears did not tend to improve the spirits of the
castaways, and ere the fine weather set in their condition was
bordering on acute depression, in spite of their individual efforts to
the contrary.

At length, after a long spell of rainy weather, the sun burst forth in
all its splendour, the wind went away, and the island appeared under a
totally different aspect from that which it had shown during the last
six months.  With the return of the dry season, the spirits of the
castaways likewise rose, and energetically they resumed their outdoor
labours.

The submerged yawl was, so far as they could see, little the worse for
its prolonged rest on the bed of the lagoon, and by dint of hard and
painstaking work she was moved nearer to the shore than she had been
since the disastrous day when she had been scuttled by the natives.

"It will be new moon to-morrow at about ten o'clock," announced Mr.
McKay.  "Consequently there will be a fairly high tide at noon, so we
can reasonably hope for sufficient water to float the yawl to the
cradle.  Everything is ready, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir," replied Ellerton.  "I finished rigging the tackle this
morning, and the cradle is properly ballasted."

"Good!  Then we'll make the attempt to-morrow."




CHAPTER XXIV

A FALSE AND A REAL ALARM

Before daybreak everyone was up and eager for the fray, and directly
breakfast was over they sallied down to the shore.  It was still pitch
dark, but the time of dead low water made it absolutely necessary that
operations should commence ere the sun rose.

By the light of several lanterns the slack of the hawsers was taken in
and the two canoes pinned down so far as the united efforts of all
hands would permit.  Nothing more could be done till the rising of the
tide.

The cradle, its ends marked by long poles to indicate its position at
high water, was already run out so far as the lines of the slipway
extended, a rope being fastened to it from the windlass ashore.

Anxiously the little group of workers watched the tide rise slowly,
inch by inch, up the temporary tide gauge.  Sometimes it paused as a
"false ebb" in the offing stayed its progress, till at length it crept
within a few inches of its predicted height.

"There's enough water now, I fancy," announced Ellerton, "so heave
away.  Gently does it!"

It was an anxious time.  Slowly the two canoes were warped shore wards,
guided by a pair of ropes abeam so as to insure the wrecked boat being
deposited evenly on the cradle.  Already the two outer poles of the
cradle were passed, when a slight shock told the salvors that the
yawl's forefoot had touched the cradle.

"Avast there!" shouted Ellerton to Terence and Quexo, who were hauling
on the shore.

"There's not enough water," exclaimed Andy, with dismay written on his
face.

"Ten minutes yet before high water," announced Mr. McKay.  "Will she do
it, I wonder?"

For answer Ellerton slipped off his clothes and plunged over the side
of the canoe.  Mr. McKay and Andy could follow his movements as he
descended with slow yet powerful strokes, till he disappeared from view
beneath the submerged craft.  Half a minute later he reappeared, and
swam alongside the canoe, into which he was assisted by the eager
spectators.

"She'll do it," he announced, when he had recovered his breath.  "We
are a bit out in our reckoning; her keel is touching the side of the
cradle."

Five minutes later the yawl was lying immediately over the slipway, the
slings were cast off, and slowly she settled upon the carriage prepared
for her reception.  The canoes were warped clear, and all that remained
to be done was to man the winch and heave the cradle above high-water
mark.

In spite of the broiling sun, the work of winding the winch was begun,
for the delighted lads would not be persuaded to delay the operation
till the cool of the day.  Foot by foot the cradle came home, till the
huge barnacle-covered hull began to appear above the water.

"What a state she's in," exclaimed Andy, as the lads rested from their
labours, for they were thoroughly played out.  "There's a week's
scraping in front of us before we can do anything else."

"Hadn't we better see about baling her out?" asked Terence.  "Directly
she ceases to be water-borne the pressure of the water will burst her
seams."

"No fear of that," replied Mr. McKay.  "The water will find its way out
of the hole that the natives made in her."

"I guess the motor is pretty rusty," continued Terence.

"It may not be," Andy replied.  "You see, I kept it smothered in
grease, and unless those brutes smashed it, it ought to be capable of
being repaired.  But I am awfully anxious to see, so what do you say to
another turn at the winch?"

Once more the lads resumed their work of hauling up the cradle, till
nearly the whole of the streaming, weed-covered hull--a forlorn waif
from the sea--was visible.

"Another five yards, lads," exclaimed Ellerton cheerfully.  "Now, put
more beef into it."

As he spoke, there was a warning shout from Mr. McKay, but the warning
came too late.  Ere the lads could realise the extent of their
misfortune the cradle collapsed and the hull of the yawl crashed over
on her side.

With a horrible rending of the shattered timbers, the enormous mass
pitched fairly on a jagged rock; the next instant the object of so many
months' tedious toil lay on its broadside, hopelessly damaged.

For quite a minute all hands gazed in speechless grief upon the scene
of calamity.  To have the fruits of victory snatched from their lips
seemed almost more than they could realise, till by degrees the extent
of their misfortune began to assert itself.

"Is she really done for?" said Andy, his voice barely raised above a
whisper.

"Yes, her back's broken," replied his father.  "She will never float
again."

"Then, by George!" announced Andy, speaking in a tone that surprised
his companions by its resolution, "I won't be done.  I begin to build
another craft to-morrow.  Come on, pater, let's get something to eat,
and after that we'll set out the plans for our new craft.  Buck up,
Hoppy, it's no use crying over spilt milk."

Inspired by their companion's cheerfulness, the lads turned their backs
upon the scene of their ill-favoured labours and set off towards the
house.  They now felt specially anxious to devote their energies to the
new task that lay before them, and already their late misfortune was
being regarded as a thing of the past.

"Without wishing to discourage you, Andy," began Mr. McKay, after the
meal was over, "I think we had better give up all idea of building
another craft.  I've been going carefully into this matter, and I'll
tell you why I form this conclusion.  You see there's no timber growing
on this island that can be used, and our own stock is insufficient even
if we make use of the planks of the wrecked yawl.  So I think the best
thing we can do is to convert one of the canoes----"

"But I thought we had already decided that they are unsuitable and
unseaworthy?"

"Quite so.  As they are at present I should hesitate to make a long
voyage in one of them, although the natives frequently travel great
distances in this type of craft.  So I think if we give the smallest
canoe--for that one seems the handiest--a good keelson, bolt a false
keel into it, and provide her with some stout timbers and stringers,
she'll answer our purpose.  We can use most of the deck planks of the
yawl to deck-in the canoe.  Her sails and most of her gear will come in
handy."

"It would certainly save a lot of work," replied Andy, for in calmer
moments the size of his proposed task had begun to assert itself.

"Then let's make a start," added Ellerton.  "There's no time like the
present, so I vote we begin to dismantle the remains of the yawl,
examine and overhaul her canvas, and remove the ballast."

"I haven't measured the smallest canoe," remarked Andy.  "What's her
length, do you think?"

"About twenty-eight feet in length, nine in breadth, and two feet
draught, though with the addition of a false keel and ballast she will
draw at least four feet."

Accordingly all hands set to work with a will, and ere nightfall the
shattered hull of the yawl was a mere shell, the gear being stowed away
in the lower storehouse.

"To-morrow we'll make a start with the canoe," said Ellerton, as they
prepared to retire for the night.  "There are plenty of pieces of
timber to shore her up, and wedges can easily be made.  Before the end
of the week we ought to have her keel and keelson bolted on."

"Then sleep well on it," added Mr. McKay, "for there's much to be done."

The inhabitants of McKay's Island had already made their customary
signal with the searchlight, the power had been switched off, and the
canvas hood placed over the instrument for the purpose of protecting it
from the night dews.  This routine was always the last ere the day's
work ended.

Mr. McKay was about to close the door of the dwelling-house when a
rapid and prolonged ringing of the electric alarm bell broke upon the
stillness of the night.

Instantly there was a rush for the arms-rack where the rifles were kept
ready for immediate use, and, securing their weapons, the whole party
made for the open, Terence, according to a prearranged plan, running to
the powerhouse to switch on the current, while the others took up their
position at the palisade commanding the cliff-path.

The night was pitch dark; a light breeze ruffled the palm trees, but
beyond that all was still.  Peering into the darkness the defenders
waited, finger on trigger, to open fire on the first appearance of the
foe.

Then the alarm bell began to ring again.

"There's someone climbing the path," whispered Ellerton, when the din
had died away.

"I wish Terence would hurry up with the searchlight; we could then see
who the intruders are.  There it is again," as the clanging of the bell
commenced for the third time.

In his natural anxiety and haste, Terence fumbled over his task, but at
length the carbons fused and the giant beam of the searchlight threw
its dazzling rays seaward.  Then, trained by Donaghue's guiding hand,
it swept the lower terraces and the beach, but neither hostile canvas
nor lurking bloodthirsty warriors came within its blinding glare.

"There's someone moving down there," exclaimed Andy, pointing towards
the foot of the steep path.  "See!  To the right of that great boulder."

"Hanged if I can," muttered Ellerton.  Nevertheless he took aim with
his rifle at the spot indicated by his chum.

"It's only the shadows thrown by the moving beam," said Mr. McKay.
"Terence, keep the light steady for a moment, will you?"

The now stationary ray revealed the fact that some moving object was
creeping cautiously over the rock-strewn beach immediately at the end
of the path.

"There's someone down there," whispered Ellerton, and almost as he
spoke the alarm bell resumed its shrill warning.

"I'm going down to see who or what it is," announced Mr. McKay, leaning
his rifle against the stockade and drawing a revolver.

Accompanied by Andy, Ellerton and Quexo, he descended the steep and
rugged path.

All at once Mr. McKay burst into a hearty laugh, his companions joining
in as soon as they perceived the cause of his mirth.  A huge turtle had
crawled across the beach and was digging a hole in the sand with its
flippers.  This had set the alarm bell ringing.

[Illustration: A HUGE TURTLE HAD CRAWLED ACROSS THE BEACH AND HAD SET
THE ALARM BELL RINGING]

As the larder needed filling, the turtle was dispatched and dragged up
to the house.

It was late in the forenoon of the next day ere the inmates turned out
of their beds, for the previous night's diversion had deprived them of
a fair share of their accustomed sleep.

"Buck up and fill the kettle, Quexo," shouted Andy "I'm right hungry."

The mulatto, taking a can in his hand, set out for the stream, but
hardly had he stepped outside the door when he returned with
consternation written all over his face.

"Massa!  Massa!" he gasped.  "Canoes!  Heap, plenty, much, great
canoes!"




CHAPTER XXV

THE GREAT INVASION

Quexo's warning was only too true.  Less than a mile from the reef the
sea was dotted with the brown mat sails of a large fleet of native
craft all heading for the island.

"Forty canoes at least, by Jove!" ejaculated Mr. McKay.  "And taking
twenty men to each--a low average--that means there are eight hundred
of the wretches making straight for us."

"It's long odds," replied Ellerton grimly, "but we'll do our best, and
perhaps we may find a means of driving them off."

"I should have thought the last little surprise would have settled
them.  We must give them credit for their persistence.  There's one
thing to our advantage, though; it's a day attack, and we are more or
less prepared for it.  But what are they up to now?"

The advancing canoes had now reached the entrance to the lagoon, and,
with marvellous precision, their sails were lowered, and the crews took
to their paddles.  Then, instead of heading straight for the beach, the
whole flotilla turned its course parallel with the shore.

"That's bad," remarked Mr. McKay, pausing in the act of dragging a box
of ammunition from the house to the stockade.  "They have learnt a
lesson, and now they mean to take us on the flank or in the rear.  Come
on, lads, there's no time to be lost.  We must follow them and see if
we can prevent them landing."

Fortunately the savages' idea of strategy was not very advanced.
Instead of keeping one section of their fleet for the purpose of making
a feint or a frontal attack while the other canoes skirted the island,
the whole of the boats kept together.

Loaded with ammunition-belts and carrying their rifles, the little band
of defenders toiled up the path leading to the interior till they
reached the summit of the cliffs overlooking the house.  Then, bearing
away to the left, they hastened to keep pace with their savage invaders.

Through the palm-groves, fighting their way between patches of thick,
prickly scrub, Mr. McKay and his companions continued their wearisome
march, till, from the summit of the ridge that separated their bay from
the one where they had first landed, they saw that the hostile canoes
had gained considerably.

The usually calm waters of the lagoon were broken into thousands of
ripples by the swift-moving craft, while the cliffs re-echoed to the
regular beats of their paddles.  Yet, without attempting to land on
that part of the shore, the savages continued their roundabout voyage.

"It's no use going any farther," gasped Mr. McKay breathlessly.  "We
are only tiring ourselves out to no purpose.  A hundred well-armed men
would be powerless to prevent them landing."

"Then what's to be done?"

"We must return to the house and make every possible use of the few
hours that as yet remain to us.  I quite admit I have been guilty of a
serious error of omission.  While paying great attention to our seaward
defences, we have entirely neglected the landward approach."

On return to the terrace on which stood the dwelling-house and the
power-station, the already wearied defenders immediately set to work to
fortify the approach from the interior of the island.

Sixty yards from the house began the narrow defile that afforded a road
between the settlement and the treasure cave.  On either side the
cliffs towered to nearly one hundred feet, so that once the savages
took possession of those heights the terrace could not be held.

"I suppose we cannot launch one of the canoes, provision her, and make
a dash for safety?" asked Terence.

"It's too risky," replied Mr. McKay.  "If seen, we should be overhauled
in less than half-an-hour.  No, we must stick to this place and hold it
to the last, so let's set to at once."

With the energy of despair all hands worked with feverish desperation,
their loaded rifles lying within easy reach, while every moment they
expected to hear the savage shouts of their bloodthirsty foes.

Across the foot of the defile they dug a shallow trench, lining the
inner side with boxes, crates, and other articles so as to form a
barricade.  It was a feeble defence at the most, but with five skilled
riflemen armed with modern rifles behind it, the breastwork might serve
its purpose.

To guard against a shower of missiles from the summit of the adjacent
cliffs, a lean-to roof of stout planks was hastily constructed, earth
being thrown upon it to deaden the shock of heavy stones, while the
remaining boxes of ammunition were brought up so that the supply was
ready to hand.

"Look here, Quexo," said Mr. McKay, "go to the stockade at the top of
the cliff-path, and keep watch.  Don't move, whatever happens, till we
call you, even if you hear us firing; but if you see any signs of the
savages landing on the beach, fire your rifle.  You understand?"

"Yas, massa," replied the mulatto, and snatching up his rifle he ran to
his appointed post as quickly as his legs could carry him.

"We mustn't forget water and provisions, Ellerton," said Mr. McKay.
"They must be brought ready to hand, for if the fighting is prolonged
we will have no time to go to the house for food and drink."

"I'll bring some biscuits and water," replied Ellerton.  "I remember
how dry I was during the last attack.  But, do you know, sir, I begin
to feel quite hopeful, now our defences are completed."

"It's certainly improved the situation, Hoppy," replied Mr. McKay.
"But we've a tough job in front of us.  Eight or nine hundred savages,
each eager for a fight and keen on plundering us.  We must not be
over-confident.  But now cut off and get the provisions and water."

Ellerton quickly performed his task, and, having placed the water and
biscuits in the spot indicated by Mr. McKay, he observed:

"It's a pity we can't use some of that dynamite again."

"We cannot make the trucks run up hill, and, besides, there are no
rails, if that's what you mean."

"No, sir, I know that," was the reply, "but I thought that if we could
place a few tins of the stuff on those rocks we could easily manage to
put a bullet through them at two hundred yards."

"By all means we'll try it," said Mr. McKay heartily.  "As I've often
said, you're a brick."

Accordingly Ellerton ran to the cave where the explosive was stored,
and returned at a walking pace with nearly forty pounds of the
dangerous compound.

"Don't use all of it," said Mr. McKay.  "Here, take these three tins;
they'll be a better mark for us."

Into each of the metal boxes Ellerton placed about ten pounds of the
explosive, adding a few handfuls of iron, nails, and bits of scrap
metal.  Then, climbing over the breastwork, he was handed the
rough-and-ready bombs.

Thus laden he cautiously made his way up the rough defile till he
reached a spot about two hundred yards from the defenders' position.

Here a mass of fallen rock, the highest part ten feet in height, formed
a suitable site for his operations, and without mishap the tin
canisters were placed in such a position that they could readily be
seen above the heads of any number of savages likely to come between
them and the defences.

Meanwhile Mr. McKay was busily engaged in preparing a number of
hand-bombs, charging several small tins with explosive mixed with
nails, and lashing a short length of thin rope securely to each
completed missile.

"I'm going to place these things here," said he, pointing to a small
cleft in the cliff.  "Be careful not to knock them, or we shall punish
ourselves."

"How are you going to throw them?" asked Ellerton, who had meanwhile
returned from his expedition.  "If they fall too close they will do us
harm, and I don't think they can be thrown more than the length of a
cricket-pitch."

"By this," replied Mr. McKay, holding up a short stick with a notch cut
in one end.  "I lay the rope along the stick and jam its end between
the palm of my hand and the wood.  By swinging the stick a greatly
increased power is obtained; at the right moment the cord is released
and the bomb flies off at a tangent."

"I see," replied Ellerton, and although he had great faith in Mr.
McKay, he found himself wondering what the result would be did the
missile not fly off at the correct tangent.

Slowly the hours dragged, for, all the preparations for the defence
being completed, the tedious and nerve-racking ordeal of waiting for
the fray told more upon the energies of the defenders than would the
actual fight.

The sun was sinking low ere the alert watchers detected the distant
shouts of the savages.

"They've found the trail leading to the cave, I fancy," remarked Mr.
McKay.  "They'll be here before dark, unless I'm much mistaken.
Terence, you had better start the dynamo and see that the searchlight
is ready for use.  Tell Quexo to come here and take your place.  You
must take sole charge of the seaward side of our defences.  Now,
listen: whatever you do, don't train the searchlight this way till I
discharge my rifle.  Keep the rays playing on the shore, and
occasionally flash the beam skywards.  It may bring us aid.  When you
hear the shot, slew the projector round and direct the beam straight up
the defile.  You quite understand?"

"Yes, sir," replied Terence.  "You can rely upon me."

"I feel sure of it," was the quiet reply, as the lad set off on his
responsible and single-handed task.

"It will soon be dark," said Ellerton.  "That will be all the better
for us, for these brutes won't find their way so easily."

"I don't think the darkness will stop them, provided they are not
afraid of it.  These savages can find their way by night like cats.
Hullo, Quexo, tired, eh?"

"No, massa, not berry tired.  One eye he go sleep, den oder eye he go
sleep."

"Quexo means to go to sleep with one eye open," said Andy.  "We ought
to take a leaf from his book."

"Yes, we'll feel the want of sleep as much as anything," replied his
father.  "Once the attack opens there will be little respite.  It
wouldn't be a bad idea if you three were to snatch a few moments' rest.
I'll wake you up in time, never fear."

This advice was acted upon, Andy, Ellerton, and Quexo stretching
themselves out on the ground at the foot of the barricade, and in a few
minutes, in spite of their risky position, the lads were sleeping
soundly.

Night had now fallen, and the ghostly white beams of the searchlight
swept the shore, the noise of the distant surf mingling with the
subdued fizzing of the carbons as Terence diligently attended to the
working of the projector.

The far-off shouts of the savages had now ceased.  Probably the
invaders, satisfied with the success of their unopposed landing, were
awaiting the dawn ere they commenced their attack.

Silence, when intent upon a hand-to-hand conflict, was a stranger to
them, and for this Mr. McKay was thankful, since few things are more
trying than the expectation of a sudden onslaught by an unseen and
unheard foe.

Notwithstanding this peculiarity on the part of the invaders, Mr. McKay
did not for one moment relax his vigilance.  Rifle in hand he stood,
rarely altering his position, and gazed stedfastly in the direction of
the defile, his ears alert for the faintest footfall or shout that
might denote the approach of the bloodthirsty savages.

Although the defenders were cut off from their carefully prepared
retreat in the treasure cave, another shelter yet remained.  The cavern
where Blight had been kept a prisoner had been since used as a
temporary storehouse for several casks of provisions.  As a last
resource it could be held, possibly for a month.

But if the natives took the island and showed no disposition to leave,
after having plundered the white man's possessions, even that refuge
would be a means of only prolonging the sufferings of the defenders.

Hopeful as he generally was, Mr. McKay fully realised that he and his
companions were in a very tight fix, and unless the skill and resource
of civilisation could overcome the superior numbers and reckless
courage of the savages, nothing short of a timely rescue would save the
defenders from death.

Then Mr. McKay found himself counting the number of days which had
elapsed since the French schooner had exchanged signals with the
island.  Even allowing for light winds and calms she would have had
time to reach some port, and, should the captain keep his word, a
gunboat or at least a trading vessel might be on her way to the rescue.

Mr. McKay's thoughts were interrupted by a loud chorus of savage shouts
at no great distance, then came the confused noise of scuffling feet
tearing down the defile.

"Up with you," he shouted.

But the warning was unnecessary, for the three lads, awakened by the
noise, were already standing to their arms.

"It's the sheep!" exclaimed Ellerton.

"The savages have frightened them, and they are running this way for
shelter," said Andy.  "That means that the natives will soon be at
their heels."

The terrified sheep continued their flight till they found their
advance checked by the barricade, and in a confused, struggling mass
they herded into the corner formed by the breastwork and the adjoining
cliff, their loud baa-ing adding to the confusion.

Then upon the brow of the rise at the end of the defile appeared a
multitude of lights, and with fierce shouts the savages tore down the
rough inclined path straight for the barricade.

[Illustration: WITH FIERCE SHOUTS THE SAVAGES TORE DOWN THE PATH
STRAIGHT FOR THE BARRICADE]




CHAPTER XXVI

A GREAT DISASTER

The natives had furnished themselves with torches made from the
branches of resinous trees, and in the ruddy flare the painted bodies
of the warriors made an easy mark.

"Three hundred yards," said Mr. McKay, setting up the backsight of his
rifle.  "Fire rapidly, but aim low.  We may check the rush before they
come to close quarters."

The sharp reports of the rifles echoed along the rocky walls of the
defile, and a series of loud shrieks told that the fire had not been in
vain.  Yet the onward rush was apparently unchecked, for though several
of the torches were extinguished, the savages still rushed to the
attack.

"Where's the searchlight?" muttered Mr. McKay, as he thrust a fresh
clip of cartridges into his magazine.

At that moment the giant beam swung majestically round and fixed itself
upon the gorge.

Under the powerful rays the scene of horror was thrown into high
relief.  The upper part of the defile was literally choked with human
beings.  A few of the foremost warriors, drawing clear of the press,
had managed to evade the death-dealing volleys, and with brandished
clubs and spears were rushing upon the barricade.

This much the defenders saw as the first flash of the searchlight was
thrown upon the scene.  The next instant the shouts of triumph and pain
gave place to cries of terror.

The blinding rays, coming apparently from out of the earth, were far
more to be feared than the bullets.  To the savage mind it was
magic--black magic.

The warlike mob seemed to melt away.  Some of the warriors, throwing
down their weapons, rushed from the scene of action with their arms
pressed tightly across their eyes as if to shut out the penetrating
beams; others dropped where they stood, grovelling in the dust and
uttering cries, while in the space of five minutes the defile was
deserted, save by the dead and wounded and a few of the natives, whose
terror seemed to have rooted them to the earth.

"That's spotted them!" exclaimed Andy, as he threw down his over-heated
rifle.  "I hope it will scare them right off the island."

"It has worked wonders," assented Mr. McKay.  "But be careful, some of
those men are not dead, I feel sure.  Bring down every man you see
moving."

Rifle on shoulder the lads waited.  They quite realised the danger of
allowing the natives to lurk in the defile, and as each cautiously
moving body could be seen, as a terrified warrior slowly recovered from
his panic, a carefully aimed shot caused him to fall.

"We are comparatively secure till daylight," said Mr. McKay.  "They've
had another lesson.  Andy, you might relieve Terence at the
searchlight.  Keep it fixed on the defile, though at intervals you
might direct it seawards.  Quexo, I want you to carry up as many pails
of water as you can to Blight's cave.  Ellerton, you're feeling fit, I
hope?  Will you keep a look-out, I am going to have forty winks."

It was an exaggerated "forty winks."  Mr. McKay, dead beat with his
exertions, slept like a log till daybreak, Terence keeping him company.

Ellerton had meanwhile climbed over the stockade and succeeded in
bringing back several of the terrified sheep, which throughout the
night had been huddled together in helpless terror.

Beyond an occasional shot as a few of the wretched natives attempted to
wriggle out of the death-trap, the rest of the night had passed without
further disturbance; but the dawn revealed a different state of affairs.

The discomfited savages were evidently built of stern stuff, for as
soon as it was light, undaunted by their defeat in the hours of
darkness, they took possession of the summit of the cliff overlooking
the defenders' lines.

Standing on the very edge of the precipice, like bronzed statues,
several of the chiefs surveyed the scene beneath them, till, having
taken in all that they wanted, they withdrew to the main body of
warriors.

Instantly the fierce shouts of the savages rent the air, and a shower
of stones and throwing-spears was hurled upon the white men's defences.

The missiles rattled on the iron roof of the house and upon the top of
the shelter over the searchlight; but the defenders, safe within the
covered-in barricade, were secure from the furious hail, though unable
to reply by a single shot.  Several of the sheep were transfixed by
spears, each casualty being greeted with a hoarse roar of delight from
the attackers.

Terence, however, who had returned to his post at the seaward side of
the terrace, saw the possibility of the searchlight being damaged by
stones, and, regardless of the danger, he rushed from his shelter to
place a screen of planks over the partially exposed instrument.

His appearance was the signal for a redoubled discharge of missiles,
but coolly he continued his task.

"Get back to cover!" shouted Mr. McKay.

At that moment a stone caught the lad in the side, and staggering a few
paces he fell.

A yell of triumph greeted the success of the savages; but without a
moment's hesitation Ellerton rushed through the danger zone.  Unscathed
he gained his friend's side, and to his relief found that the missile
had merely winded him.

Fortunately Terence had the presence of mind to stagger to the remote
side of the searchlight hut, where the two lads were protected from the
hailstorm of stones.

"Are you fit for a dash?" asked Ellerton after a while.

"Yes," replied Terence, "I'm ready now."

Seizing their rifles, the two friends rushed at top speed across the
open ground and gained the shelter of the palisade guarding the
cliff-path.  Here they were, so to speak, on the wrong side of the
fence, and had there been any savages on the shore their position would
have been critical in the extreme.

As it was, they were able to keep up a constant fire upon the natives
on the cliff; but their foes seemed totally indifferent to the rifles,
though man after man was observed to fall.

The savages had not been idle.  Realising that the buildings and the
barricade at the end of the defile were proof against stones and
spears, they rolled an enormous stone to the edge of the cliff with the
intention of dropping it upon the roofed-in stockade.

"Look out!" shouted Ellerton.  "There's a rock about to fall on your
heads!"

Taking advantage of the warning shout, Mr. McKay, Quexo, and Andy
crossed the covered way to the opposite side of the defile.  Not a
moment too soon.

In spite of a couple of successful shots by Ellerton, who managed to
bowl over one of the most active of the savages who were engaged in
rolling the ponderous rock, the mass of stone rushed down the slope and
shot clear of the cliff.

The next instant it crashed through the frail roof of the barricade,
and, in addition, smashed a huge gap in the wall of packing-cases and
chests.

"A near shave," ejaculated Mr. McKay.  "If they keep that game up we
shall soon be without a roof to our heads."

Emboldened by their success, a considerable number of the savages
worked their way round to the head of the gorge with the intention of
charging the shattered defences, the remaining natives still keeping up
a telling discharge from the brink of the cliff.

"I must rush it," said Ellerton hurriedly, as he grasped the state of
affairs.  "Keep a good look-out along the shore, Terence.  If I fall,
don't attempt a rescue; there are not enough of us to throw ourselves
away like that."

Bending low, the lad ran across the danger zone once more, and although
several spears fell close to him, he gained the side of his companions
in safety.

Seen by day, the advance of the savages had an even more fearful
appearance than the night attack.  Brandishing their weapons and
uttering awful yells, they rushed down the gorge, with one object in
view.  They meant to come to hand-grips with the stubborn defenders of
the barricade.

"Now, Andy," remarked Mr. McKay quietly, "reserve your fire till the
thickest of the press passes yonder rock, then aim carefully at that
canister.  Go on firing, you," he added to the other two lads.

The execution caused by the three rifles amongst that solid pack of
howling savages was great.  No body of white men would have faced it,
but undaunted the warriors swept on.

Andy, finger on trigger, watched the advance till the critical moment;
but his arm was not so firm as it ought to have been, and the bullet
struck the rock a foot to the left of the tin of explosives.

"Miss, by Jove!" he exclaimed savagely as he jerked open the breach and
ejected the empty cylinder.

Ere he could again take aim, Mr. McKay's rifle spoke.  There was a
blinding glare, followed by a deafening report, and the close ranks of
the savages seemed to be swept aside as if by a gigantic flail.  Not
only did the dynamite charge scatter death amongst the natives, but the
concussion brought down huge masses of rock from the cliffs, their fall
adding to the terror and confusion of the attackers.

"That's fifty of them at the very least," exclaimed Andy.  "A few more
coups like that, and we'll wipe them all out."

"It will teach them caution, I'm afraid," was his father's reply.  "But
we've done very well up to the present.  How's Terence?"

"He was only slightly hurt," replied Ellerton.

"No sign of any canoes?"

"No, sir."

"Thank Heaven for that," replied Mr. McKay fervently.

"The explosion also sent off the other canisters," observed Andy.
"Shall we place some others in the gorge when it is dark?"

"I don't think they will attempt that way again," replied Mr. McKay.
"They've had a rare fright, both by day and night."

"I noticed a crowd of them on the cliffs immediately above the cave
where the rest of the dynamite is stored," paid Ellerton.  "If we can
use the stuff to no better purpose, why not set a time-fuse, and give
them another surprise?"

"It might be done, but there's a great risk to be run by whoever lights
the fuse."

"I'm willing to do it," said Ellerton resolutely.  "I can creep along
the base of the cliff so as to be out of sight."

"Then do it, my boy.  Now's the time to act, before they have got over
their last reverse."

Without a moment's delay, Ellerton dashed across the spear-encumbered
ground and gained the shelter of the overhanging cliffs.  Then waving
his hands to his companions, he disappeared from view.

There was a lull in the fighting.  The defenders, anxiously awaiting
their comrade's return, lay idle within their defences, while the
natives were content to hurl an occasional spear or stone upon the
roofs of the buildings to show that they were still determined to
continue the attack.

"I hope Ellerton's all right," exclaimed Andy uneasily.  "He's been
gone quite long enough."

"I cannot help thinking the same," replied his father.

They waited another five minutes, then Quexo announced his intention of
going to search for Massa El'ton.

"Be careful, then, Quexo," said Andy.  "Remember Mr. Ellerton may have
lit the fuse--set fire to great bang-up," he added, noting that the
mulatto looked puzzled over the word "fuse."

"All right, Massa Andy.  Quexo he mind take care ob self an' Massa
El'ton."

Another five minutes passed in breathless suspense.  What had happened?
Ellerton had only to cover a distance of about four hundred yards both
ways.  Allowing for the rugged nature of the ground, and the necessity
for caution, he ought to have returned several minutes ago.  Perhaps he
had stumbled and was lying helpless within a few feet of the heavily
charged mine.

Suddenly two revolver shots rang out in quick succession, and Quexo's
voice was heard shouting for aid.

"Stay here, Andy," exclaimed his father hurriedly, and grasping his
revolver he ran towards the scene of action, the report of another shot
greeting his ears as he went.

On rounding a spur of the cliff, a strange sight met his gaze.  From
the summit of the cliff dangled a long rope of cocoa-fibre.  Half-way
from the ground was a native, evidently badly wounded, grasping the
swaying rope with one hand while the other was pressed against his
side.  On the ground at about twelve feet from the end of the rope lay
four bodies in a heap, and on arriving at the spot Mr. McKay discovered
to his consternation that two of the motionless forms were those of his
companions.

Quexo lay uppermost, a jagged spear-head buried deep in his back.  One
hurried glance revealed the sad truth that the faithful mulatto was
dead.  Under him were the bodies of two natives, both shot through the
chest, while underneath the ghastly pile was Ellerton.

As Mr. McKay stooped over the lad, a spear whizzed close to his ear and
sank deeply in the ground.  It was a stern warning, and Mr. McKay took
advantage of it.  Lifting Ellerton's body, he bore it to the shelter of
the cliffs, then as the rope began to tremble violently he stepped out
a pace, revolver in hand.

He fired, and two bodies came hurtling through space, striking the
ground with a heavy thud.  A lucky shot had severed the rope as cleanly
as if by a knife.

There was no time to be lost.  At any moment the mine might be sprung.
Hoisting Ellerton's body on his shoulder like a sack of flour, Mr.
McKay began his retreat, stepping over the rough ground with giant
strides, till the shelter of the cliffs came to an end.  Here he
transferred his burden to his arms, and, protecting it as well as he
was able with his own body, he dashed across the open.

Unscathed he reached the roofed-in stockade, and breathlessly he
deposited the body of his comrade upon the ground.

"Dead?" asked Andy anxiously.

"No, only stunned.  It's a bad business."

"And Quexo?"

"He's gone, poor fellow!"

"Oh!" Andy gasped, as if something had struck him; but the blow was a
mental not a physical injury.  "How----"

His words were interrupted by a roar that seemed to shake the island to
its very foundations.  The cliffs trembled, dislodging masses of loose
rock, while a blast of air swept over the terrace like a tornado.

The mine had exploded!




CHAPTER XXVII

THE LAST STAND

The explosion, though terrific, had not the desired effect.  Ellerton
had succeeded in lighting the fuse, and was on his way back, when the
natives lowered a rope from the cliffs.  No doubt they had observed him
on his way to the cave as he rather thoughtlessly showed himself in
crossing the base of the projecting spur.

Cunningly two of the savages lowered themselves on to a ledge within
twenty feet of the ground, and on Ellerton's return they hurled a stone
with unerring aim, bringing him senseless to the ground.

Eager to secure his body, the two assailants descended the remaining
distance, and were stooping over the prostrate youth when Quexo
appeared on the scene.

A couple of well-directed shots settled their accounts; but the
mulatto, in rushing to Ellerton's assistance, failed to notice that the
edge of the cliff above him swarmed with natives.

Even as he bent over the bodies of Ellerton and his assailants, a spear
thrown with terrible force struck him in the back.  Hardly knowing what
hurt him, the mulatto sprang to his feet, and with his dying strength
discharged his revolver at one of the blacks who was descending the
rope, ere he fell across the bodies of the victims of his first two
shots.

This episode had caused the crowd of savages, who had previously been
congregating immediately above the mine, to rush to that part of the
cliff nearest to the scene of the tragedy, and thus the actual
explosion did not inflict very great damage upon the invaders.
Nevertheless the moral result was a good service to the sore-pressed
white men, for the savages refrained from renewing the attack, and
withdrew to the shelter of the palm-groves.

The approach of night also prolonged the mutual cessation of
hostilities, for the natives dreaded the great flashing beams of light
more than anything else.

Terence, in spite of himself, fell asleep several times beside the
searchlight, while Andy, weary-eyed and stricken with grief, was kept
awake solely by his devotion to his wounded comrade.

Fortunately Ellerton's injuries were not so bad as Mr. McKay had at
first supposed.  The missile had struck him a glancing blow, and
although reducing him to insensibility, was more of the nature of a cut
than a contusion.  There had been a copious flow of blood which
relieved the pressure on the scalp that a bruise would have otherwise
caused.

Before midnight Ellerton had recovered sufficiently to relate the
circumstances of the affair so far as he knew, although he was ignorant
of the actual ambush.  Neither did Mr. McKay think fit to tell him at
present of Quexo's death in his heroic and successful attempt to save
his master from mutilation.

      *      *      *      *      *

With the return of daylight the savages renewed the attack.  Large
stones, brought to the brink of the cliff by their stupendous efforts,
came crashing down upon the frail defences, till only a small section
of the barricade midway between the walls of the defile remained intact.

Here Mr. McKay and Terence kept up a continuous but apparently
ineffectual fire, while Ellerton, still weak and showing signs of
light-headedness, did his best with a revolver.

Andy, nearly done up for want of rest, resumed his solitary vigil at
the cliff path, occasionally adding to the fusillade whenever a group
of natives appeared at the edge of the cliff to hurl another of the
weighty missiles.

With parched lips and swollen eyes the weary little band continued the
unequal combat, almost unable to raise their rifles to their aching
shoulders, till, to add to their misfortunes, Andy perceived ten large
canoes rounding the south-eastern promontory of the island.

The natives had at length grasped the importance of a simultaneous rear
and frontal attack.

"We must retreat to Blight's cave," exclaimed Mr. McKay, when his son
had shouted the disheartening intelligence.  "Let us hope the explosion
has not closed up the entrance.  Pull yourself together, Hoppy!  We've
got to make a rush for it."

"I'm going to stay here--I'm quite comfortable where I am," replied
Ellerton with astonishing determination.

"But you can't, man; you'll be cut to pieces in less than a minute."

But Ellerton refused to move.  His comrades looked at each other
anxiously.  In ordinary circumstances it would have been no easy task
to compel the lad to get up and walk, and with a few hundred savages
hanging round, the difficulties were increased tenfold.

"I'll risk it," muttered Mr. McKay.  "It's either kill or cure."  And
raising his voice he said: "Hoppy, old man, Quexo is missing.  He went
to look for you and has not returned."

"What?" exclaimed Ellerton wildly.  "Quexo missing?  I'll go and look
for him."

"We are all going," replied Mr. McKay.  "Take your rifle and keep with
us."

The savages saw the white men deserting the shelter of the barricade,
and with shouts of triumph they redoubled the hail of missiles, while
numbers of them rushed to the head of the defile and thence straight
for the abandoned defences.

Edging cautiously along the base of the cliff, the forlorn little band
continued its retreat till Ellerton, who was leading, came across the
body of the faithful mulatto.

For a moment he gazed at the ghastly scene with drawn face and staring
eyes; then, his scattered wits returning, he burst into tears.

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. McKay to his son.  "That's saved his reason.  But
here they come."

Already the leading pursuers were appearing on the edge of the
cliff-path, while others, rushing down the gorge, had scrambled over
the debris of the barricade, and with brandished clubs and spears were
charging down upon their white foes.

"Pick him up, Hoppy; we must not leave him to those fiends," shouted
Andy.

Assisted by Terence, Ellerton raised the body of the mulatto on his
back, and, covered by Mr. McKay and Andy, continued the retreat.

As they reached the scene of the great explosion, they found that
masses of dislodged boulders extended almost to the edge of the lower
cliff.  Slowly Ellerton and Terence bore their burden over the rough,
rock-strewn ground, the savages meanwhile gaining upon them rapidly.

"Keep going at any cost," shouted Mr. McKay.  "Gain the door of the
fence, and look out for us.  Andy, we must make a stand here."

"All right, pater," replied his son as he took cover behind a
convenient mass of stones.

The two rifles opened a furious fire upon the advancing natives.  Not a
shot was thrown away, and although stones and spears whizzed over their
heads or shattered themselves against the sheltering rock, father and
son continued to blaze away coolly, and deliberately.  The savages, now
more or less contemptuously familiar with the white men's weapons,
hesitated to close in upon the dauntless twain, and, shouting to their
fellows to hasten to help them to wipe out the white men, they
contented themselves with rushing to the right and left in the hope of
surrounding their foes.

"Stop that chap!" yelled Andy, pointing to a crafty warrior, who was
creeping on all fours up the rocks on Mr. McKay's left.

Barely two inches of the man's head were visible above the sheltering
boulder, but those two inches were sufficient.  Mr. McKay's rifle
cracked, and the savage bounded a good three feet in the air to fall
upon his face upon the ground.

"They're safe!" shouted Mr. McKay, giving a rapid glance in the
direction of the iron fence.  "Now, bolt for it!"

Springing over the remainder of the intervening boulders, father and
son ran for shelter.  For a brief instant the natives failed to
understand that their foes were again in retreat; then, to the
accompaniment of a flight of spears, they launched themselves over the
latest line of defence and pressed home the pursuit.

Rifle in hand, Terence and Ellerton stood by the open door to aid their
comrades' retreat; another five yards, then comparative safely.

Suddenly Andy stumbled and fell headlong on the ground, his rifle
flying from his grasp; the next instant half-a-dozen natives were upon
him.  Without a moment's hesitation, Mr. McKay faced about, and,
drawing his revolver, fired.

At the first report one of the pursuers fell; but the hammer of the
weapon clicked harmlessly as Mr. McKay attempted to bring down a
second.  The weapon was empty.

Throwing the now useless weapon straight into the face of one of the
savages, Mr. McKay stooped to pick up his rifle, a spear just grazing
his shoulder as he did so.

With the strength and fury of a Berserker, he gripped the rifle by the
barrel, and wielding it like a ponderous flail he smote right and left.

At one moment the brass-bound butt crashed with a terrific lunge full
in the tattooed face of a native; at the next it descended with
relentless force upon the skull of another.

Then Ellerton's rifle cracked and Terence's revolver added to the din.
The blacks seemed to melt away; and ere the main body of the pursuers
could join in the struggle, the white men were safe within the stockade.

"Don't trouble about the door," shouted Mr. McKay, as Terence was about
to close and barricade the iron-lined aperture.

Breathlessly the harried fugitives entered the cave, and, holding their
rifles ready for instant use, awaited the arrival of their triumphant
foes.

The door of the fence standing tantalisingly open served a better
purpose than if it had been closed and barred.  Had it been secured,
the savages would soon have battered it in by sheer weight of numbers;
but even in the heat of the pursuit the natives paused and looked
askance at the mute invitation to enter.

Fears of some other snare, more terrible than those they had already
experienced, held them in a spell-bound grip.

The temporary check gave the defenders a chance of much-needed rest.

"Now, lads," exclaimed Mr. McKay, "we are safe enough for the present.
A thousand of the wretches couldn't rush us in this place.  But keep
your eyes open, and let rip at the first chap who shows his head inside
the door."

There was a touch of irony in Mr. McKay's advice.  Want of sleep
threatened to become a more dangerous foe than the savages themselves,
and the lads were almost falling asleep as they awaited the next
assault.

All at once Mr. McKay raised his rifle and fired.

A gaudily-decked warrior had so far overcome his fears and doubts as to
peer cautiously into the inclosure.  His curiosity led to his undoing,
for, without knowing what struck him, he slid quietly to the ground
with a bullet through his brain.

But the spell was broken, and with a hideous clamour the natives poured
in through the doorway.  Many fell dead or wounded, while others
tripped over their prostrate bodies; but by sheer weight of numbers the
fence was overthrown, and over the removed obstruction rushed the
bloodthirsty mob.

Seeing that it was impossible to check the flowing tide of warriors as
they sped over the broad expanse, the defenders hurriedly retired into
the farthermost recesses of the cave.  Here they were able to command
the narrow entrance, and with a rapid magazine fire they simply mowed
down every savage who showed himself at the mouth of the cave.

At last, disheartened by the obvious impossibility of rushing the
desperate band of white men, the warriors retired, and silence reigned
save for the moans of the wounded who littered the floor of the cavern.

Worn out as they were, the four defenders, as soon as possible, scooped
out a shallow trench for the reception of the body of Quexo, who had
been killed, and silently the earth was heaped over the still form of
this their faithful servant and devoted comrade.

"Now turn in for a spell," said Mr. McKay, as the last offices were
performed.  "I'll take the first watch.  I think I can keep awake for
another couple of hours."

Vainly protesting, the lads obeyed and were soon asleep.

Shouldering his rifle, Mr. McKay walked as far as the overthrown fence,
whence he could command a view of the house.  Swarming in and out of
the building were the natives bearing away everything of value, while
others were demolishing the searchlight, which they evidently regarded
as an evil spirit, whose powers were harmless by day.  The work of
plunder continued till nothing was left of the dwelling but the bare
walls and roof, and presently the building burst into flames.

Hoping against hope, Mr. McKay watched with impotent rage the wanton
destruction of the result of so many months of patient toil and energy.

Would the natives be content with their success, and re-embark with
their booty?  Already several of them, laden with spoil, were
descending the cliff-path to their canoes; were the white men to be
left unmolested?

Without thinking of the sore straits to which they would be reduced by
the loss of their home with most of their stores, Mr. McKay waited and
watched.  The possibility of a fresh lease of life, even under such
adverse conditions, was infinitely preferable to having to fight
desperately to the last.

But his hopes were doomed to failure.

A strong body of savages began to ascend the slope leading to the cave,
and, to his consternation, the watcher perceived that many of them were
bearing bundles of sticks and grass.

It was to be a struggle not only against the spears and clubs of the
natives, but against fire and smoke, and Mr. McKay realised that the
choice of the defenders lay between a fight to the death in the open or
being stifled in the recesses of the cave.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE RESCUE

Returning to the cave, Mr. McKay awoke the lads and hurriedly explained
the nature of the threatened attack.

"We must quit this shelter and keep in the open as long as we possibly
can," said he.  "A long-range fire may keep them at bay.  Only as a
last resource must we return to the cave."

Barely had the defenders left the cavern than they were assailed from
above by a shower of stones and spears.  Several of the savages had
taken up a position on the summit of the cliff overhanging the mouth of
the white men's retreat, so as to make the advance of the main body
easier.

Thrown into confusion by this unlooked-for attack, the four defenders
fled headlong for the cave they had just left, narrowly escaping the
falling missiles.  Then, finding that the jutting rocks protected them
so long as they kept close to the base of the cliff, the wearied men
plucked up courage, and opened fire upon the dense masses of the
natives as they advanced rapidly with their burdens.

Many of the savages fell, but others immediately took up their loads,
and working from cover to cover with admirable cunning the natives came
within throwing distance of their spears.

The rifle-fire, hot as it was, was unable to stop the fan-like
formation of the crafty warriors, and, assailed by stones and spears,
the defenders were once more compelled to retire to the cave.

Repeated repulses had taught the natives caution, and without risking
themselves by appearing in front of the death-dealing tunnel, they
thrust their bundles of wood and grass into the mouth of the cave by
means of long poles.  Then a torch was flung upon the heap of
inflammable material, and the next instant it burst into flames.

"Throw some water on it," grasped Terence, as the heat began to take
effect.

"Useless," replied Mr. McKay.  "It would only cause more smoke," and
lifting a case of ammunition he rushed towards the blazing pile.

"Lie down!" he ordered sharply, as he regained his comrades.

Crouched in the remotest part of the cave, they awaited the explosion.
Then with a roar, followed by a series of minor reports, the cartridges
exploded, filling the cave with pungent fumes.

As the last detonation ended, Mr. McKay leapt to his feet, and,
revolver in hand, dashed through the scattered and still burning
embers.  His companions followed his example, and gained the open.
Even as they drank in the deliciously cool air they were compelled to
resume the unequal combat, though the savages, alarmed by the explosion
and the sudden appearance of their foes, gave back in terror.

Edging along the base of the cliff, for the darts and stones still
descended, regardless of friend or foe, the defenders blazed away at
their enemies, till the latter recovered from their fright and returned
to the attack.

Not till they were in grave danger of being cut off did Mr. McKay and
his companions return to the cave once more to endure the torments of
the smoke-laden atmosphere.

This time the savages did not leave them in peace.  With poised weapons
the wily warriors waited on either side of the entrance, while others
descended from the terrace and procured fresh fuel.

Splashing their faces with water, and fanning the noxious fumes with
portions of their clothes, the defenders strove to cool their parched
and heated bodies, realising that another half-hour would doubtless see
the end of the unequal struggle.

"I'm not going to be smoked out like a rat in a hole," exclaimed
Ellerton.  "I'll make a dash for it and die in the open."

"It's the only way," replied Mr. McKay.  "If we are to die we must die
like Britons, fighting to the last."

Hardly had the forlorn party made this desperate decision, when a sharp
ear-splitting explosion, followed almost immediately by another, was
heard without the cave.  Yells of terror and noisy surprise arose, and
the savages fled right and left.

For a moment the defenders were unable to grasp the meaning of the
interruption, till Andy shouted: "Hurrah!  A rescue!" and overcome by
mental and bodily strain, he fell on the floor in a swoon.

Terence and Ellerton were about to rush to the mouth of the cave, but
Mr. McKay restrained them.

"Lie down!" he exclaimed.  "They're firing with shell, and we shall be
blown to atoms if we go outside."

It was, to a certain extent, unfortunate that the inhabitants of
McKay's Island were unable to observe the means by which they were so
opportunely rescued from what appeared to be a terrible and remorseless
fate.

While the preparations for the smoking-out of the still-resisting white
men were in progress, H.M.S. _Blazer_ was steaming straight for the
island.

Unnoticed by the natives, she gained the entrance to the lagoon, the
leadsmen in the chains, and the decks cleared for action.

The alert commander had already observed the smouldering ruins of what
was obviously at no remote time a civilised settlement, and the shouts
of the desperate savages told him that resistance was still being made.

H.M.S. _Blazer_ was but a third-class cruiser, mainly engaged in
surveying duties in the Pacific.  Her armament consisted of two
4.7-inch guns, one mounted fore and aft, six twelve-pounders, and ten
Maxims, and these were amply sufficient for the work in hand.

Rounding to in seven fathoms, and less than three hundred yards from
the scene of the desperate encounter, the _Blazer_ opened fire.  Her
commander had noted the actual locality of the defenders' retreat, and
carefully avoiding the spot for fear of harming friend as well as foe,
he had a couple of shells planted in the fringe of the attacking
natives.

Those two shells were sufficient.  Madly the survivors fled along the
terrace in the direction of the defile leading to the ulterior, and as
they ran they were subjected to a raking fire by the quick-firers and
Maxims, till only a small remnant gained the shelter of the palm-groves.

"Man and arm boats!" came the order.

But ere the landing-party gained the shore, not a living savage was to
be seen.  Panic-stricken they fled to the far side of the island, where
they embarked in their canoes.

"We're too late, it seems," remarked the lieutenant in charge, as he
gazed upon the devastated scene.

"Those brutes were running from up yonder, sir," observed a
petty-officer, pointing towards the upper terrace.  "Maybe there's
someone up there among the rocks."

"Party, fall in!" ordered the officer, and giving the word to march, he
led the way over the open ground, which was littered by the victims of
the _Blazer's_ fire.

"Strike me; wot's this?" ejaculated the petty-officer, as four battered
specimens of humanity appeared above the crest of a rise of ground and
floundered painfully towards their rescuers, who gave them a hearty
cheer.

"We were certainly in the nick of time," remarked Commander Bulwark,
as, five hours later, Mr. McKay and the three lads were seated in the
_Blazer's_ wardroom.  "We received a telegraphic message from Tahiti
while we were lying off Suva, to the effect that a French trader
reported that she had communicated with British castaways; but was
unable, owing to the high seas that were running, to render assistance.
So we came at full speed, and, I am glad to say, with fortunate
results.  We are leaving here to-morrow for Sydney.  I suppose you
don't object to being landed there?"

"By no means," replied Mr. McKay.  "I think we've had enough of the
island to last us a lifetime."

In a few words Mr. McKay told the commander of the finding of the
treasure, and how it was hidden under the floor of the house.

"Treasure, eh?  Well, you're lucky in more than one way.  There are
plenty of islands in the Pacific where treasure is supposed to be
hidden.  We usually regard these stories as a myth, but you've
evidently proved that such things do exist.  Let me congratulate you
once again.  I'll send ashore at once."

Before nightfall the treasure chests were conveyed safely on board the
cruiser.

The bluejackets also placed a pile of stones over the grave of the
brave mulatto, a simple inscription setting forth his name and the
manner of his death; while for the benefit of possible future
castaways, a paper giving particulars of the stores deposited in the
treasure cave was placed in an air-tight case and lashed to a post in a
conspicuous position on the shore.

Shortly after daybreak on the following day Mr. McKay and the three
lads watched from the poop of the _Blazer_ the rapidly receding land
which for so many months had been their home; and in silence they stood
gazing with wistful eyes till the summit of the peak of McKay's Island
sank beneath the horizon.




THE END





_The Mayflower Press, Plymouth, England_.  William Brendon & Son, Ltd.






THE SCOUT LIBRARY

STORIES OF ADVENTURE.

_In Cloth Covers.  Price 2s. 6d. Net.  Postage 5d. extra._


THE YOUNG CAVALIER.

By PERCY F. WESTERMAN.

"One of the best stories of the English Civil War we have met, and Mr.
Gordon Browne's fine pictures enrich it unspeakably."--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.


THE QUEST OF THE VEILED KING.

By RUPERT CHESTERTON.

"A really good yarn which will be appreciated by every Scout and by
many a boy who belongs to no patrol."--_Morning Post_.


FRANK FLOWER.

The Boy War Correspondent.

By A. B. COOPER.

"Boy Scouts should thoroughly enjoy this story, for the principles on
which young Flower always acts are thoroughly sound, and, though no
offensive morals are drawn, the advantage of straight conduct is made
obvious."--_Academy_.


GILDERSLEY'S TENDERFOOT.

By ROBERT LEIGHTON.

"A rattling good story of adventure in the Wild West which boys will
thoroughly enjoy."--_Bookman_.


SONS OF THE SEA.

By CHRISTOPHER BECK.

"Mr. Beck tells a story of the Sea Scouts and shows how handy these
young people may become....  Written in a manly, healthy style, and may
be recommended to the attention of every boy."--_The Field_.


The above books may be ordered through your Bookseller, or will be sent
post free on receipt of the price named with postage added from

A. F. SOWTER, Publisher, "THE SCOUT" Offices,
  28 Maiden Lane, LONDON, W.C.




Attractive Nature Books

BY

OWEN JONES AND MARCUS WOODWARD

Authors of "A Gamekeeper's Note Book"

Illustrated.  Crown 8vo, Cloth.  Price 2s. 6d. each net; postage 4d.
extra.

Also in Picture paper wrappers.  Price 1s. 6d. each net; postage 3d.
extra.


Woodcraft

"Packed from end to end with observations and instructions which turn
the country-side and its small inhabitants from a series of perplexing
puzzles into a vast book which every intelligent person can read for
himself."--_The Globe_.

"A book which would make a delightful present for any country
child."--_Country Life_.

"Boys will certainly like this book."--_Manchester Guardian_.

"A truly delightful companion for the rambler and woodman."--_Pall Mall
Gazette_.

"A charming book on woodcraft."--_School Guardian_.


Going About the Country With Your Eyes Open

"A delightfully varied volume dealing with topics full of interest and
also of instruction to those who knock about the country."--_Morning
Post_.

"These well-known collaborators once more show that they have the knack
of imparting information in the most charming fashion ... no better
book could be put into the hands of a boy."--_Evening Standard_.

"An excellent book for boys with a love of the country, and, for the
matter of that, for those who have passed the years of boyhood but have
retained their interest in wild nature."--_Birmingham Post_.

"A capital book of all kinds of outdoor lore and practice."--_Times_.


ALSO BY MARCUS WOODWARD

In cloth boards, fully Illustrated.  Price 2/6 net; postage 4d. extra.

In Nature's Ways

A book for all young Lovers of Natural History.  Being an Introduction
to Gilbert White's immortal "Natural History of Selborne."

Illustrated by J. A. SHEPHERD.

With Preface by WILFRID MARK WEBB, Secretary of the Selborne Society.

This volume contains 8 full-page Illustrations on Art Paper in addition
to the Drawings in the Text.

"This is a 'White's Selborne' for the young; giving passages from the
original under different headings and, side by side, some talk about
the bird or beast referred to; with plenty of illustrations by Mr. J.
A. Shepherd, full of his usual vitality."--_Times_.

"We think this volume cannot fail to interest and instruct the
young."--_Field_.

"White's 'History of Selborne' is here amplified and explained for
young readers.  Mr. Woodward has that gift of humour without which all
writing on nature is a weariness unto the flesh for young readers, and
for many readers who are no longer young.  Mr. J. A. Shepherd's
illustrations catch the spirit of the letterpress, and are of a piece
with the work that has made his reputation as an artist."--_Literary
World_.


_May be had of all Booksellers or will be sent direct on receipt of
published price and postage from_

C. ARTHUR PEARSON LTD., Henrietta Street, LONDON, W.C. 2.




The SCOUTS' BOOK of HEROES

WITH A THREE-COLOUR FRONTISPIECE BY

SIR ROBERT BADEN-POWELL

And Eight Full-page Illustrations.

THE CHIEF SCOUT ALSO CONTRIBUTES A FOREWORD.

Demy 8vo. Cloth.  With attractive Wrapper in Colours.

Price 6s. net.  (Postage 6d. extra.)


"The part that scouts--past and present--played in the war is a source
of unbounded pride to many boys; and these will be delighted with 'THE
SCOUTS' BOOK OF HEROES.'  The Chief Scout himself, Sir Robert
Baden-Powell, in a 'foreword,' points out that the war-work of the
scouts--and Jack Cornwell, Piper Laidlaw, Lieutenant Gates, Lieutenant
Haine, Major Toye, Private Cruikshank, Lieutenant Manson Craig,
Lieutenant-Colonel Dimmer, Captain McKean, Lieutenant Donald Dean,
Lieutenant Hallowes, all of them V.C.'s, were also all of them
scouts--'was not the result of military training, or of drill.  It was
the outcome of the spirit that gives the essential self-discipline and
dare to do.' ... There is a breaking strain to discipline that is
applied, there is none to _esprit de corps_.  It is the spirit that
tells, the spirit which it is the aim of Scout training to inculcate.
'And the book is full of the spirit.'"--_Westminster Gazette_.

"This story of scout heroes is a noble record which should fire the
scout of to-day to 'Play up and play the game!'"--_Church Times_.

"A truly noble volume is 'THE SCOUTS' BOOK OF HEROES', with a preface
by the Chief Scout, Sir Robert Baden-Powell, K.C.B.  Here is told the
stirring story of many a boy scout who has grown up to serve his
country, and offer it, too, the last sacrifice.  The scout V.C.'s are
here, with Boy Cornwell, who was one of their number, and the many who
have won other high honours--the list fills nearly 70 pages.  But the
book is not a mere enumeration of scout achievements; it is full of
stories of heroism and devotion to duty, and has abundant illustrations
bringing to life its stirring themes."--_The Universe_.

"No more satisfactory gift-book for a Scout can be imagined than this
admirably compiled story of Scout heroes of the Army.  It is a fine
record to put before the boys of the Empire, and we trust the book will
have multitudes of young readers."--_Pall Mall Gazette_.

"These grand true stories of Boy Scouts who became soldiers, and won
glory or death, will make every reader proud of his
uniform."--_Christian World_.


C. Arthur Pearson, Ltd., Henrietta Street, London, W.C. 2.



BOOKS BY THE CHIEF SCOUT

SIR ROBERT BADEN-POWELL, K.C.B.


SCOUTING FOR BOYS.

A HANDBOOK FOR INSTRUCTION IN GOOD CITIZENSHIP.

9th Edition.  The Official Handbook of the Boy Scouts.

_Price 2s. net, paper; 3s. net, cloth (postage 4d. extra)._


THE WOLF CUB'S HANDBOOK

The Official Handbook for the training of boys from 8-11, leading up to
the time when they can become full Scouts.  _Paper Wrapper, price 1s.
6d. net; cloth boards, price 2s. 6d., net (postage 4d. extra)._


GIRL GUIDING

THE OFFICIAL HANDBOOK FOR THE GIRL GUIDES.

_4th Edition.  Paper wrapper, price 1s. 6d. net (postage 3d. extra);
cloth boards_

_2s. 6d. net (postage 4d. extra)._


MY ADVENTURES AS A SPY

Extra Crown 8vo, Cloth Gilt, with Coloured Frontispiece, Four Half-tone
Illustrations, and other Sketches by the Author.

_Price 3s. 6d. net (postage 5d. extra)._


SCOUTING GAMES

A splendid collection of Outdoor and Indoor Games specially compiled
for Boy Scouts.  4th Edition.

Price 1s. 6d. net, paper wrapper (postage 3d. extra).  2s. 6d. net in
cloth boards (postage 4d. extra).

"No one who, as a schoolboy, has read a word of Fenimore Cooper or
Ballantyne, nobody who feels the fascination of a good detective story,
or who understands a little of the pleasures of woodcraft, could fail
to be attracted by these games, or, for that matter, by the playing of
the games themselves."--_Spectator_.


YARNS FOR BOY SCOUTS

TOLD ROUND THE CAMP FIRE

2nd Edition.

"There is no gift book that could be put into the hands of a schoolboy
more valuable than this fascinating volume, and if you asked the boy's
opinion he would probably add, 'No book that he liked
better.'"--_Spectator_.


YOUNG KNIGHTS OF THE EMPIRE

THEIR CODE AND FURTHER SCOUT YARNS.

"The Ten Laws of Scouts and Sir Robert's exposition of them make a most
lucid and telling code of behaviour; and very good, too, are his tales
of travel, chapters on sea-scouting, backwoodsmen, &c., all illustrated
by the author himself."--_Times_.


BOY SCOUTS BEYOND THE SEAS

"MY WORLD TOUR."

Illustrated by the Author.

"Describes in brightest and most concise fashion his recent tour of
inspection amongst the Boy Scouts....  Every boy will read it with
avidity and pronounce it 'jolly good.'"--_Graphic_.


_The above 3 books, price 1s. each in pictorial wrapper, or 2s. each in
cloth boards (postage 4d. extra)._


THE CUB BOOK.

THE BOOK FOR THE BOYS.

_Price 3d. net (post free 4d.)_


MARKSMANSHIP FOR BOYS

THE RED FEATHER AND HOW TO WIN IT.

_Price 3d. net (post free 4d.)._



_Write for Illustrated List of Books for Boy Scouts to_

A. F. SOWTER, Publisher, "The Scout" Offices,
  28 Maiden Lane, London, W.C. 2.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Nameless Island, by Percy F. Westerman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NAMELESS ISLAND ***

***** This file should be named 37652.txt or 37652.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/6/5/37652/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
