The Project Gutenberg EBook of Report on the Cost of Living in Ireland, by
Ministry of Economic Affairs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Report on the Cost of Living in Ireland
       June 1922

Author: Ministry of Economic Affairs

Release Date: October 8, 2011 [EBook #37666]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT ON THE COST OF LIVING ***




Produced by Brian Foley, Barbara Kosker and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Text in Gaelic Script marked +like so+.                   |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+




  _FOR OFFICIAL USE._


  RIALTAS SEALADACH NA HEIREANN.

  MINISTRY OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS.




  REPORT

  ON THE

  COST OF LIVING

  IN

  IRELAND

  JUNE, 1922.




DUBLIN:
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE STATIONERY OFFICE.


To be purchased through any Bookseller or directly from
EASON & SON, LTD., 40 AND 41 LOWER SACKVILLE STREET, DUBLIN.


1922.

_Price One Shilling._




PREFACE.


It having been represented to the Provisional Government that it was
desirable to calculate an official figure indicating in respect of
Ireland the change in the cost of living at the present time as compared
with the cost of living in 1914, the Provisional Government appointed
for the purpose on 10th June, 1922, a Committee comprising
representatives of the Ministries of Agriculture, Finance, Economic
Affairs and Labour. The Committee reported on the 4th August, 1922, and
the result of its enquiries, together with the Committee's detailed
explanation of the procedure adopted, are appended hereto.

The conclusions set out in the report represent the closest
approximation which is practicable to the average increases in the cost
of maintaining, in particular months of the current year as compared
with July, 1914, the same standard of living for a family dependent on
wage earnings in places with 500 or more inhabitants. The inquiry
applied to the whole of Ireland, and its basis is therefore broad enough
to be reasonably dependable for any practical purpose to which a
calculation as to changes in the cost of living can usefully be applied.

It is proposed to arrange for the calculation at intervals of three
months of a cost of living figure on the same basis as that adopted by
the Committee for the purpose of this report. September will be the next
month for which a figure will be determined.

It is to be observed that the information collected in the course of
this inquiry has incidentally revealed relations between the wholesale
and the retail prices of several important commodities and between the
prices of the same commodity in similar localities which require
explanation. This matter is being further examined with a view to
determining whether any undue advantage is being taken of the general
body of consumers, and, if that be the case, to the adoption of
appropriate remedies.

MINISTRY OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
_23rd August, 1922_.




THE COST OF LIVING

IN

IRELAND.


REPORT

_To the Chairman, Provisional Government, Ireland._


By minute dated the 10th June last we were appointed by the Government
to determine the cost of living in Ireland for the months of March and
June, 1922, as compared with the cost of living in July, 1914, on such a
basis as would show the average increase in the cost of maintaining the
same standard of living for a family dependent on wage earnings. We were
asked to complete our calculations not later than July 15th, if
possible, but owing to the fact that a considerable proportion of our
staff were unable to reach our offices during the recent troubles in
Dublin we were given until the 25th to complete our work. The following
letter was sent to the Head of the Government on the 26th July:--

     "A Chara,--The Report of the Cost of Living Committee is not yet
     finally drafted, but the main lines of it have been agreed upon. We
     think, therefore, that we ought to acquaint you at once that our
     investigations show that the percentage increase in the Cost of
     Living of Wage Earning Classes in Ireland between July, 1914, and
     June, 1922, is 85.2 per cent. and the increase between July, 1914
     and March, 1922, is 91.4 per cent.

     "Sinne, le meas mor,"

The following Report, while bringing out the points essential to a
purely Irish cost of living inquiry, can hardly be regarded as
exhaustive, in view of the mass of figures collected which could be
examined from many different points of view. Had we been able to spend a
longer time in digesting these figures we should not have arrived at any
different final result as regards the Irish cost of living figure; but
we think that many interesting and important facts might be brought out
by a further analysis of the figures which we have not had time to
undertake, and we suggest, therefore, that the Government should request
the Ministry of Economic Affairs to investigate more thoroughly, from
the point of view of their general economic significance, the figures
collected and compiled.


Method of Compiling Cost of Living Figures.

In every country in which cost of living figures have been obtained the
same method, as far as broad lines are concerned, has been followed. The
method adopted is to ascertain the average retail prices for a number of
representative commodities for the dates to be compared and then to
combine these retail prices in a single figure representing the change
in retail prices as a whole. This combination is not effected by a plain
average, but the individual price changes are "weighted" according to a
comparison of the amounts spent on each of the commodities concerned
(_e.g._, a change in the price of a commodity such as bread, must
obviously be given more "weight" than a change in the price of such
commodities as cheese or soap) and in order to determine the proper
"weight" to attach to the retail price changes, representative family
budgets are obtained showing the details of the actual expenditure of a
large number of households. By combining these budgets it is possible to
discover the relationship between the consumption of the various items;
for instance, 12s. may be spent on meat for every 5s. 6d. spent on
butter, and so on. The retail price changes can then be "weighted"
according to the results given by the budgets and the final figure
arrived at by combining them on these lines.


Stages of our Inquiry.

Our inquiry can, therefore, be divided into four main stages:

     =(A)= The collection of retail prices for July, 1914, and March and
     June, 1922.

     =(B)= The collection and analysis of representative family budgets
     by means of which to determine the "weighting" of the retail price
     changes.

     =(C)= The combination of the retail price changes by means of the
     "weights" so obtained into one final figure.

     =(D)= The results of applying different methods of "weighting."


(A) Collection of Retail Prices.

We found that as regards articles of food much of the information we
required had already been collected by the Ministry of Economic Affairs
who had obtained returns for July, 1914, and March, 1922, from 420
sources in towns of 500 persons and upwards; and also that retail prices
of a certain number of articles of food had been collected in 1914, in
Ireland by the Labour Statistics Branch of the Board of Trade.

Our first task was, therefore, to collect returns of the retail prices
in June, 1922, of all the commodities selected, and of the corresponding
prices in July, 1914, and March, 1922, where these were not already at
our disposal.

Forms were accordingly drawn up on which this information could be
collected and specimens of these forms are shown in the Appendix to the
Report.


(1) _Food, Clothing, Fuel and Light, and Sundries._

These forms for food, clothing, fuel and light and sundries, were sent
out for completion through the channels used by the Ministry for
Economic Affairs in its inquiry (viz.:--officials of the Post Office, of
the Ministry of Labour, and of the Local Government Board, and in the
Six-County area through other sources), and to the same towns as in that
inquiry (viz.:--towns with populations of 500 and over). In the case of
the larger towns more than one report was asked for, graduating from two
returns to twenty returns according to their population as shown in the
Census of 1911.

The following table summarises essential particulars regarding the
forms:--

  ---------------------------+-----------+----------+---------------------
                             |           |  Number  |
                             |   Number  |    of    |       Returns
             Form.           |  of Forms |   Towns  |      collected
                             |dealt with.|from which|         by
                             |           | received.|
  ---------------------------+-----------+----------+---------------------
  Prices (Food)           A  |    450    |   250 }  |
  Prices (Food, Fuel and     |           |       }  |Post Office, Ministry
    Light and Sundries)   B 2|    436    |   220 }  |   of Labour, and
  Prices (Meat)           B 3|    434    |   227 }  |   Local Government
  Prices (Clothing)       B 4|    436    |   216 }  |   Board Officials.
  Rents                   B 5|     91    |    71    |Rate Collectors and
                             |           |          |   Town Clerks.
  ---------------------------+-----------+----------+---------------------


(2) _Rents._--The forms for rents were issued through the Local
Government Board, and in the Six-County area through other sources, and
filled in for the most part by Rate Collectors in the several districts
and towns in Ireland. They were asked to state the rents in July, 1914,
and in March, and June, 1922, of about 20 houses in their districts
showing the number of rooms and the Poor Law Valuation, the latter
figures enabling us to ensure that the same classes of houses of wage
earners were being compared. Enquiry was also made in connection with
the rents of tenements, and due allowance was made for this in the final
figures. The rent figures include rates in every case.


(3) _Compilation of prices for individual commodities._--The next step
was to calculate from these returns the average retail prices of the
individual commodities selected, and this was done as follows:--

       *       *       *       *       *

One set of average retail prices was compiled from the returns of the
Post Office officials, and another from those of the other officials,
and a division of the forms was made on this basis.

The retail prices of food, etc. (on Forms A, B2 and B3), and of clothing
(Form B4) were then separately summarised in the two groups, viz.--those
received from the Post Office officials and those received from the
officials of the other Departments for July, 1914, and March and June,
1922.


(4) _Compilation of Rent Returns._

The rent returns were treated in precisely the same manner, except that
there was no division, since the returns were received through the Local
Government Board only.

On pages 7 and 8 is the list of average retail prices so compiled:--


(5) LIST OF PRICES.

THE FOLLOWING TABLE SHEWS RETAIL PRICES IN IRISH TOWNS OF 500 INHABITANTS
  AND UPWARDS; AS AVERAGED FROM RETURNS COLLECTED BY OFFICERS OF THE POST
  OFFICE, MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD.

  -----------------------------------+-----------+-------------+-------------
                                     | Mid July, |  Mid March, | Mid June,
                                     |   1914.   |     1922.   |    1922.
  -----------------------------------+-----------+-------------+-------------
                                     |     | M.L.|      |  M.L.|      | M.L.
                                     | P.O.| and |  P.O.|  and | P.O. | and
                                     |     | L.G.|      |  L.G.|      | L.G.
  -----------------------------------+-----+-----+------+------+------+------
         FOOD.                    per|  d. |  d. |   d. |   d. |   d. |  d.
  Beef                            lb.|  8.0|  7.8|  13.5|  13.4|  13.4| 13.2
  Mutton                          lb.|  8.6|  8.3|  16.0|  15.5|  16.0| 15.5
  Pork Chops                      lb.|  8.9|  9.2|  17.5|  17.7|  20.1| 20.0
  Pork Sausages                   lb.|  8.7|  8.6|  16.8|  16.4|  16.3| 16.1
  Bacon                           lb.|  9.2|  9.5|  19.7|  17.9|  20.7| 19.0
  Butter, Irish Creamery          lb.| 13.9| 12.8|  23.9|  22.3|  23.2| 22.6
  Butter, Irish Farmers           lb.| 12.6| 10.6|  24.4|  20.0|  19.9| 18.9
  Cheese                          lb.|  9.8|  9.8|  17.8|  17.0|  17.4| 16.8
  Margarine, 1st grade            lb.|  7.6|  7.7|  11.7|  12.1|  11.8| 11.2
  Margarine, 2nd grade            lb.|  6.2|  6.1|   9.1|   9.6|   8.8|  8.4
  Lard                            lb.|  7.1|  7.3|  13.6|  11.5|  12.0| 11.6
  Milk, Fresh                   quart|  2.5|  2.6|   6.8|   6.4|   5.4|  4.9
  Condensed Milk, Irish       lb. tin|  6.8|  5.6|  13.1|  12.8|  11.9| 11.6
  Condensed Milk,                    |     |     |      |      |      |
    Imported                  lb. tin|  7.2|  6.2|  13.8|  13.4|  12.8| 11.8
  Eggs, 1st Grade               dozen|  9.6| 11.2|  19.5|  19.2|  19.0| 17.3
  Bread                    2 lb. loaf|  3.2|  3.0|   5.8|   5.6|   5.6|  5.6
  Flour, household             14 lb.| 19.8| 22.1|  36.6|  33.3|  35.7| 35.8
  Oatmeal                      14 lb.| 21.1| 23.7|  38.1|  41.6|  41.1| 41.3
  Rice                            lb.|  2.8|  2.7|   5.8|   5.6|   5.5|  5.4
  Potatoes, old                14 lb.|  5.5|  7.3|  12.8|  13.7|  16.6| 16.5
  Tea, Best                       lb.| 30.3| 30.5|  44.2|  45.4|  42.6| 42.7
  Tea, Cheapest                   lb.| 18.1| 18.3|  31.4|  29.1|  27.1| 26.4
  Sugar, white                       |     |     |      |      |      |
    granulated                    lb.|  2.2|  2.1|   5.9|   5.8|   5.9|  6.0
  Jam                             lb.|  6.6|  6.7|  16.2|  16.3|  15.4| 15.5
  -----------------------------------+-----+-----+------+------+------+------
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
               CLOTHING.             |     |     |      |      |      |
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
                WOMEN'S.             | s.d.| s.d.|  s.d.|  s.d.|  s.d.|  s.d.
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
  Light Coats                        | 8 10|25  7| 53  0| 47  0| 51  8| 46  0
  Heavy Coats                        |30 10|31  7| 58  2| 57 11| 56  5| 56  4
  Costumes                           |44  2|41  7| 79  9| 77 11| 77  7| 76  4
  Blouses                            | 5  3| 4  8| 10  3|  9  5|  9  9|  9  1
  Skirts                             | 8  1| 5 10| 14  7| 11  2| 13  7| 10 10
  Stockings                          | 1  4| 1  5|  3  0|  2  9|  2  9|  2  8
  Combinations                       | 5  8| 5  0| 11  1| 10  0| 10  8|  9  9
  Corsets                            | 4  2| 3  8|  8  2|  6 10|  7 10|  6  8
  Underskirts                        | 4  1| 3  2|  7  8|  5 10|  7  4|  5  9
  Chemises                           | 2  5| 2  5|  4 10|  4  6|  4  9|  4  4
  Boots                              |11  2| 8  7| 22  9| 16  0| 21 11| 15  9
  -----------------------------------+-----+-----+------+------+------+------
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
             GIRLS (OVER 6).         |     |     |      |      |      |
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
  Coats                              |14  1|11  8| 25  9| 21  0| 25  1| 20  9
  Dresses                            |13 11| 9  7| 27  3| 17  7| 26  3| 17  3
  Stockings                          | 1  4| 1  2|  2  8|  2  2|  2  5|  2  1
  Combinations                       | 4  5| 3 10|  8  0|  6  9|  7  9|  6  8
  Stays                              | 2  9| 2  5|  5 10|  4  9|  5  6|  4  8
  Petticoats                         | 2  7| 2  2|  4 11|  4  1|  4  8|  4  0
  Chemises                           | 2  1| 1 11|  3  9|  3  3|  3  7|  3  2
  Boots                              | 8  4| 7  9| 16  6| 14  2| 15 10| 14  0
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
  -----------------------------------+-----+-----+------+------+------+------
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
                 MEN'S.              |     |     |      |      |      |
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
  Overcoats (Readymade)              |34  3|33  7| 69  1| 64  3| 66  5| 63  4
  Overcoats (Tailormade)             |53  6|48 10|100 11| 93  3| 98  7| 91  8
  Suits (Readymade)                  |31  5|35  0| 67  9| 70  0| 66  2| 68  6
  Suits (Tailormade)                 |58 10|54  5|119  6|113 10|116  4|112  7
  Trousers (Readymade)               | 8  6| 8  1| 17  0| 15  5| 16  6| 15  0
  Trousers (Tailormade)              |15  7|13  9| 32  2| 29  8| 31  7| 29  0
  Singlets                           | 3  6| 2  8|  7  5|  5  2|  7  0|  5  0
  Drawers                            | 3  9| 2 10|  7  7|  5  3|  7  2|  5  2
  Shirts                             | 3  8| 3  1|  7  2|  6  5|  6 11|  6  4
  Socks                              | 1  2| 1  2|  2  5|  2  3|  2  3|  2  2
  Boots                              |12  5|11 11| 24  6| 23  3| 23  9| 22  9
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
  -----------------------------------+-----+-----+------+------+------+------
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
             BOYS (OVER 6).          |     |     |      |      |      |
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
  Overcoats                          |16  8|14 11| 33  1| 29  0| 32  1| 27  9
  Suits                              |15  9|15  7| 31  7| 31  1| 30  5| 30  0
  Shirts                             | 2  1| 2  0|  4  2|  3  9|  3 11|  3  8
  Stockings                          | 1  3| 1  4|  2  6|  2  7|  2  3|  2  6
  Boots                              | 8  9| 7  8| 16  9| 13 11| 16  0| 13  6
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
  -----------------------------------+-----+-----+------+------+------+------
                                     |     |     |      |      |      |
           OTHER COMMODITIES.        |     |     |      |      |      |
                                     |   d.|   d.|    d.|    d.|    d.|    d.
  Coal                        112 lb.| 17.4| 17.1|  38.9|  37.0|  37.2|  35.0
  Turf                        112 lb.| 13.7| 11.1|  29.9|  26.2|  30.1|  25.1
  Gas for Lighting        1,000 c. ft| 50.6| 51.5| 101.9   98.9| 101.0|  98.2
  Gas for Cooking         1,000 c. ft| 49.1| 48.7| 101.7|  97.1| 101.1|  96.6
  Electricity for                unit|  5.3|  5.3|  10.4|   9.7|  10.3|   9.4
    Lighting                         |     |     |      |      |      |
  Electricity for                unit|  3.0|  2.4|   5.7|   5.0|   5.7|   5.0
    Cooking                          |     |     |      |      |      |
  Candles                         lb.|  3.5|  3.8|   7.1|   6.8|   6.5|   6.3
  Paraffin Oil                 gallon|  8.3|  8.9|  20.4|  19.9|  19.8|  19.9
  Soap (Household)                lb.|  3.6|  3.6|   7.8|   7.3|   7.4|   6.9
  Pipe Tobacco                 2 ozs.|  7.0|  7.0|  17.0|  17.0|  17.0|  17.0
  Cigarettes               pkt. of 10|  3.0|  3.0|   6.0|   6.0|   6.0|   6.0

THE FOLLOWING TABLE shows Retail Prices in March and June,
1922, in respect of certain Commodities for which corresponding prices
in 1914 were not collected.

  ------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------
                                      | Mid-March, 1922.| Mid-June, 1922
                                      |--------+--------+--------+------
                                      |        |  M.L.  |        |  M.L.
                                      |  P.O.  |  and   |  P.O.  |  and
                                      |        |  L.G.  |        |  L.G.
  ------------------------------------+--------+--------+--------+------
                                      |   d.   |   d.   |   d.   |   d.
  Butter (Irish Factory)     per lb.  |  21.9  |  21.1  |  22.0  |  20.6
  Rice (Rangoon)             per lb.  |   4.1  |   4.0  |   3.9  |   3.8
  Rice (Java)                per lb.  |   6.1  |   5.9  |   5.9  |   5.6
  Jam (Strawberry)           per lb.  |  15.7  |  15.9  |  15.2  |  15.2
  Fresh Pork (Shoulders)     per lb.  |  16.8  |  17.2  |  17.4  |  17.4
  Fresh Herrings             per lb.  |  26.1  |  25.3  |  25.6  |  23.7
  Cod Steak                  per lb.  |  14.4  |  14.7  |  13.8  |  13.8
  Tea (Quality most used by           |        |        |        |
    working classes)         per lb.  |  36.1  |  35.0  |  33.4  |  32.1
  Cabbage                    per head |   3.6  |   3.7  |   3.4  |   3.1
  ------------------------------------+--------+--------+--------+------

The above prices, which were used as far as possible in conjunction with
other figures to arrive at the correct increases between July, 1914, and
March and June, 1922, in respect of commodities, less specifically
described in the returns for 1914 (_e.g._, Butter, Rice, Jam), will also
be of value in the future as an additional basis from which to calculate
the change in the cost of living.


NOTES ON RETAIL PRICES.

(_a_) _Collection of Figures for 1914._

There are obvious difficulties in the collection of figures for 1914
after so long a lapse of time, and the accuracy of these figures may
possibly be questioned.

Despite the eight years' interval, however, we believe these prices to
be reasonably accurate. The compilers of the returns were asked to get
figures in every case from the actual books kept by the shopkeepers; and
the food prices collected by us are in substantial agreement with those
collected by the Board of Trade in 1914. The latter are, as a matter of
fact, slightly higher than those collected by us, so that if they were
to be used in preference to our figures the resultant percentage
increase would be slightly lower than on the figures which we have
accepted.

(_b_) _Comparison Restricted to Strictly Comparable Articles._

A point to be noted is that in comparing prices at different dates it is
essential that articles of different quality should not be compared;
milk, for instance, is a simple commodity and is always comparable with
milk, but beef is a variable commodity inasmuch as sirloin beef is not
strictly comparable with shin beef; consequently special figures showing
the relative consumption and average prices of the different parts of
beef, mutton and bacon were obtained on Form B3 (see Appendix), and in
these cases the prices as returned for each description of meat are
separately weighted by the average quantities purchased in order to
arrive at the ultimate average prices for "beef," "mutton," etc.

As regards all other articles, it will be seen from the instructions on
the forms that pains were taken to explain that prices must only be
returned for strictly comparable articles.


(_c_) _Accuracy of Rent Figures._

A point likely to give rise to criticism is the low percentage increase
shown for rent. This figure is, however, the result of comparing the
actual returns sent us by the Town Clerks and Rate Collectors, who gave
the actual name of the street and the actual number of each house, and
on the closest investigation we have no reason to doubt the accuracy of
their figures. The average weekly rents (including rates) appearing from
those returns are:--

                   Average Weekly
                       Rent
                 (including Rates).
  July, 1914          4s. 0d.
  March, 1922         5s. 2d.
  June, 1922          5s. 2d.


(_d_) _Comparison of Figures received from Post Office and other
Sources._

It will have been noted from the Table of Retail Prices given above that
on the whole there is comparatively little difference between the sets
of figures compiled by the Post Office officials and those compiled by
the Ministry of Labour and Local Government Board officials, though the
Post Office figures tend to give a somewhat higher average increase of
prices. This is brought out by the following table of the ratios of
retail prices for the main groups of commodities for the three dates:--

  ---------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------------
                 | Mid-July, 1914. | Mid-March, 1922. | Mid-June, 1922.
  ---------------+--------+--------+---------+--------+--------+--------
                 |    A   |    B   |    A    |    B   |    A   |    B
  Food           |  52.4  |  54.6  |  104.8  |  102.8 |   100  |   100
  Clothing       |  52.7  |  52.9  |  103.9  |  101.7 |   100  |   100
  Rent (C)       |  78.9  |  78.9  |  100.4  |  100.4 |   100  |   100
  Fuel and Light |  46.6  |  48.1  |  104.8  |  104.4 |   100  |   100
  Sundries       |  50.5  |  51.9  |  103.2  |  103.1 |   100  |   100
  ---------------+--------+--------+---------+--------+--------+--------

The figures A result from the returns from the Post Office.

The figures B result from the returns from other Departments.

The figures C were obtained from only one Department--the Local
Government Board.

(In case the meaning of this table is not at once clear, it may be
explained that the first line, for instance, means that for 100s.
expended on food by the wage-earning households in June, 1922, exactly
the same quantities and exactly the same foods could, according to the
Post Office officials' returns, be purchased in March, 1922, for
104.8s., and in July, 1914, for 52.4s. and according to the other
returns for 102.8s. and 54.6s. respectively; and so on with the other
items).

The near agreement of these figures is a strong proof of their essential
accuracy. We ultimately decided to take the average between the two sets
of figures as representing the nearest approach to the truth at which we
could arrive.


(B) The Collection of Household Budgets.

(1) _Representative Budgets._

The second stage of our enquiry was to obtain representative household
budgets, from which to compile the "weights" by which the individual
price changes might be combined into a single final figure.

For this purpose a special Form was drafted (Form B6, a copy of which
appears in the Appendix) and some 5,000 of these forms were despatched
to National School teachers in every school in the country, accompanied
by detailed instructions (of which there is a copy in the Appendix) of
the method in which they were to be completed.

Notwithstanding the difficulties of the time when these budgets were
called for, and the fact that a number of forms were held up and perhaps
lost in the post, we were able to use 308 completed budgets of
wage-earning households, received from 112 towns. This number was quite
sufficient for our purpose. These budgets were excellently filled in,
and, apart from the fact that such a number is in itself a fair
guarantee of the statistical results obtained, we are satisfied for
reasons given below of the substantial accuracy of the budgets.

(2) _Wide Scope of Budgets._

The budgets received were from a very varied class of households, and as
will be seen from the following list, embraced the principal industrial
occupations. Labourers, Fishermen, Messengers, Servants, Pilots, Barmen,
Carpenters, Boatmen, Building Contractors, Motor Boat Drivers,
Plasterers, Ship Inspector, Stone Masons, Marine Engineer, Bricklayer,
Mill-hands, Yachtman, Caretakers, Tailors, Post Office Workers,
Housekeepers, Tailoresses, Gardeners, Herds, Dress-makers, Shop
Assistants, Farm Stewards, Shoemakers, Charwomen, Dairyman, Cottage
Industries, Laundresses, Egg Packer, Milliners, Washerwomen, Fowl
Plucker, Shirtmaker, Hairdresser, Wool Sorter, Spinners, Smiths,
Woodcutters, Embroidery Workers, Fitters, Sawyers, Hosiers,
Boiler-makers, Wood-turners, Stitchers, Engineers, Body-makers,
Knitters, Plumbers, Golf Caddies, Lace-makers, Machinists, Pointers,
Road Engine Drivers, Crane-driver, Paper Maker, Motor Mechanics,
Collier, Sextons, Car Drivers, Brass-finisher, Butchers, Carters,
Bakers, Dealer, Chauffeur, Millers, Electrician, Tram Driver,
Confectioner, Watchmaker, Railway Workers, Painters and Saddlers, etc.

(3) _Compilation of Budgets._

Two methods of compiling the budgets were followed:--A simple addition
was made of the particulars of the expenditure on each item separately
recorded on each of the budgets. These particulars consisted of the
expenditure on food, sundries, and rent for one week in June, 1922; the
particulars of yearly expenditure on items of clothing, fuel and light
were reduced to a weekly average by dividing by 52, before adding. The
resulting totals gave the present average weekly expenditure on each
article, and consequently the _proportion_ which the expenditure on each
article bears to the total expenditure of the average wage-earning
household.

A more complex method of compilation was also adopted which should lead
to an even more accurate result.

It was found by analysis of the Census figures that the proportion of
children under 14 to adults (persons over 14) is approximately as 2 to
5, and an adjustment was made to bring the budgets into conformity with
this proportion in order that they might truly represent the actual
proportions of the population of the country, the assumption being that
the percentage rise in the price of articles mainly consumed by children
might be higher or lower than the rise in the prices of articles mainly
consumed by persons over 14.

The budgets were accordingly classified into three groups, viz.:--"S" or
simple households, consisting of not more than two persons over 14
years, and with one or more children under 14 years; "C" or complex
households, consisting of more than two persons over 14 years, and with
one or more children under 14 years; and "A" or adult households, in
which there were not any persons under 14 years.

It was necessary to multiply the "A" group by 3, in order to bring the
proportionate number of adults and children in the budgets with which we
were dealing into conformity with the national proportion (5 to 2). The
figures for the three groups having been totalled separately, those
obtained for the "A" group were weighted accordingly.

It was found, however, that the difference between the "weights"
obtained by the first and by the second methods were so small as to be
quite negligible, as is shown by the following tables:--

PERCENTAGE INCREASES FROM JULY, 1914, TO MARCH, 1922, AS SHOWN BY
THE APPLICATION OF POST OFFICE PRICES.[A]

  ----------+-------+-----------+-------+--------+-----------+---------
            |       |           |       | Fuel   |           | Total
   Budget   | Food. | Clothing. | Rent. | and    | Sundries. | for all
  Grouping. |       |           |       | Light. |           | Items.
  ----------+-------+-----------+-------+--------+-----------+---------
   S+C+A    | 99.8  |   97.1    | 27.3  | 120.6  |   104.2   | 95.5
   S+C+3A   | 99.9  |   97.3    | 27.3  | 124.9  |   104.1   | 95.7
  ----------+-------+-----------+-------+--------+-----------+---------

PERCENTAGE INCREASES FROM JULY, 1914, TO MARCH, 1922, AS SHOWN BY THE
APPLICATION OF MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
PRICES.

  ----------+-------+-----------+----------+--------+-----------+---------
            |       |           |          | Fuel   |           | Total
   Budget   | Food. | Clothing. | Rent.[A] | and    | Sundries. | for all
  Grouping. |       |           |          | Light. |           | Items.
  ----------+-------+-----------+----------+--------+-----------+---------
   S+C+A    | 88.2  |    91.4   |    27.3  | 116.8  | 97.0      | 86.9
   S+C+3A   | 88.3  |    92.0   |    27.3  | 117.2  | 96.9      | 87.0
  ----------+-------+-----------+----------+--------+-----------+---------
[A: Figures obtained for Local Government Board only.]

It may be mentioned here that if weights are obtained for the "S" group
of households only, _i.e._, for an average of two adults, and 3.5
children, the final increase in the cost of living figures would be 91.2
for March, 1922, and 84.6 for June, 1922, _i.e._, practically identical
with the figures obtained by "weighting" in accordance with all the
budgets.

(4) _Table of Weights._

The following Table shows the actual Irish "weights," representing the
proportionate expenditure by the average wage-earning household on the
various commodities, as compiled from the budgets received.

The actual Irish weights or proportions of expenditure on each item are
as follow:--

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
  Total expenditure 100                |   Food 57.05
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
  Beef                            5.18 | Flour                         3.70
  Mutton                          2.94 | Oatmeal, etc                   .97
  Fresh Pork                       .63 | Rice, Sago, etc.               .45
  Sausages, Black Puddings, etc.   .82 | Potatoes                      3.16
  Bacon, Pigs' Heads, etc.        5.23 | Other Vegetables              1.33
  Fresh Fish                       .61 | Tea                           3.80
  Cured or Tinned Fish             .16 | Sugar                         3.24
  Butter                          6.91 | Jam                           1.12
  Cheese                           .26 | Other Food                     .95
  Margarine                        .18 | Meals eaten at Shops,
  Lard                             .25 |   Hotels, etc.                 .70
  Fresh Milk                      4.56 |
  Condensed Milk                   .09 |
  Eggs                            3.44 |      Total Food              57.05
  Bread                           6.37 |
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
                          CLOTHING       17.48
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
  _Women's_:--                           _Girl's_ (over 6):--
  Coats                            .69 |
  Hats                             .37 | Coats                          .50
  Costumes                        1.09 | Hats                           .23
  Blouses, etc.                    .39 | Dresses                        .69
  Skirts                           .21 | Stockings                      .20
  Stockings                        .24 | Combinations                   .13
  Combinations                     .15 | Stays                          .11
  Corsets                          .19 | Petticoats                     .15
  Underskirts                      .18 | Chemises                       .13
  Chemises                         .19 | Boots and Shoes                .71
  Boots and Shoes                  .92 | Other Clothing                 .19
  Other Clothing                   .27 |
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
  _Men's_:--                           _Boy's_ (over 6):--
  Overcoats                        .83 | Overcoats                      .27
  Suits                           2.60 | Suits                          .83
  Hats                             .38 | Caps                           .07
  Singlets                         .30 | Shirts                         .17
  Drawers                          .30 | Stockings                      .12
  Shirts                           .55 | Boots and Shoes                .56
  Socks                            .32 | Other Clothing                 .13
  Boots and Shoes                 1.33 |
  Other Clothing                   .34 |    _Children_ (under 6):--
                                       | Clothes, Boots, etc.           .45
                                       |
                                       |        Total Clothing        17.48
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
                            Rent                 5.41
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
                            Fuel and Light       7.04
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
  Coal                            3.14 | Electricity for Cooking         --
  Turf                            1.79 | Candles                        .33
  Firewood                         .34 | Paraffin Oil                   .67
  Gas for Lighting                 .40 | Other Fuel and Light           .05
  Gas for Cooking, etc.            .29 |
  Electricity for lighting         .03 |   Total Fuel and Light        7.04
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
                            Sundries            13.02
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
  Soap                            1.12 | Other Sundries                8.41
  Pipe Tobacco                    2.11 |
  Cigarettes                      1.38 |   Total Sundries             13.02
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
                            Total Expenditure   100.0

NOTES ON THE BUDGETS.

(a) _Reliability of Budgets. Tests._

As a test of the reliability of the budget returns several sets were
taken at random and were arranged in two groups having a common factor
of approximately equal numbers of persons and equal total income. It was
found on addition that the proportion of total expenditure spent on each
description of food, clothing, etc., was approximately the same in each
family and income group. Thus we treated the first 30 budgets from
households with small and large incomes in this manner, dividing them so
that each lot of 15 would have about the same number of persons and the
same income. The selection was made without any reference whatever to
expenditure, and the following were the results:--

PERCENTAGE EXPENDITURE.

                     1st Lot      2nd Lot
                      of 15.       of 15.
  Food                 54.3         53.2
  Clothing             20.9         20.3
  Rent                  6.6          6.7
  Fuel and Light        6.7          6.7
  Sundries             11.5         13.1

NUMBERS IN THE HOUSEHOLD.

  Under 4                     8        3
  4 to 13                    30       31
  14 and over                57       59
                             --       --
                Total,       95       93

  Total Weekly Incomes   1597s.   1543s.

_The Household Budgets in the "S" Group were separately tested and the
following results were obtained:--_

  ------------------------------+-------------------------------------
                                |        INCOME OF HOUSEHOLD.
                                |-------+------+------+------+--------
  Proportion of Expenditure     | Under |  L3  |  L4  |  L5  |    L6
    under each of the following |   L3  |      |      |      | upwards
    sub-divisions:--            |       |      |      |      |
                                |-------+------+------+------+--------
  Food                          |  61.1 | 60.4 | 56.3 | 48.0 |   41.4
  Clothing                      |  15.7 | 13.7 | 19.3 | 19.4 |   17.7
  Rent                          |   5.3 |  6.6 |  5.0 |  8.8 |   12.4
  Fuel and Light                |   8.7 |  7.6 |  7.3 |  8.1 |    9.0
  Sundries                      |   9.2 | 11.7 | 12.1 | 15.7 |   19.5
                                |-------+------+------+------+--------
          Total                 |   100 |  100 |  100 |  100 |   100
                                |       |      |      |      |
  ------------------------------+-------+------+------+------+--------

This test showed that the budgets we used conformed with common
experience, and is, therefore, evidence of their reliability.


(_b_) _Comparison of English and Irish Weights._

The weights used in England in compiling the British index figure were
compiled from budgets collected as long ago as 1904. These show a
pre-war standard of living and the final index figure shows the
percentage increase in expenditure necessary to maintain that precise
standard of living absolutely unchanged at the present day.

We were not in possession of any Irish figures by which the pre-war
standard of living could be accurately measured, and it was accordingly
necessary for us to obtain budgets showing the present standard of
living. Our final index figure therefore shows the percentage increase
in expenditure which would have been necessary to maintain the present
standard of living absolutely unchanged from July, 1914, to the present
day.

It has been seen that according to the figures compiled by us, 57.1s.
out of every 100s. is spent on food in Irish wage-earning class
households; 17.5s. on clothing, and so on, and it is of interest to
compare these "weights" with the corresponding figures calculated by
the English Ministry of Labour from the "United Kingdom" Budgets of
1904, which relate to the pre-war "United Kingdom" Standard of Living
and which are still in use in England.

The following table shows the proportion of each 100s. spent by
Wage-Earning Class Households which is spent on (1) Food, (2) Clothing,
(3) Rent, (4) Fuel and Light, and (5) Sundries:--

  ----------------------------------------------+-----------------------
                     |         IN IRELAND.      |  IN "UNITED KINGDOM."
                     +--------------------------+-----------------------
                     |  In June,  |In July, 1914|           |In July,
  Class of           |  1922, as  |as calculated| In July,  |1922, as
   Commodity.        | calculated |from the     | 1914, as  |calculated
                     |   from the |previous     |calculated |from 1904
                     | Committee's|column by    | from 1904 |Budgets by
                     |   Budgets. |price        |  Budgets. |price
                     |            |changes.     |           |changes.
  -------------------+------------+-------------+-----------+-----------
                     |      A.    |       B.    |     C.    |     D.
  (1) Food           |     57.1   |      56.2   |     60    |    58.6
  (2) Clothing       |     17.5   |      17.0   |     12    |    15.6
  (3) Rent           |      5.4   |       7.9   |     16    |    13.3
  (4) Fuel and       |            |             |           |
      Light          |      7.0   |       6.6   |      8    |     8.3
  (5) Sundries       |     13.0   |      12.3   |      4    |     4.2
                     +------------+-------------+-----------+-----------
         Total       |    100.0   |     100.0   |    100    |   100.0
  -------------------+------------+-------------+-----------+-----------

It should be explained that the method of arriving at Columns B and D is
as follows:--

The amounts of the various commodities consumed, as shown in the table
compiled from the budgets, are left unchanged, but the prices are
altered according to the prices ruling at the date under consideration,
_i.e._, Column B shows the proportion of expenditure in 1914 on the
various classes of commodities had the 1914 standard been precisely the
same as the present day standard.


(C) Compilation of the Final Figure.

We were now in possession of the retail prices of the individual
commodities at the different dates, and of the weights obtained from the
summarisation of the household budgets, and these prices and weights for
the main groups of articles are set out in the subjoined table:--

  --------------+---------------+-----------------+-------------+---------
                |               |                 |             |  Irish
                |Mid-July, 1914.| Mid-March, 1922.|  Mid-June,  | Weights
                |               |                 |    1922.    |(see last
                |               |                 |             |  par.).
  --------------+-------+-------+--------+--------+------+------+---------
                |  A.   |   B.  |   A.   |    B.  |  A.  |   B. |
  Food          | 52.4  |  54.6 | 104.8  |  102.8 | 100  |  100 |  57.1
  Clothing      | 52.7  |  52.9 | 103.9  |  101.7 | 100  |  100 |  17.5
  Rent (C)      | 78.9  |  78.9 | 100.4  |  100.4 | 100  |  100 |   5.4
  Fuel and Light| 46.6  |  48.1 | 104.8  |  104.4 | 100  |  100 |   7.0
  Sundries      | 50.5  |  51.9 | 103.2  |  103.1 | 100  |  100 |  13.0
  --------------+-------+----------------+--------+------+------+---------

  The figures A result from the returns from the Post Office.
  The figures B result from the returns from other Departments.
  The figures C were obtained from only one Department--the Local
                Government Board.

It now only remained for us to compile the final figure.

This was ascertained by multiplying the ratio prices of the various
commodities by the "weights" appropriate to those commodities (_i.e._,
by multiplying the figures in the first six columns of the table above
by the figures in the final column).

The following table gives the result so obtained:--

  ---------------+--------+--------+---------+---------+---------+--------
                 | Mid-July, 1914. |  Mid-March, 1922. |  Mid-June, 1922.
  ---------------+--------+--------+---------+---------+---------+--------
                 |   A.   |   B.   |    A.   |    B.   |    A.   |    B.
  Food           | 2992.0 | 3117.7 |  5984.1 |  5869.9 |  5710.0 |  5710.0
  Clothing       |  922.3 |  925.7 |  1818.2 |  1779.7 |  1750.0 |  1750.0
  Rent (C)       |  426.1 |  426.1 |   542.2 |   542.2 |   540.0 |   540.0
  Fuel and Light |  326.2 |  336.7 |   730.8 |   730.8 |   700.0 |   700.0
  Sundries       |  657.0 |  674.7 |  1341.6 |  1327.3 |  1300.0 |  1300.0
  ---------------+--------+--------+---------+---------+---------+--------
      Total      | 5323.6 | 5480.9 | 10416.9 | 10249.9 | 10000.0 | 10000.0
  ---------------+--------+--------+---------+---------+---------+--------

Then, taking the prices in July, 1914, as the standard and representing
them by the figure of 100 we get the final percentage table.

  ----------------+-----------+---------------+--------------
                  |     Mid.  |       Mid.    |     Mid.
                  | July, 1914|  March, 1922. | June, 1922.
  ----------------+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+------
  As Per Cent. of |     |     |       |       |       |
                  |  A  |  B  |   A   |   B   |   A   |   B
    July, 1914.   | 100 | 100 | 195.7 | 187.0 | 187.8 | 182.5
  ----------------+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+------

The following table shows the percentage changes so obtained for the
main groups of commodities:--

  ----------------+-------------------+-----------------
                  |   March 1922 over |   June 1922 over
                  |     July 1914.    |     July 1914.
  ----------------+---------+---------+---------+-------
                  |    A    |    B    |    A    |    B
  ----------------+---------+---------+---------+-------
  Food            |   99.9  |   88.3  |   90.8  |   83.2
  Clothing        |   97.3  |   92.0  |   89.9  |   88.7
  Rent (C)        |   27.3  |   27.3  |   26.8  |   26.8
  Fuel and Light  |  124.9  |  117.2  |  114.6  |  108.0
  Sundries        |  104.1  |   96.9  |   97.8  |   92.8
                  +---------+---------+---------+-------
  ALL ITEMS       |   95.7  |   87.0  |   87.8  |   82.5
  ----------------+---------+---------+---------+-------

The figures in column marked "A" as before were obtained from the prices
collected by Post Office officials, and those marked "B" from prices
collected by officials of the Ministry of Labour and Local Government
Board.

By taking the mean of "A" and "B" for March and for June, 1922, the
final figures showing the increases in the Cost of Living are
obtained:--

  Mid-March, 1922,                Mid-June, 1922,
  over July, 1914.               over July, 1914.

  =91.4= per cent.               =85.2= per cent.

=and these are the final figures which we recommend the Government to
adopt.=


NOTES ON THE COMPILATION.

     (_a_) _Comparison of Post Office, Ministry of Labour and Local
     Government Board Figures._

The close similarity between the figures supplied by the various
Departments can perhaps be most clearly seen in a different tabular
form.

For every 100 shillings spent by wage-earning classes in July, 1914, the
following would be the corresponding amounts (as shown by the different
returns) which would have to be spent in order to maintain the same
standard of living in March and June, 1922.

  -------+-------+-------------+---------+--------------+--------------
         |       | Ministry of | Mean of |   Deviation  |   Deviation
         |  Post |  Labour and | columns | of (_a_) and |      as a
         |Office.| Ministry of |(_a_) and|  (_b_) from  | percentage of
         |       | Local Govt. |  (_b_). |   the mean.  | column (_c_).
         | (_a_) |    (_b_)    |  (_c_)  |              |
  -------+-------+-------------+---------+--------------+--------------
  March, |       |             |         |              |
    1922 | 195.7 |    187.0    |  191.35 |     4.35     |      2.3
  June,  |       |             |         |              |
    1922 | 187.8 |    182.5    |  185.15 |     2.65     |      1.4
  -------+-------+-------------+---------+--------------+--------------

The last column shows that in general the difference between Post
Office, Ministry of Labour and Ministry of Local Government was 2.3 per
cent. of the mean for prices returned for March, 1922, and 1.4 per cent.
of the mean for prices returned for June, 1922--surely a small
difference considering the instability of prices.

(_b_) _Sundries._

A point of some importance is the following:--

In the British budgets only items of which the price changes could be
accurately measured are understood to have been included.

In our Summary all "Sundries" shown in the budgets are included. But as
the price change of only about one-third of them could be directly
measured it was assumed that the change in the level of the prices of
the remaining sundries varied in the same proportion as the change in
the other four groups combined.


(D) Results of Different Weighting.

Calculations were also made whereby a final figure could be arrived at
by different methods, and the following table shows results obtained:--

PERCENTAGE INCREASES ARISING BY USING BRITISH WEIGHTS.

  ------------------------------------------------+-------------------
                                                  |Percentage Increase
                                                  | in Cost of Living
                                                  |    in Ireland.
               DIFFERENT METHODS.                 |----------+---------
                                                  | July 1914|July 1914
                                                  |    to    |    to
                                                  |March 1922|June 1922
  ------------------------------------------------+----------+---------
  _a_ By applying British Weights in 1914         |          |
    to the Committee's Irish Prices of all        |          |
    commodities in 1914 and 1922 the percentage   |          |
    increase in the Cost of Living                |          |
    would be                                      |   84.8   |   80.2
                                                  |          |
  _b_ Taking Irish Prices for Food in 1914 as     |           |
    collected by the British Board of Trade,      |          |
    but the Committee's Prices for all other      |          |
    commodities in 1914 and all commodities       |          |
    in 1922 the increase would be                 |   76.6   |   71.0
                                                  |          |
  _c_ Taking British Prices for food in the       |           |
    "United Kingdom" in 1914, but the Committee's |          |
    Prices for all other commodities in 1914      |          |
    and all commodities in 1922 the increase      |          |
    would be                                      |   72.1   |   67.3
  ------------------------------------------------+----------+---------
  Prices obtained entirely on Irish weights       |          |
  and prices, and recommended for adoption        |          |
  are                                             |   91.4   |   85.2
  ------------------------------------------------+----------+---------

As regards this table it should, however, be pointed out that the
commodities selected by us are not in all respects identical with those
selected by the British authorities and that the application of the
weights, although broadly speaking correct, could not be accurate in
every detail.

It only remains for us to express our gratitude for all the assistance
given to us by the officials of the Departments already mentioned and by
the staff assisting in the actual compilation. Our thanks are especially
due to Mr. C. J. Barry, of the Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction and to the National School teachers who furnished such
excellent budgets.

  (Signed)      JOHN HOOPER, _Chairman_.
  T. K. BEWLEY.
  +T. Mac Giolla Padraig.+
  STANLEY LYON.
  _4th August, 1922._




APPENDIX.


Form A.

DIRECTIONS.

1. All prices should be quoted in pence, and should be cash prices at
the shop (not delivered).

2. Please note the quantity mentioned in the first column in each case,
and let your figures correspond.

3. If actual prices paid for any item are not available--leave space
blank. _Do not estimate._

4. The figures quoted for the month of March, 1922, should be those
prevailing on the date on which you fill up the form.

5. In the column headed "Observations," please furnish any particulars
concerning the retail prices of food in your district, which, in your
opinion are worthy of observation.

6. Fill in on the back page of the form particulars of the sources from
which information as to the prices of the commodity has been obtained,
for example:--

  ------------+-----------------------------+----------------------
   COMMODITY. |           SOURCE.           |       NATURE.
  ------------+-----------------------------+----------------------
  Butter      |  John Macken, Main Street   | Large Shop--Day Book
  Eggs        |  Personal knowledge         | Direct Country supply
  Eggs        |  Mrs. O'Kane, Dublin Road   | Household Pass Book
  ------------+-----------------------------+----------------------

7. The figures representing the majority of the sales are the figures
required. Exceptional prices are of no value.

8. In every case you should check your information, whether given of
your knowledge or after investigation by enquiry from more than one
source.

  RETAIL PRICES OF CERTAIN FOOD COMMODITIES IN __________________________
  AT UNDERMENTIONED DATES.                     (City, Town, or District).
  -----------------------+--------------------+---------+---------+---------
                         |      1913          |  1914   |   1922  |
                         +----+-----+----+----+---------+---------+ Observa-
  Commodity              |Jan.|April|July|Oct.|Feb.|July|Feb.|Mar.| tions
  -----------------------+----+-----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---------
  Beef (Irish).          |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Best cuts     per lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Second parts      lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Rough meat        lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Mutton (Irish).        |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Best cuts         lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Second parts      lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Rough meat        lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Bacon.                 |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   Smoked   (piece)   lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   Smoked   (rashers) lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   Unsmoked (piece)   lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   Unsmoked (rashers) lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   Shoulder (piece)   lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   Shoulder (rashers) lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   American (piece)   lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   American (rashers) lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Fresh Pork.            |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Chops             lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Steaks            lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Puddings          lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Sausages.              |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Beef              lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Pork              lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    "Limerick"        lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Lard                lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Dripping            lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Butter.                |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Irish Creamery    lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Irish farmer's    lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    New Zealand       lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Danish            lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Margarine.             |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    First Grade       lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Second Grade      lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Third Grade       lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Cheese (give brand     |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   or other description).|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Eggs.                  |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    First Grade      doz.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Second Grade     doz.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Third Grade      doz.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Third Grade      doz.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Milk.                  |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Fresh           quart|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Buttermilk      quart|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Skim Milk       quart|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Tinned Milk.           |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Irish (give size     |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
      of tin)            |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Imported (give       |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
      size of tin)       |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Bread (per 2-lb. Loaf) |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Flour.                 |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Household per stone  |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Household per sack   |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
     of ___ stones.      |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Best American per    |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
     sack of ___ stones. |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Meal.                  |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Oaten           stone|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Wheaten         stone|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Indian          stone|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Rice                lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Potatoes          stone|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Sugar, White           |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    granulated        lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Tea.                   |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Best quality      lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Cheapest quality  lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Coffee, Ground      lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Cocoa.                 |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Shell             lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    Tinned            lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Jam, Irish (give name  |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    of kind in most      |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
    demand).             |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
                         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  -----------------------+----+-----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---------
  Please add any         |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   information available |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   as to prices of the   |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   following commodities,|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   giving description of |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
   each item:--          |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
     Fish                |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
     Vegetables       lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
     Poultry          lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
     Fruit            lb.|    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  -----------------------+----+-----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---------
                                           Signature________________________
                                                  Date_________________

PARTICULARS OF SOURCES from which information has been obtained:--

  -------------+---------------------+---------------------------
  COMMODITY.   |       SOURCE.       |         NATURE.
  -------------+---------------------+---------------------------
  Beef         |                     |
  Mutton       |                     |
  Bacon        |                     |
  Fresh Pork   |                     |
  Sausages     |                     |
  Lard         |                     |
  Dripping     |                     |
  Butter       |                     |
  Margarine    |                     |
  Cheese       |                     |
  Eggs         |                     |
  Milk         |                     |
  Tinned Milk  |                     |
  Bread        |                     |
  Flour        |                     |
  Meal         |                     |
  Rice         |                     |
  Potatoes     |                     |
  Sugar        |                     |
  Tea          |                     |
  Coffee       |                     |
  Cocoa        |                     |
  Jam          |                     |
  Fish         |                     |
  Vegetables   |                     |
  Poultry      |                     |
  Fruit        |                     |
  -------------+---------------------+---------------------------


Form B 1.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR FILLING IN SPECIAL FORMS FOR RETAIL PRICES.

(1) The necessary inquiries for filling up these forms should be made
immediately.

(2) The returns duly completed should be posted so as to reach this
Office _not later than Thursday, 22nd June_. Please do your utmost to
post them as early as possible.

(3) Get the information from the shops most frequented by the
wage-earning classes. Prices representing the kind, quality, etc., on
which these classes spend most money are the prices required.

(4) Please note the quantity for which the prices of each commodity are
to be quoted.

(5) All prices on Forms B 2 and B 3 should be quoted in pence (but
correct to farthings)--thus Sugar 5-3/4d. per lb.

(6) Give actual prices. If you cannot get them leave blanks; do not give
estimates or averages. For prices for the dates prior to June, 1922, get
the Shopkeepers to look up their books.

(7) All prices should be cash prices at the shop (_not delivered_) they
should represent the majority of sales and they should be checked by
inquiry from more than one source.

(8) (_a_) Get prices in all cases from Shopkeepers, giving on each Form
the names and full postal addresses of those who supplied the
information for that Form.

(_b_) Give exact descriptions of beef, mutton, etc., where you are asked
to do this on the Form.

(9) Give on the space provided on each Form any explanations or
observations which you think would be helpful.

=Form B 2.=

RETAIL PRICES OF CERTAIN COMMODITIES

  in ________________ of __________________________________
     (_Parish_)      (_City, Town or District_).

  [_Prices to be correct to the nearest farthing._]
  -----------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----------------------+-------+-----
                         |     |Mid  |     |                       |       |
                         |     |Mid- |Mid- |                       |       |Mid-
                         |     |Mar.,|June,|                       |       |June,
       Commodity.        |Per  |1922.|1922.|   Commodity.[B]       |Per    |1922.
  -----------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----------------------+-------+-----
                         |     |_d._ |_d._ |                       |       |_d._
  Butter, Irish Factory  |lb.  |     |     |Pork Chops             |lb.    |
  Cheese, Golden Spray[A]|lb.  |     |     |Pork Sausages          |lb.    |
  Condensed Milk, Irish  |1 lb.|     |     |Lard                   |lb.    |
     full Cream.         |  tin|     |     |                       |       |
  Condensed Milk,        |1 lb.|     |     |                       |       |
     Nestle's            |  tin|     |     |Butter, Irish Creamery |lb.    |
  Rice, Rangoon          |lb.  |     |     |Butter, Irish Farmer's |lb.    |
  Rice, Java             |lb.  |     |     |Margarine, First Grade |lb.    |
  Jam, Strawberry        |lb.  |     |     |Margarine, Second      |lb.    |
                         |     |     |     |   Grade.              |       |
  Fresh Pork, Shoulders  |lb.  |     |     |Eggs, First Grade      |doz.   |
  Fish--Red Herrings     |doz. |     |     |Milk, Fresh            |Quart  |
  Fish--Fresh Herrings   |doz. |     |     |Bread                  |2 lb.  |
                         |     |     |     |                       |  loaf |
  Fish--Cod Steak        |lb.  |     |     |Flour, Household       |14 lbs.|
  Tea (quality most used |lb.  |     |     |Oatmeal                |14 lbs.|
    by working classes). |     |     |     |                       |       |
  Cabbage                |head |     |     |Potatoes, Old          |14 lbs.|
  =============================|     |     |                       |       |
                         |July,|     |     |                       |       |
                         |1914.|     |     |                       |       |
  Soap, Household (bar)  |     |     |     |Sugar, white granulated|lb.    |
                  per lb.|     |     |     |                       |       |
                         |     |     |     |Tea, Best Quality      |lb.    |
  Candles         per lb.|     |     |     |                       |       |
                         |     |     |     |Tea, Cheapest Quality  |lb.    |
  Paraffin Oil   per gal.|     |     |     |================================
                         |     |     |     |        OBSERVATIONS.
  Coal       per 112 lbs.|     |     |     |
                         |     |     |     |
  Turf[A]    per 112 lbs.|     |     |     |
                         |     |     |     |
  Gas for lighting[A] per|     |     |     |
                         |     |     |     |
  Gas for cooking,    per|     |     |     |
    &c.[A]               |     |     |     |
  Electricity for     per|     |     |     |
    lighting[A]          |     |     |     |
  Electricity for     per|     |     |     |
    cooking, &c.[A]      |     |     |     |
  ==========================================================================
  [A: SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS.--(_a_) _Cheese_, _Golden Spray._--If this kind
  of Cheese is not sold, strike out last two words, insert kind most
  usually sold to working classes, and give prices. (_b_) _Turf._--Note,
  price is asked for per 112 lbs. State on back of this form how it is
  sold in your Parish, and give number of sods, creels, etc., to the 112
  lbs. (_c_) _Gas and Electricity._--Insert the quantity which you are
  pricing, and state any "observations" (on the front or back of this
  form) which will help in compiling uniform quotations for the different
  parts of Ireland.]

  [B: NOTE.--Prices for Mid-June, 1922, only are required for these
  particular commodities.]

  _Date_ ______________ (_Signature_) ____________________________

  =Form B 2=--CONTINUED.

  -------------------+----------------------------+------------------------
                     |Name and full postal address|
       COMMODITY.    |  of Shopkeeper or Firm from|     OBSERVATIONS.
                     |  whom the information was  |
                     |  obtained.                 |
  -------------------+----------------------------+------------------------
   (1) Butter        |                            |
   (2) Cheese        |                            |
   (3) Condensed Milk|                            |
   (4) Margarine     |                            |
   (5) Lard          |                            |
   (6) Sausages      |                            |
   (7) Fresh Pork    |                            |
   (8) Tea           |                            |
   (9) Sugar         |                            |
  (10) Jam           |                            |
  (11) Rice          |                            |
  (12) Oatmeal       |                            |
  (13) Flour         |                            |
  (14) Bread         |                            |
  (15) Eggs          |                            |
  (16) Milk, fresh   |                            |
  (17) Potatoes      |                            |
  (18) Cabbage       |                            |
  (19) Fish          |                            |
  (20) Soap          |                            |
  (21) Candles       |                            |
  (22) Oil           |                            |
  (23) Coal          |                            |
  (24) Turf          |                            |
  (25) Gas           |                            |
  (26) Electricity   |                            |
  -------------------+----------------------------+------------------


Form B 3.

RETAIL PRICES OF CERTAIN COMMODITIES

  in _________________________ of ________________________
              (Parish).           (City, Town or District).
  ------------------------------------+-----------------------------------
                  PRICES.             |          ESTIMATED WEIGHTS.
                                      |
  Insert under _Beef_ the exact       |On each blank line below insert the
  description (e.g., "round steak,"   |same description as you have
  "stewing beef," "rib steak," "corned|already inserted on the same line
  brisket," "shoulder," "liver," etc.,|in the lefthand column, then insert
  or whatever is the exact            |below the best estimates of
  description) of each of the six      |comparative weights which you can
  parts, kinds, etc., on which the    |get from the shopkeeper.
  _working classes_ at present spend  |
  most _money_, naming the parts in   |That is to say, for every 10 _lbs._
  the order of their importance from  |of that part, kind, cut, etc., on
  this point of view. Please insert   |which the working classes spend
  prices opposite each description.   |most _money_, insert below the
  Similarly, in the case of _Mutton_  |approximate _weight_ of each of the
  insert the exact description of the |other descriptions (2), (3), etc.,
  four parts, kinds, etc., in the     |purchased by the working classes.
  order of their money importance to  |
  the working classes, entering the   |
  exact price opposite each. Again,   |
  under _Bacon, etc._, insert the     |
  exact description (e.g., "Irish     |
  shoulder rashers," "Irish bacon,    |
  back piece," "American bacon,       |
  shoulder piece," "Pigs' heads,"     |
  "American Gams," etc., or whatever  |
  is the exact description) of each of|
  the six parts, kinds, cuts, etc., of|
  cured pigs on which the _working    |
  classes_ at present spend most      |
  _money_, naming the parts in order  |
  of their importance from this point |
  of view. Enter the exact prices     |
  opposite each description.          |
                                      |
  Do not estimate prices. As regards  |
  Mid-March, shopkeeper's books should|
  be referred to in each case.        |

  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |   Mid-   |   Mid-   |                    |
                    |  March,  |   June,  |                    |
     BEEF, per lb.  |   1922.  |   1922.  |       BEEF.        | Weights.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (1)               |          |          |(1)                 |   10 lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (2)               |          |          |(2)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (3)               |          |          |(3)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (4)               |          |          |(4)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (5)               |          |          |(5)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (6)               |          |          |(6)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
    MUTTON, per lb. |          |          |      MUTTON.       |
                    |          |          |                    |
  (1)               |          |          |(1)                 |   10 lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (2)               |          |          |(2)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (3)               |          |          |(3)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (4)               |          |          |(4)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
       BACON, &c.,  |          |          |                    |
       per lb.      |          |          |    BACON, etc.     |
                    |          |          |                    |
  (1)               |          |          |(1)                 |   10 lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (2)               |          |          |(2)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (3)               |          |          |(3)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (4)               |          |          |(4)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (5)               |          |          |(5)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------
                    |          |          |                    |
  (6)               |          |          |(6)                 |      lb.
  ------------------+----------+----------+--------------------+----------

The working-class families in this district spend about _____ shillings
on Mutton for every 10 shillings spent on Beef.

For every 10s. which the working classes spend on butchers' meat (beef
and mutton) how much do they spend on bacon and other pig-meat (including
sausages)? ____________

  Signature ____________________________    Date ____ June, 1922.


_Source of Information_


_Observations_


Form B 4.

CLOTHING OF WAGE-EARNING CLASSES.

RETAIL PRICES IN ___________________________

The prices for 1914 must refer to exactly the same type and quality of
articles as for 1922, which must be of a description in general demand
amongst wage-earning classes in 1922. In all cases of clothing it is the
ready-made article that should be priced, except as regards men's suits,
men's trousers and men's overcoats, for which two sets of prices, (1)
ready-made, (2) tailor-made, should be given.

  -------------------+------------------------+------+------+------+-----
                     |   State Material and   |      | July,| Mar.,|June,
       Articles.     |   exact Description.   |  --  | 1914.| 1922.|1922.
  -------------------+------------------------+------+------+------+-----
                     |                        |      | s. d.| s. d.|s. d.
  (A). Men's.        |                        |      |      |      |
    Suits        (1) |                        | each |      |      |
    Suits        (2) |                        | each |      |      |
    Trousers     (1) |                        | pair |      |      |
    Trousers     (2) |                        | pair |      |      |
    Overcoats    (1) |                        | each |      |      |
    Overcoats    (2) |                        | each |      |      |
    Singlets         |                        | each |      |      |
    Drawers          |                        | pair |      |      |
    Shirts           |                        | each |      |      |
    Socks            |                        | pair |      |      |
    Boots            |                        | pair |      |      |
  -------------------+------------------------+------+------+------+-----
  (B). Boys aged     |                        |      |      |      |
       about 12.     |                        |      |      |      |
    Suits            |                        | each |      |      |
    Overcoats        |                        | each |      |      |
    Shirts           |                        | each |      |      |
    Stockings        |                        | pair |      |      |
    Boots            |                        | pair |      |      |
  -------------------+------------------------+------+------+------+-----
  (C). Women's.      |                        |      |      |      |
    Light Coats      |                        | each |      |      |
    Heavy Coats      |                        | each |      |      |
    Costumes         |                        | each |      |      |
    Blouses          |                        | each |      |      |
    Skirts           |                        | each |      |      |
    Stockings        |                        | pair |      |      |
    Combinations     |                        | pair |      |      |
    Corsets          |                        | each |      |      |
    Underskirts      |                        | each |      |      |
    Chemises         |                        | each |      |      |
    Boots            |                        | pair |      |      |
  -------------------+------------------------+------+------+------+-----
  (D). Girls aged    |                        |      |      |      |
       about 12.     |                        |      |      |      |
    Coats            |                        | each |      |      |
    Dresses          |                        | each |      |      |
    Stockings        |                        | pair |      |      |
    Combinations     |                        | pair |      |      |
    Stays            |                        | each |      |      |
    Petticoats       |                        | each |      |      |
    Chemises         |                        | each |      |      |
    Boots            |                        | pair |      |      |
  -------------------+------------------------+------+------+------+-----
  (E).--MATERIALS purchased by Wage-earning Classes (same kind and quality
  at each date).
  -------------+-------------------------------+-----+------+------+------
               |                               |     | July,| Mar.,| June,
    Materials. | Exact Description, Width, &c. | Per | 1914.| 1922.| 1922.
  -------------+-------------------------------+-----+------+------+------
               |                               |     | s. d.| s. d.| s. d.
  Woollen Yarn |                               | lb. |      |      |
  Calico       |                               | yard|      |      |
  Cotton       |                               | yard|      |      |
  Flannel      |                               | yard|      |      |
  Flannelette  |                               | yard|      |      |
  Serge        |                               | yard|      |      |
  Tweed        |                               | yard|      |      |
  Print        |                               | yard|      |      |
  -------------+-------------------------------+-----+------+------+------

(F).--Names and full postal addresses of shopkeepers, firms, &c., from whom
information on this Form B. 4 was obtained.


(G).--Observations.


_Signature_ _______________________________

_Date_ ______________________

_This Form should be returned by the day of June_, 1922. Form B 5.

REPRESENTATIVE RENTS PAID BY WAGE-EARNING CLASSES IN

I.--WHOLE HOUSE OCCUPIED BY ONE FAMILY.

I.--The houses referred to below should be representative of
wage-earning class dwellings in as many different districts as possible.
Houses owned by the Local Authority should be indicated by an asterisk
placed after the postal number; such houses should only form their due
proportion of the number mentioned below since the Return is required to
show the true average change in rents in all wage-earning class houses.
_Rents of actual houses should be given: different rents are not to be
averaged_.

  ---------------+---------+------+-----------------------+
                 |         |No.   |     Annual Rent[B]    |
                 |         |of    |    (including rates)  |
                 |Postal[A]|rooms |     of each house.    |
  Name of Street.| No. or  |in    |-------+-------+-------+
                 | Nos. of |each  | July, | Mar., | June, |
                 | houses. |house.| 1914. | 1922. | 1922. |
  ---------------+---------+------+---+---+---+---+---+---+
                 |         |      | L | s.| L | s.| L | s.|
                 |         |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |
                 |         |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |
                 |         |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |
                 |         |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |
                 |         |      |   |   |   |   |   |   |
  ---------------+---------+------+---+---+---+---+---+---+

Continuation of above table
  --------------+---------+-----------------+--------------------------------
                |         |                          |
                |         |       Annual Rates       |    P.L. Valuation
                |Postal[A]|      on each house.      |    of each house.
  Name of Street| No. or  |--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------
                | Nos. of | July,  | Mar.,  | June,  | July, | Mar., | June,
                | houses. | 1914.  | 1922.  | 1922.  | 1914. | 1922. | 1922.
  --------------+---------+--+--+--+--+--|--+--+--+--+---+---+---+---+---+---
                |         | L|s.|L |s.| L|s.|  |  |  |   |   |   |   |   |
                |         |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |   |   |   |   |   |
                |         |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |   |   |   |   |   |
                |         |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |   |   |   |   |   |
                |         |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |   |   |   |   |   |
                |         |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |   |   |   |   |   |
  --------------+---------+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+---+---+---+---+---+---
[A. Owned by the Local Authority.]

[B. It is the ANNUAL rent that should be entered; accordingly
weekly, monthly or quarterly rents at the above dates should be
multiplied by 52, 12, or 4 respectively, and the result entered.]

Form B 5--continued.

II.--PART ONLY OF HOUSE OCCUPIED BY FAMILY.

II.--The houses or tenements should be in as many different districts as
possible and the particulars should be representative of wage-earning
class accommodation in those districts. _Actual rents are to be given:
different rents are not to be averaged._

  ------+------+--------------+------------------------------------
        |      |  Number[A] of|   Amount of Rent paid per week
  Name  |Postal|rooms occupied|           for the rooms
  of    |No. of|by each family|-----------+------------+-----------
  Street|house.|selected.     |July, 1914.|March, 1922.|June, 1922.
  ------+------+--------------+-----+-----+-----+------+-----+-----
        |      |              |  s. |  d. |  s. |  d.  |  s. |  d.
        |      |              |     |     |     |      |     |
        |      |              |     |     |     |      |     |
        |      |              |     |     |     |      |     |
        |      |              |     |     |     |      |     |
        |      |              |     |     |     |      |     |
  ------+------+--------------+-----+-----+-----+------+-----+-----

[A: The numbers required are to represent different types of
wage-earning class accommodation and, therefore, families should
be selected occupying different numbers of rooms so as to properly
represent local conditions.]

_Date_ __________ 1922. _Signature_ ______________________


=Form B 6.=--Page 1.

HOUSEHOLD BUDGET.

PARTICULARS for all persons in a household at _________ Co
__________ during the seven days ended ___ June, 1922.

(NOTE.--Particulars for _each_ person should be given, one line
being devoted to _each_).

  -----------------------+----------+----+-----------+---------
        Description      |          |    |           |Earnings
  (_e.g._, husband, wife,|   Sex    |    |           |  for
    father, son, niece,  | (M) Male |Age.|Occupation.|the seven
   servant, lodger, &c.).|(F) Female|    |       [1] | days.[2]
  -----------------------+----------+----+-----------+---------
                         |          |    |           |  s. d.
   (1)                   |          |    |           |
   (2)                   |          |    |           |
   (3)                   |          |    |           |
   (4)                   |          |    |           |
   (5)                   |          |    |           |
   (6)                   |          |    |           |
   (7)                   |          |    |           |
   (8)                   |          |    |           |
   (9)                   |          |    |           |
  (10)                   |          |    |           |
  -----------------------+----------+----+-----------+---------
  [1. _e.g._, "Carpenter," "Dock   |Total earnings(A)|
  labourer," "domestic duties," "at|                 |
  school," &c.]                    |Other receipts[E]|
  [2. If there is a servant, her   |-----------------|---------
  wages should not be included here]Total income (B) |
  (E) Receipts of old age or other |-----------------+---------
  pensions should be included here and not in the column for
  "earnings" above. Please state on the following lines
  particulars of pensions or other receipts:--
  ---------------------------+----------------------------------
  Observations with regard to|              SUMMARY.
  particulars on this page.  |----------------------------------
                             |          Number of Persons
                             |                               No.
                             |Who earned cash (A)       ________
                             |Who did not earn cash (A) ________
                             |Total number of persons
                             |  in the household        ________
                             |----------------------------------
                             |                            s.  d.
                             |Total _income_ (B)
                             |  for the seven days      ________
                             |----------------------------------
                             |         Number of Persons
                             |                               No.
                             |Under 4 years             ________
                             |4 years to 13 (inclusive) ________
                             |14 years and over         ________
                             |                          --------
                             |Total number of persons
                             |  in the household        ________

=Form B 6.=--Page 2.

QUANTITIES AND COSTS OF ARTICLES CONSUMED DURING THE SEVEN DAYS ___
JUNE, TO ___ JUNE, 1922.

  --------------------------+------+----+--------------------------+----+----
                            | Qty. |s.d.|                          |Qty.|s.d.
            FOOD.           |      |    |     FUEL AND LIGHT.      |    |
   (1) Beef                 | lb.  |    |(29) Coal                 |cwt.|
   (2) Mutton               | lb.  |    |(30) Turf                 |cwt.|
   (3) Fresh pork           | lb.  |    |(31) Firewood             |    |
   (4) Sausages, black      | lb.  |    |(32) Gas                  |    |
         puddings, &c.      |      |    |(33) Electricity          |    |
   (5) Bacon, pigs' heads,  | lb.  |    |(34) Candles              |lb. |
         &c.                |      |    |(35) Paraffin  Oil        |pts.|
  --------------------------+------+----|(36) Other Fuel and Light |[3] |
                            |      |    |--------------------------+----+----
   (6) Total Meat[4]        | [3]  |[4] |(37) Total Fuel & Light(E)|[3] |
   (7) Fresh Fish           | [3]  |    |--------------------------+----+----
   (8) Cured or Tinned Fish | [3]  |    |                          |    |
   (9) Butter               | lb.  |    |  HOUSEHOLD REQUISITES.   |    |
  (10) Cheese               | lb.  |    |(38) Soap                 |    |
  (11) Margarine            | lb.  |    |(39) Starch, blue,        |[3] |
  (12) Lard                 | lb.  |    |       polishes, &c.      |    |
  (13) Fresh Milk           | pts. |    |(40) Crockery, hardware,  |[3] |
  (14) Condensed  Milk      | lb.  |    |       &c.                |    |
  (15) Eggs                 | doz. |    |(41) Other household      |[3] |
  (16) Bread                | 2 lb.|    |       requisites.        |    |
                            |loaves|    |(42) Total Household      |[3] |
  (17) Flour                | lb.  |    |       Requisites (F).    |    |
  (18) Oatmeal, &c.         | lb.  |    |--------------------------+----+----
  (19) Rice, Sago, &c.      | lb.  |    |                          |    |
  (20) Potatoes             | lb.  |    |         SUNDRIES.        |    |
  (21) Other Vegetables     | [3]  |    |(43) Pipe tobacco         |oz. |
  (22) Tea                  | lb.  |    |(44) Cigarettes           |oz. |
  (23) Sugar                | lb.  |    |(45) Medicines, Ointments,|[3] |
  (24) Jam                  | lb.  |    |       Ointments, &c.     |    |
  (25) Other food           | [3]  |    |(46) Newspapers, &c.      |[3] |
  (26) Meals eaten at shops,| [3]  |    |(47) Train and tram fares,|[3] |
         &c.                |      |    |       &c.                |    |
  --------------------------+------+----|(48) Insurances           |[3] |
  (27) Total Food (C)       | [3]  |[4] |(49)                      |    |
  --------------------------+------+----|(50)                      |    |
                                        |(51)                      |    |
  (28) Clothes boots and    | [3]  |    |--------------------------+----+
         shoes (D)          |      |    |(52) Total Sundries (G)   |[3] |
  --------------------------+------+----+--------------------------+----+

[3: Cost only is required.]

[4: When totting be careful not to add in Meat twice over.]

NOTE.--Food purchased for poultry, pigs, &c.; materials for making up
garments for _sale_; implements for producing goods _for sale_, &c.,
should not be included above.

_(H) RENTS (Including rates)._--What is the weekly rent (including rates)
of the house or rooms occupied by the household? ___ shillings and ___ pence.

Does the family own the house? ________ (yes or no). If the answer is "yes,"
insert the equivalent rent and rates.

Observations on Weekly Costs and on rent:--

=Form B 6.=--Page 3.

COST OF CLOTHING (INCLUDING BOOTS AND SHOES) FOR THE TWELVE MONTHS,
JULY, 1921, TO JUNE, 1922, INCLUSIVE.

As it is exceptionally difficult to obtain representative costs of
clothing, you are earnestly requested to help the Government by going to
the greatest pains to give below the most accurate figures you possibly
can for the cost of the clothing (including boots and shoes) used up by
the household during the twelve months, July, 1921, to June, 1922,
inclusive. Costs of materials purchased for clothing (_e.g._, cotton for
children's dresses) should be included, any costs of making-up should be
added. Material purchased for making up articles for _sale_ should not
be entered. COSTS FOR REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS OF CLOTHING
(including boots and shoes) should be included. FOR ARTICLES WHICH
USUALLY LAST MORE THAN TWELVE MONTHS include below only the
proportionate cost for the twelve months. For instance, if an overcoat
is usually bought only once in _three_ years, enter below only
_one-third_ of the price; even if the overcoat was purchased eighteen
months ago, one-third of the cost should still be stated below. If the
exact amount of money spent during the twelve months on, for instance,
boys' stockings, cannot be remembered, but if it is known that a pair
lasts about _four months_, then include below _three times_ the price of
the last pair. The lists below are intended for your convenience; some
of the articles may not have been used, others more important than some
mentioned may have to be included with minor expenditure under "Other
Clothing."

  -----------------+------------------+------------------+------------------
    For  Women.    |For  Girls over 6.|   For  Men.      | For  Boys over 6.
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
              |    |             |    |             |    |             |
              |L s.|             |L s.|             |L s.|             |L  s.
              |    |             |    |             |    |             |
  Coats       |    |Coats        |    |Overcoats    |    |Overcoats    |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Hats        |    |Hats         |    |Suits        |    |Suits        |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Costumes    |    |Dresses      |    |Hats         |    |Caps         |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Blouses, &c.|    |Stockings    |    |Singlets     |    |Shirts       |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Skirts      |    |Combinations |    |Drawers      |    |Stockings    |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Stockings   |    |Stays        |    |Shirts       |    |Boots & Shoes|
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Combinations|    |Petticoats   |    |Socks        |    |Other        |
              |    |             |    |             |    |Clothing     |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Corsets     |    |Chemises     |    |Boots & Shoes|    |     Total   |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Underskirts |    |Boots & Shoes|    |Other        |    |    Per Boy  |
              |    |             |    |Clothing     |    |             |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Chemises    |    |Other        |    |             |    |For children |
              |    |Clothing     |    |             |    |  under 6.   |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Boots &     |    |             |    |             |    |             |L s.
  Shoes       |    |             |    |             |    |Total        |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----|childen's    |
  Other       |    |             |    |             |    |clothes,     |
  clothing    |    |             |    |             |    |boots, &c.   |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Total of    |    |Total of     |    |Total of     |    |Per Child    |
  above       |    |above        |    |above        |    |             |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  Per Woman   |    |Per Girl     |    |Per Man      |    |             |
  ------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----+-------------+----
  (I.) Total cost of Clothing, Boots and Shoes, for the whole household for
  12 months, L : :

OBSERVATIONS on costs of clothing (including Boots and
Shoes):--

Form B 6.--Page 4.

COST OF FUEL AND LIGHT FOR THE TWELVE MONTHS, JULY, 1921, TO JUNE, 1922,
inclusive.

As the cost of fuel and light is so different in winter and summer, will
you please state below, as accurately as possible, the expenditure on
fuel and light by the household during the past twelve months, and the
corresponding quantities of the items consumed.

  --------------------+---------+-----+--------------------+---------+-----
                      |Quantity.|L  s.|                    |Quantity.|L  s.
  --------------------+---------+-----+--------------------+---------+-----
  Coal                |  tons.  |     |Electricity for     |         |
                      |         |     | lighting           |         |
  --------------------+---------+-----+--------------------+---------+-----
  Turf                |  tons.  |     |Electricity for     |         |
                      |         |     | cooking, &c.       |         |
  --------------------+---------+-----+--------------------+---------+-----
  Firewood            |         |     |Candles             |      lb.|
  --------------------+---------+-----+--------------------+---------+-----
  Gas for lighting    |         |     |Paraffin Oil        |   galls.|
  --------------------+---------+-----+--------------------+---------+-----
  Gas for cooking, &c.|         |     |Other fuel and light|         |
  --------------------+---------+-----+--------------------+---------+-----

(J). Total expenditure on Fuel and Light for the twelve months ___L

Observations on fuel and light:--

General Observations:--

The figures and observations inserted on these four pages are reliable
to the best of my knowledge and belief.


  Signature of Teacher or Assistant______________Rank_____________

  Address of School_______________________________________________

                                            Date_____________1922.

Form B 7.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR DEALING WITH HOUSEHOLD BUDGET FORM B 6.

1. Select the household with one or more wage-earners for which you can
give the most reliable particulars. You can choose any type of household
you think fit, it does not matter whether it be a household even of
twenty or even of one, whether comfortably off or poorly off, with many
children or with few or no children, with several wage-earners or with
only one, with no men, with no women, with a visitor, with a servant,
etc., provided the household chosen is one of the wage-earning class.
This will ensure that taking the country as a whole the budgets will
represent every day conditions and avoid anything exceptional.

2. If you select a household with a plot or garden in which food is
produced, or one with fowl or pigs, etc., a note to this effect should
be made under "Observations."

3. Make no statement which would identify the household for which you
send an account; as a further precaution the individual returns will be
treated as strictly confidential--your figures will be used only in
totting them with figures in a large number of other budgets in order to
arrive at averages, etc.

4. If you live with a wage earner and give the budget of your own house,
do not state that the household is your own, but you will of course
place the word "teacher" on one line in the occupation column of the
first table (a teacher is not necessarily a national school teacher; in
any case the budget will be treated as strictly confidential).

5. If you can get accurate particulars for the days of the current week,
do so. If not, would you ask the householder to keep an account for the
seven days immediately following the receipt of this communication. Post
your budget so as to reach here by the 30th June, at latest. Spend all
the time you can spare to get the particulars as accurate as possible.

6. Under "Observations" on each page give any remarks that may be
helpful, especially explanations of unusually large or small figures.
The budgets will be closely scrutinised.

7. Do not stamp the envelope; it will come post free.

PAGE 1.

8. Give a line to each individual in the household from the oldest to
the youngest. In the summary table include as earners any who earn even
a few shillings. In case short time or only a few hours were worked this
should be stated under "Observations."

PAGE 2.

9. Get the quantity and cost of the items _consumed_ in the week. In
most cases it will be accurate enough to state _purchases_ during the
week, but where there has been an unusually large purchase of food,
etc., to last more than one week (or an unusually small purchase owing
to a large quantity being in hand at the beginning of the week) give the
quantity and cost of the week's consumption. You are, however,
definitely instructed to state the _purchases_ during the week of such
articles as "clothing, boots and shoes," "crockery, hardware," etc., and
of all such goods which are intended to last more than one week. If any
article (e.g., a suit of clothes, etc.) is purchased on an easy payment
system give the total cost--not the amount of the instalment. It is
anticipated that a small number of budgets will contain abnormally large
figures for "clothing, boots and shoes," etc., and in such cases
particulars should be given under the "Observations."

Loads, creels, etc., of turf should be converted to the equivalent
weight.

RENT.--The figure required is to include rates. If the
household owns the house, this should be stated and the equivalent rent
(including rates) should be given. If the household do not occupy a
whole house, this should be stated.

10. You will observe that the week's expenditure will not necessarily be
the same as the week's income.

PAGES 3 AND 4

11. The difficulty of giving as accurate figures on pages 3 and 4 as on
pages 1 and 2 is recognised, but you are earnestly requested to do the
very best you can to give reliable figures. Under "Observations" on the
last page give an indication of the degree of accuracy of your figures.

12. Do not send a budget at all unless you are satisfied that the
figures are reliable on the whole.




  PRINTED BY A. THOM & CO., LTD., DUBLIN.
                16459. 750. 9. 1922.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Report on the Cost of Living in Ireland, by
Ministry of Economic Affairs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT ON THE COST OF LIVING ***

***** This file should be named 37666.txt or 37666.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/6/6/37666/

Produced by Brian Foley, Barbara Kosker and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
