The Project Gutenberg EBook of Biblical Extracts, by Robert Cooper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Biblical Extracts
       Or, The Holy Scriptures Analyzed; Showing its
       Contradictions, Absurdities, and Immoralities

Author: Robert Cooper

Release Date: October 10, 2011 [EBook #37700]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIBLICAL EXTRACTS ***




Produced by David Widger





BIBLICAL EXTRACTS

Or

The Holy Scriptures Analyzed; Showing Its Contradictions, Absurdities,
And Immoralities.

By Robert Cooper.


"The Bible contained details of Atrocity at which human nature
shuddered. Part of the Holy Writings consisted of history and of
the narration of facts of a kind, that could not be mentioned in the
presence of a virtuous woman without exciting Horror. Should a woman be
permitted to read in her chamber what she would tremble to hear at her
domestic board? Should she con over and revolve what she would rather
die than utter?"--[The Right Hon R. L. Shiel, M.P.]

[FROM AN ENGLISH EDITION.]

CINCINNATI, O. 1860.




PREFACE.

The distinguishing characteristic of the present age, is the freedom
of inquiry and discussion which prevails upon all subjects; and most
particularly upon religious subjects. Intelligent and thinking men of
every class, are beginning to investigate and discuss questions of the
latter kind with considerable closeness, fearlessness and determination.
They are now resolved no longer to be hoodwinked with the veil of
prejudice, enchained with the trammels of superstition, or deluded
by the Hosted by or intimidated by the denunciations of a crafty and
intolerant priesthood; but to examine for themselves--"to prove all
things, and hold fast that which is good." And long have the priesthood
dreaded, and anxiously have they endeavored to procrastinate, the
arrival of this period. Long have they been apprehensive of the
development of intellect, and the enlightenment of mind. Long have they
feared the advent of that era which will hail the dawn of rationality
and advancement. And why? Because they knew full well, ignorant and
superstitious as many of them may appear, that when intellect and
rationality become the main-springs of society--when men begin
dispassionately and philosophically to examine into the mysteries and
workings of religion, that all their impositions will be discovered,
all their craftiness detected, and all their designs and practices fully
exposed. And, when once this is done, they are conscious that their
influence over the people, would immediately decline, and ultimately
fall. This has already in some measure proved true. For by the many bold
and daring innovations, which have been made by a Paine, a Voltaire,
a Mirabaud, a Volney, a Taylor, a Howitt, and an Owen, upon what is
arrogantly called the consecrated ground of religion, their influence
has materially declined, and has every prospect of still continuing
to do so. And this they know--_this they feel_. Hence, the terrific
thunderbolts of indignation and anathema which they have hurled at the
characters of those distinguished men. And hence, that malicious and
vindictive spirit which they have manifested toward all those who have
had the integrity or boldness to acknowledge themselves their disciples.
Hence, too, their present discreditable opposition to every educational,
political and social measure, which would conduce to the elevation and
improvement of society. But poor deluded mortals! how vain will they
find all their attempts to impede the mighty progress of truth--the
glorious advancement of thought and enlightenment! As well, indeed,
might they attempt to overthrow the pyramids of Egypt with the waft of
a feather, as to endeavor to demolish the temple of reason and intellect
which is now erecting in society; a temple which, while it will be a
glorious emblem of the progression of man, will be a lasting monument
of their final downfall! So considerably, in fact, is the power of the
priesthood already diminished, that they are now beginning to be looked
upon by the leading minds of all classes, with feelings of indifference
and compassion, rather than those of reverence and admiration.

It was the desire to endeavor to hasten the annihilation of the
influence of these men that induced me to publish the following work---a
work which, I trust, will serve somewhat to expose one of the greatest
impositions ever palmed upon mankind in any age, or in any country. I
allude, as may be supposed? to the Bible. Yes, the Christian priesthood
dare so outrageously to blaspheme the character of the Supreme Governor
of the Universe as to say, that book is his word; that he either wrote
or inspired men to write it. O shame, shame upon such blasphemy! What!
a munificent and omniscient Deity the author of a book replete with
more contradictions, containing more immoralities, and inculcating more
absurdities, than any book extant; contradictions, too, of the grossest
character, immoralities of the most pernicious tendency, and absurdities
of the most extravagant nature! Audacious impiety! Such an opinion
perhaps might be entertained in the dark ages of ignorance and
superstition, but in this the boasted era of reason and science, it must
be repudiated by all who dare openly and frankly avow their sentiments,
This may be deemed by those who have always read the Bible with their
eyes closed, or who are interested in teaching its doctrines and
mysteries, as very bold and presumptuous; but let the reader refer to
the extracts contained in this little book, (and which are only a few to
what may be adduced) and I am persuaded that he will at once acknowledge
that I am perfectly justified in making these statements, Indeed, so
extremely immoral and disgustingly obscene, are many passages in this
book, that I feel almost ashamed to publish them, and I am sure that any
one who has the least sense of delicacy or chastity, will blush to
read them. A book which had really originated from an Omniscient and
Munificent Divinity---a book which was the word, or organ of such
a being, must inculcate in every chapter and in every verse, the
strictest, the purest, and most exalted morality; must constantly exhort
mankind to every thing that was just, rational and charitable; and
must contain no language but that which was exquisitely beautiful
and elevating; and no expressions but those which were irresistibly
persuasive and convincing. But the Bible is a book, as may be seen on
a reference to these extracts, quite the reverse of this. We are
compelled, therefore, to conclude against the established opinions of
society, that it cannot be of Divine origin, and that consequently it
cannot be the word of God.

My humble, but decided opinion is, as I have previously observed, that
it was nothing more than a mere imposition; an imposition which was
palmed upon mankind by the Christian priesthood, for the purpose of
deluding or enslaving them; for the purpose of leading them from the
open and cheering paths of knowledge and improvement, into the nauseous
and gloomy quagmires of ignorance and superstition. The priesthood of
every sect of religion, in every country of the habitable globe, have
instituted and perpetuated certain impositions, by means of which they
have conceived they would be enabled to maintain and increase their
influence over the minds of their followers; so that thereby they might
still continue to luxuriate in ease and enjoyment, while their poor
deluded victims repined in ignorance and woe. And this is such an
imposition now established and supported by the Christian priesthood--an
imposition which is the corner stone of all their power, the fountain
of all their influence. It has been the tool which they have invariably
used in the accomplishment of their objects, however selfish; and in the
consummation of their machinations, however odious. Whenever they have
massacred, immolated, or incarcerated those who have dared to dispute
their vicegerency, or who have presumed to expose their doctrines, or
denounce their practices, they have quoted this imposition as their
authority. Whenever they have defended, or connived at the extortions of
the tyrants who have flattered or supported them, they have quoted this
imposition as their authority. Whenever they have opposed any system or
any measure, which they considered would be inimical to their interests,
or subversive of their power, they have quoted this imposition as their
authority. And the sooner this imposition is removed--the sooner the few
good seeds which it may contain are extracted from it, and the immense
mass of chaff is cast into oblivion, the better will it be for the
amelioration and progression of man. Perhaps the expression of such
opinions as these may be painful to the feelings of many excellent
individuals. For this I am truly sorry, as my object is, not to cause
pain or uneasiness, but to expose error and imposture. The time has now
arrived when truth must come out, when truth must be spoken, "without
mystery, mixture of error, or fear of man." Too long, indeed, has this
precious jewel been sacrificed to the paltry predilections of interest
and prejudice. Too long have we been tossed in the dark and unfathomable
gulf of bigotry and intolerance; we must now make our way to the
expansive and unruffled ocean of reason and inquiry, and there, free
from the storms of persecution, and the squalls of denunciation,
proceed, on our onward course, in security and felicity. R. C.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Passages inconsistent....

Immateriality.

Omnipresence.

Omnipotence.

Omniscience.

Munificence.

Impartiality.

Immutability.

Incomprehensibility..

Passages Immoral and Obscene

Passages Absurd and Unnatural.

Passages Contradictory..




IMMATERIALITY.

"God is a spirit." John iv. 24..

1. So God created man _in his own image_, in the _image of God_ created
he him; male and female-created he them. Gen. i. 27.

2. The _eyes_ of the lord are in everyplace, beholding the evil and the
good. Prov. xv. 3.

3. So shall my word be that goeth from out of my _mouth_; it shall not
return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. Isaiah lv. 11.

4. Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me for I am holier than
thou; these are a smoke in my _nose_, a fire that burneth all the day.
Isaiah lxv. 5.

5. Behold the name of the Lord cometh from afar burning with his anger
and the burden thereof is heavy: his _lips_ are full of indignation, and
his _tongue_ as a devouring fire. Isaiah xxxth, 27.

6. And when we cried unto the Lord God of our fathers, the Lord
_heard_ our voice and _looked_ on our affliction, and our labor and our
oppression. Deut. xxvi. 7.

7. Lord, bow down thine _ear_ and hear, open thine eyes and see; and
hear the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent him to reproach the
living God. 2 Kings xix. 16.

8. And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the
place of the _soles_ of my _feet_, where I will dwell in the midst of
the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of
Israel no more defile, neither they nor their kings, by their whoredom,
nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places. Ezek. xliii. 7.

9. And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand, and
with a strong _arm_ even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath. Jer.
xxi. 5.

10. The Lord hath made bare his _holy arm_, in the eyes of all the
nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our
God. Isaiah lii. 10.

11. When I consider the heavens, the work of thy _fingers_, the moon and
the stars which thou hast ordained. Psalms viii. 3.

12. And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with
him upon Mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written
with the _finger_ of God. Exod. xxxi. 18.

13. And I saw as the color of amber, as the appearance of fire round
about within it, from the appearance of his _loins_ even upward, and
from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the
appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about it. Ezek. i. 27.

14. And it repenteth the Lord that he had made man upon the earth, and
it grieved him at his _heart_, Gen. vi. 6.

15. My _bowels, my bowels_, I am pained at my very _heart_, my heart
maketh a noise in me: I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O
my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war. Jer. iv. 19.

16. And with the blast of thy _nostrils_ the waters were gathered
together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were
congealed in the heart of the sea. Exod. xv. 8.

17. And it shall come to pass while my glory passeth by, that I will put
thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my _hand_ while
I pass by. And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my _back
parts_, but my _face_ shall not be seen. Exod. xxxiii. 22, 23.

18. Then the Lord put forth his _hand_ and _touched_ my _mouth_, and the
Lord said unto me, Behold I have put my words in thy mouth. Jer. i. 9.

19. Behold the Lord's _hand_ is not shortened, that it cannot save;
neither his _ear_ heavy, that it cannot hear. Isaiah lix. 1.

20. Mine _hand_ also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my
_right hand_ hath spanned the heavens,--when I call unto them they stand
up together. Isaiah xlviii. 13.

21. I will also smite mine hands together, and I will cause my fury to
rest; I the Lord have said it. Ezekiel xxi. 17.

22. And the Lord _spake_ unto Moses, saying. Num. xxv. 16.

23. And God _spake_ unto Noah, saying. Genesis viii. 15.

24. And the Lord _spake_ unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon
the dry land. Jonah ii. 10.

25. And Abraham fell on his face; and God _talked_ with him saying.
Genesis xvii. 3.

26. And the Lord _smelled_ a sweet savour, and the Lord said in his
heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for
the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth, neither will I
again smite any more every thing living as I have done. Genesis viii.
21.

27. And the Lord formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life: and man became a living soul. Genesis
ii. 7.

28. By the _breath_ of God frost is given and the breadth of the waters
is straitened. Job xxxvii. 10.

29. And the Lord said unto him, this is the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying I will give it unto thy
seed; I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither. So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died therein the
land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord. And _he_ buried him in
a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor; but no man knoweth
of his sepulchre unto this day. Deut. xxxiv. 4-6.

Also notes 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 44; 46, 637 64, 65, 72, 114, 130, 133.




OMNIPRESENCE.

One God and father of all, who is, above all, through all, and in you
all. Ephesians iv. 6.

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: If I make my bed
in hell, behold thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead
me, and thy right hand shall hold me. Psalms cxxxix. 7---10.

30. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus; Who _being
in the form of God_ thought it not robbery to be equal with God. Phil.
ii. 5, 6.

31. And the Lord _came down_ upon Mount Sinai on the top of the mount;
and the Lord _called Moses up_ to the top of the mount, and Moses went
up. Exodus xix. 20.

32. And the Lord _came down in a cloud_, and spake onto him, and took of
the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and
it came to pass that when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied,
and did not cease. Numbers xL 25.

33. And the Lord _came down in the pillar of the cloud_, and _stood in
the door_ of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam, and they both
came forth, Numbers xii. 5.

34. For I know their works and their thoughts; it shall come that I will
gather all nations and tongues, and they shall _come and see my glory_.
Isaiah lvi. 18.

35. And _come and stand before me in this house_, which is called by
name, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations. Jeremiah
vii. 10.

36. And the Lord said unto Moses, _Come up to me in the mount_ and be
there; and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments
which I have written; that thou mayst teach them. Exod. xxiv. 12.

37. And he left on talking with him, and God _went up from Abraham_.
Genesis xvii. 22.

38.. And the Lord _came down to see the city and the tower_, which the
children of men builded. Gen. xi..5.

39. And the Holy Ghost _descended in a bodily shape like a dove_ upon
him, and a voice came from heaven which said, Thou art my beloved son;
in thee I am well pleased. Luke iii. 22.

40. For the Lord himself shall _descend_ from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in
Christ shall rise first. 1 Thessalonians iv. 16.

41. Thus saith the Lord, I am _returned_ unto Zion, and will dwell in
the midst of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth;
and the mountain of the Lord of hosts, the holy mountain. Zech. viii. 3.

42. And I _will dwell_ amongst the children of Israel, and will be their
God. Exodus xxix. 45.

43. And God _met_ Balaam, and he said unto him, I have prepared seven
altars, and 1 have offered upon each altar a bullock and a ram. Numbers
xxiii. 4.

44. For the Lord thy God _walketh in the midst of thy camp_, to deliver
thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy camp
be holy, that he sees no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.
Deuteronomy xxiii. 14.

45. They shall be carried to Babylon; and there shall they be until the
day that I _visit_ them, saith the Lord, then I will bring them up and
restore them to this place. Jeremiah xxvii. 22.

46. I saw the Lord _standing upon the altar_; and he said, Smite the
lintel of the door, that the posts may shake; and cut them in the head
all of them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword; he that
fleeth of them shall not flee away; and he that escapeth of them shall
not be delivered. Amos ix. 1.

47. God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is
Lord of heaven and earth _dwelleth_ not in temples made with hands. Acts
xvii. 21.

48. Moreover the word of the Lord _came to me_ saying. Jeremiah ii. 1.

49. God _came from Teman,_ and the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah. His
glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. Habakuk
iii. 3.

Also notes 1, 63, 66, 303.




OMNIPOTENCE.

But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is impossible,
but with God all things are possible. Matt. xix. 26.

50. And the Lord was with Judah, and he drave out the inhabitants of
the mountains, but _could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley_,
because they had chariots of iron. Judges i. 19.

51. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than man, and the _weakness_
of God is stronger than man. 1. Corinthians i. 25.

52. For thou shalt worship no other God; for the Lord whose name is
Jealous; is _a jealous God_. Exod. xxxiv. 14.

53. They have moved me to _jealousy_ with that which is not God; they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities; and I will move them to
jealousy with those who are not a people, I will provoke them to anger
with a foolish nation. Deut. xxxii. 21.

54. I am the Lord, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to
another _neither my praise_ to graven images. Isaiah xlii. 8.

55. _Turn, O backsliding children_, saith the Lord; _for I am married
unto you_; and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I
will bring you to Zion. Jeremiah iii. 14.

56. A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth, for the Lord hath
a _controversy_ with the nations; he will _plead_ with all flesh, he
will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord of hosts.
Jeremiah xxv. 31.

57. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel, for the Lord hath
a _controversy_ with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. Hosea iv. 1.

58. I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the
valley of Jehoshaphat; and will _plead_ with them there for my people,
and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations,
and parted my land. Joel iii. 2.

59. And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and behold,
it is a stiff-necked people. Now therefore, _let me alone_ that my wrath
may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make
of thee a great nation. Exod. xxxii. 9, 10.

60. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever; for
in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the _seventh_ day he
_rested_ and was _refreshed_. Exodus xxxi. 17.

61. For God created man to be immortal, and made him to be an image of
his own eternity. Nevertheless, _through the envy of the Devil_, came
_death_ into the world; and they that do hold of his side do find it.
Wisdom of Solomon ii. 23.

62. To wit, that God was in Christ _reconciling the world unto himself_,
not imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath committed unto us the
word of reconciliation. 2. Corinthians v. 19.

63. And Jacob was left alone; and there _wrestled_ a man with him until
the breaking of the day. And when he saw that he prevailed not against
him, he touched the hollow of his thigh: and the hollow of Jacob's thigh
was out of joint, as he _wrestled_ with him. And he said, Let me go for
the day breaketh; and he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me. And he said unto him, What is thy name! And he said, Jacob. And
he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a
prince _thou hast power with God_, and with men, and hath _prevailed_.
And Jacob asked him and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name: And he
said, Wherefore is it, that thou dost ask after my name? and he blessed
him there. And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, for _I have
seen God face to face_, and my life is preserved. Genesis xxxii. 24--30.




OMNISCIENCE.

And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord which knowest the hearts of all
men, show whether of these two thou hast chosen. Acts i. 24.

But God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit: for the spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. 1. Corinthians ii.
10.

No thought escapeth him, neither any word is hidden from him. Eccles.
xlii. 20.

O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knoweledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. Romans
xi. 33.

64. And the Lord called unto Adam, and said unto him, _Where art thou?_
Gen. iii. 9.

65. And he said. _Who told thee_ that thou wast naked? _Hast thou eaten
of the tree_ whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat? Gen.
iii. 11.

66. And God came unto Balaam, and said, _What men are these with thee?_
Numbers xxii. 9.

67. And the Lord said, _Who shall entice Ahab, king of Israel_, that he
may go up and fall at Ramothgilead?

2 Chronicles xviii. 19.

68. Thus saith the Lord, _What iniquity have your fathers found in me_,
that they have gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are
become vain? Jeremiah ii. 5.

69. Then saith the Lord unto Moses, Behold I will rain bread from heaven
for you, and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every
day, _that I may prove them whether they will walk in my law or no_.
Exodus xvi. 4.

70. When _therefore the Lord knew_ how the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made and baptised more disciples than John. John iv. 1.

71. Because _the foolishness_ of God is wiser than men, and the weakness
of God is stronger than men. 1 Corinthians i. 25.

72. Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another, and the
Lord hearkened and heard it, and _a book of remembrance_ was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. Malachi iii. 16.

73. And the Lord saith, Because they have forsaken my law which I set
before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein. But
have walked after the _imagination_ of their own _heart_, and after
Baalim, which their fathers taught them. Jeremiah ix. 13, 14.

74. And ye have done worse than your fathers; (for behold ye walk every
one after the imagination of his _evil heart_, that ye may not hearken
unto me.) Jeremiah xvi. 12.

75. Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall
speak unto thee, _receive into thine heart_, and hear with thine ears.
Ezek. iii. 10.

76. They shall walk after the Lord; he shall _roar like a lion_: when he
shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the west. Hosea xi. 10.

77. The Lord your God, which goeth before you, he shall _fight_ for you,
according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes. Deut. i.
30.

78. The great God that formed all things, both _rewardeth the fool_, and
rewardeth transgressors. Prov. xx vi. 10.

79. And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the
children of men builded. And the Lord said, behold the people is one,
and they have all one language; and this they begin to do. Go to, let
us go down, and there _confound their language, that they may not
understand one another's speech_. Genesis xi. 5. 6, 7.

Also notes, 63, 121, 144, 147, 152, 153.




MUNIFICENCE.

He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love. 1. John iv. 8.

The Lord is good, a strong-hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth
them that trust in him. Naham i. 7.

All the works of the Lord are good; and he will give every needful thing
in due season. Eccles. xxxix. 83.

80. For the Lord thy God is _a consuming fire_, even a jealous God.
Deut. iv. 24.

81. God is jealous and the Lord _revengeth_; the Lord revengeth and is
_furious_; the Lord will take _vengeance_ on his adversaries; and he
_reserveth wrath_ for his enemies. Nahum i. 2..

82. It is a _fearful thing_ to fall into the hands of the living God.
Hebrews x. 31.

83. The Lord is a _man of war_; the Lord is his name. Exodus xv. 3.

84. The Lord shall go forth as a _mighty man_; he shall stir up jealousy
like _a man of war_; he shall cry, yea roar; he shall prevail against
his enemies. Isaiah xl. 11. 13.

85. The Lord hath opened his _armory_, and hath brought forth the
_weapons of his indignation_; for this is the work of the Lord God of
hosts, in the land of the Chaldeans. Jeremiah 1. 25.

86. And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, _and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbor_. And the children of Levi did
according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day
about _three thousand men_. Exodus xxxii. 27, 28.

87. For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the _lowest
hell_ and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the
foundation of the mountains. I will heap _mischiefs_ upon them, I
will spend mine arrows upon them. They shall be burnt with anger, and
devoured with burning heat? and with bitter destruction. I will also
send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of
the dust. The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the
_young man_ and the _virgin_, the _suckling_ also, with the _man of gray
hairs_, Pent, xxxii. 22 to 25.

88. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them; for I the
Lord thy God am a _jealous God; visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation_ of them that
hate me. Exodus xx. 5.

89. The Lord hath made all things for himself: yea, _even the wicked for
the day of evil_. Prov. xvi. 4.

90. I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace _and create
evil_: I the Lord do all these things, Isaiah xiv. 7.

91. _And I will harden Pharaoh's heart_ and multiply my signs and my
wonders in the land of Egypt. But Pharaoh _shall not hearken unto you_,
that _I may lay my hand upon Egypt_, and bring forth mine _armies_ and
my people the children of Israel, out of the land of-Egypt, by great
judgments. Exodus vii. 3, 4.

92. And it came to pass that at midnight _the Lord smote all the
first-born of the land of Egypt_, from the first-born of Pharaoh that
sat on his throne, unto the first-born of the captive that was in the
dungeon and all the first-born of cattle. Exodus xii. 29.

93. And my _wrath_ shall wax hot, and _I will kill you with the sword_;
and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Exodus
xxii. 24.

94. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, _"Vex_ the Midianites and
_smite_ them." Numb. xxv. 17.

95. And the Lord's _anger_ was kindled the same time, and he sware
saying, "Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt from twenty
years old and upwards, shall see the land which I sware unto Abraham,
unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not _wholly_ followed me."
Num. xxxii. 10, 11.

96. Now go, and smite Amalek, _and utterly destroy all that they have_,
and spare them not; but slay both _man and woman, infant and suckling_,
ox and sheep, camel and ass. 1. Samuel xv. 3.

97. Wherefore they spake to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations
which thou hast removed, and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not
the manner of the God of the land; therefore he hath sent lions among
them, and behold, _they slay them_, because they know not the manner of
the God of the land. 2nd Kings xvii. 26.

98. For the _indignation_ of the Lord is upon all nations, and his
_fury_ upon all their armies; he hath _utterly destroyed_ them, he hath
delivered them to the slaughter. Isaiah xxxiv. 2.

99. Then the angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the camp of the
Assyrians _one hundred and fourscore and five thousand_; and when they
arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses. Isaiah
xxxvii. 36.

100. Therefore, thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon
them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry
unto me, _I will not hearken unto them_. Jer. xi. 11.

101. _The fierce anger_ of the Lord shall not return until he have
done it, and until he have performed the _intents of his heart_: in the
latter days ye shall consider it. Jeremiah xxx. 24.

102. For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning the houses
of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are
thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword, "They come to fight with
the Chaldeans, but it is to fill them with the dead bodies of men,
whom _I have slain in mine anger and in my fury_, and for all whose
wickedness I have hid my face from this city." Jer. xxxii. 4; 5.

103. And he hath _violently_ taken away his tabernacle as if it were of
a garden; he hath destroyed his places of the assembly; the Lord hath
caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath
despised _in the indignation of his anger_ the king and the _priest_.
Lament of Jer. ii. 6.

104. The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins
and my young men are fallen by the sword; _thou hast slain them in the
day of thine anger; thou hast killed, and not pitied_. Lam. of Jer, ii.
21.

105. Therefore _the fathers shall eat the sons_ in the midst of thee,
and the _sons shall eat their fathers_; and I will execute judgments in
thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds.
"Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord God, surely because thou hast
defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine
abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee, _neither shall mine
eye spare, neither will 1 have any pity._." Ezek. v. 10, 11.

106. So the Lord sent _pestilence_ upon Israel; and there fell of Israel
_seventy thousand men_. 1st. Chron. xxi. 14.

107. He that is far off shall die of the _pestilence_, and he that is
near shall fall by the _sword,_ and he that remaineth and is besieged
shall die by the _famine_; thus will I accomplish my _fury_ upon them.
Ezek. vi. 12.

108. Samaria shall become desolate, for she hath rebelled against her
God; they shall fall by the sword; _their infants shall be dashed in
pieces, and their women with child shall be ript up._ Hosea xiii. 16.

Also notes 79, 56, 119, 121, 126, 143, 149.




IMPARTIALITY.

Then Peter opened his mouth and said, Of a truth I perceive that _God is
no respecter of persons_. Acts x.

For there is _no respect of persons with God_. Romans ii. 11.

109. Therefore I endure all things for the _elect's_ sakes, that they
may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal
glory. 2 Tim. ii. 10.

110. For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God; the Lord thy God
hath _chosen_ thee, to be a _special people unto himself_ above all the
people that are upon the face of the earth. Deut. vii. 6.

111. And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be _their_
God. Exodus xxix, 45.

112. I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the
valley of Jehoshaphat, and will _plead_ with them there for _my_
people, and for _my heritage_ Israel, whom they have scattered among the
nations, and parted my land. Joel iii. 2.

113. Behold, I have done according to thy words; lo, I have given thee
a wise and understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before
thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee. 1 Kings iii.
12.

114. I have loved you, saith the Lord; yet ye say, Wherein hast thou
loved us! Was not Esau Jacob's brother, saith the Lord; yet I _loved_
Jacob. And I _hated_ Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage
waste, for the dragons of the wilderness. Malachi i, 2, 3.

115. As it is written, Jacob have I _loved_, but Esau have I _hated_.
Romans ix. 13.

116. Now God had brought Daniel into _favor_ and _tender love_ with the
prince of the eunuchs. Dan. i. 9.

117. For God loveth _none but him that dweleth with wisdom_. Wisdom of
Solomon vii. 28.

118. The Lord maketh _poor_ and maketh _rich_, he bringeth low, and
lifteth up. 1 Sam. ii. 7.

119. The rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is the _maker of them
all_. Prov. xxii. 2.

120. For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy _on whom 1 will have
mercy_, and I will have compassion on whom I _will_ have compassion.
Romans ix. 15.

Also notes 91 and 132.




IMMUTABILITY.

For I am the Lord, _I change not_; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed. Malachi iii. 6.

Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down
from the father of lights, _with whom is no variableness neither shadow
of turning_. James i. 17.

God is not a man, that he should lie, _neither the son of man, that
he should repent_; hath he said, _and shall he not do it?_ or hath he
spoken, _and shall he not make it good?_ Numbers xxiii. 19.

121. And the Lord said, I will destroy man, whom I have created, from
the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping, things,
and the fowls of the air: for it _repenteth_ me that I have made them.
Genesis vi. 7.

122. And the Lord _repented_ of the evil which he had thought to do unto
his people. Exodus xxxii. 14.

123 It _repenteth_ me that I have set up Saul to be king; for he is
turned back from following me, and hath not performed my commandments,
and it grieved Samuel, and he cried unto the Lord all night. 1 Samuel
xv. 11.

124. And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy
it, the Lord _repented_ him of the evil, and said to the angel that
destroyed the people, it is enough; stay now thine hand. And the angel
of the Lord was by the threshing-place of Araunah the Jebusite. 2 Sam.
xxiv. 16.

125. If that nation against whom I have pronounced turn from their evil.
I will _repent_ of the evil that I thought to do unto them. If it do
evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will _repent of the
good_ wherewith I said I would benefit them. Jer. xviii. 8; 10.

126. For thus saith the Lord, like as I have brought all this great
_evil_ upon this people, so will I bring upon them the _good_ which I
have promised them. Jeremiah xxxii. 42.

127. And rend your heart and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God; for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and _repenteth_ him of the evil. Joel ii. 13.

128. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and
God _repented of the evil_ that he had said he would do unto them; and
he did it not. Jonah iii. 10.

129. Thou hast forsaken me, saith the Lord, thou art gone backward;
therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; _I
am weary with repenting_. Jeremiah xv. 6.

Also notes 14, 26 and 167.




INCOMPREHENSIBILITY.

Who is the image of the _invisible_ God, the first born of every
creature. Coloss. i. W.

O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! _how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out_. Romans
xi. 33.

For _my thoughts_ are not _your thoughts_, neither are _your ways my
ways_ saith the Lord. Isaiah iv. 8.

130. And the Lord spake unto Moses _face to face, as a man speaketh unto
his friend_. Exodus xxxiii. 11.

131. Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and _seventy_ of the
elders of Israel. _And they saw the God of Israel_; and there was under
his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire-stone, and as it were the
body of heaven in his clearness. Exodus xxiv. 9. 10.

132. And Jacob called the name of the place. Peniel; _for I have seen
God face to face_, and my life is preserved. Genesis xxxii. 30.

133. _I saw the Lord_ standing upon the altar. Amos ix. 1.

134. And Jesus when he was baptised went up straightway out of the
water; and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and _he saw the spirit
of God descending like a dove_, and lighting upon him. Mat. iii. 16.

135 And the Lord _appeared_ unto him (Isaac,) and said, Go not down into
Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of. Gen. xxvi. 2.

138. And the Lord _appeared_ in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud;
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle. Deut.
xxxi. 15.

137. Seek ye the Lord while he may be _found_, call ye upon him while he
is near. Isaiah lv. 6.

138. And ye shall seek me, and _find_ me, when ye shall search for me
with all your heart. Jer. xxix. 13.

139. Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of God; and every one
that loveth is born of God, and _knoweth_ God. 1 John iv. 7.

140. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that _God is light_, and in him is _no darkness_ at all. 1
John i. 5.

Also notes 1, 17, 34, 80, 83.




PASSAGES IMMORAL AND OBSCENE.




GOD.

141. And Jacob begat Joseph the _husband_ of Mary, of whom was born
Jesus, who is called Christ. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this
_wise:_ When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came
together, she was _found with child of the Holy Ghost_. Then Joseph
her _husband_ being a just man, and not willing to make her a public
example, was minded to put her away privily. But while he thought on
these things, behold the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream,
saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
_wife_: for that which is conceived in her _is of the Holy Ghost_. Mat.
i. 16--20.

[Here God is represented as committing --------.]

142. And I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians;
and it shall come to pass, that when ye go ye shall not go empty: But
every woman shall borrow of her neighbor, and of her that sojourneth
in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment; and
ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shall
spoil the Egyptians. Exodus iii. 21, 22.

[Here he is represented as commanding the Israelites to rob the
Egyptians, under the _pretence of borrowing of them_; thus encouraging
them to steal.]

143. So Jehu _slew all that remained of the house of Ahab_ in Jezreel,
and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left
him none remaining. And the Lord said unto Jehu, Because thou hast done
well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto
the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, _thy children
of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel_. 2 Kings x.
11--30.

[Here he is represented not only as pronouncing the most heinous of
all crimes, _murder_, to be _right,_ but actually rewarding Jehu for
committing it.]

144. And the Lord said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite; for I have
provided me a king among his sons. And Samuel said, how can I go? If
Saul hear me he will kill me. And the Lord said, take an heifer with
thee, _and say, I am come to sacrifice to the Lord_. 1. Samuel xvi. 1,2.

[Here he is represented as commanding Samuel to act the most _consummate
hypocrite_.]

145. Wherefore 1 gave them also statutes _that were not good_, and
judgments _whereby they should not live_. Ezek. xx. 25.

146. And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish;
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved. And for this cause, _God shall send them strong delusion_, that
they should _believe a lie_. 2. Thes. ii. 10. 11.

147. And the Lord said, Who shall entice Ahab, king of Israel, that he
may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one spake, saying after this
manner, and another saying after that manner. Then there came out a
spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said I will entice him. And
the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go out and be a
_lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets_. And the Lord said, Thou
shalt entice him, and thou shalt also prevail; go out _and do even so_.
2 Chron. xviii. 19, 20, 21.

148. And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, _I the
Lord God have deceived that prophet_, and I will stretch out my hand
upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel. Ezek.
xiv. 9.

149. And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the
dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up,
and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more,
_till the thousand years should be fulfilled_; and after that he must be
loosed a little season. And _shall go out to deceive the nations_ which
are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them
together to battle, the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. Kevel.
xx. 1, 2, 3, 8..

150. He is a merchant, the balances of _deceit_ are in his hand _he
loveth to oppress_. Hosea xii. 7.

151. The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea; and the Lord
said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee _a wife of whoredoms and children of
whoredoms_; for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from
the Lord. Hosea i. 2.

152. And I will _make drunk_ her princes, and her wise men, her captains
and her rulers, and her mighty men; and they shall sleep a perpetual
sleep, and not wake, saith the king, whose name is the Lord of hosts.
Jer. li. 57.

153. Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts,
the God of Israel, _Drink ye and be drunken, and spue, and fall,
and rise no more_, because of the sword which I will send among you,
Jeremiah xxv. 27.




MOSES.

154. And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he
went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens; and he spied an
Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren. And he looked this
way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, _he slew the
Egyptian_, and hid him in the sand. Exodus ii. 11. 12.

155. Now therefore (says Moses) kill every male among the little ones,
and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him. But all the
women children, that have not known man by lying with him, _keep alive
for yourselves_. Numbers xxxi. 17, 18.

156. And Moses spake unto the people, saying, _Arm some of yourselves
unto the war_, and let them go against the Midianites, and _avenge_
the Lord of Midian. And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every
tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war,
_with the holy instruments_, and the trumpets to blow in his hand. Num.
xxxi. 3--6.




DAVID.

And it came to pass in an evening tide, that David arose from off his
bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house, and from the roof he
saw a young woman washing herself, and the woman was very beautiful to
look upon. And David sent and enquired after the woman: and one said,
Is not this Bathsheba the daughter of Eliam, _the wife of Uriah the
Hittite_. And David sent messengers and took her; and she came in unto
him _and he lay with her_, (for she was purified from her uncleanness,)
and she returned unto her house. And the woman conceived and sent
and told David, and said, _I am with child_. And David sent to Jacob,
saying. Send me Uriah the Hittite, And Joab sent Uriah to David. 2 Sam.
xi. 2 to 6.

[The story then proceeds to represent David, _the man after God's own
heart_, as endeavoring to cajole the poor cuckold Uriah. But he returns
to the war without visiting his wife, and David sends a letter with him
to Joab, in which letter he orders Joab to place Uriah in the front of
the battle, _and then leave him so that he might he killed_. Joab obeys
his orders Uriah is slaughtered, and he then takes Bathsheba his wife
and marries her in order that he might continue to gratify his lust upon
her!]

158. And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of
Achish the king of Gath. And he changed his behavior before them, _and
feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the
gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard_. 1 Sam. xxi. 12, 13.

159. Wherefore David arose, and went, he and his men, and slew of the
Philistines two hundred men; and _David brought their foreskins_, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, _that he might be the king's
son-in-law_; and Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife. 1 Samuel
xviii. 27.

160. Now King David was old, and stricken in years, and they covered him
with clothes, but he gat no heat. Wherefore his servants said unto him,
Let there be sought for my lord the king, _a young virgin, and let her
stand before the king, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy
bosom_, that my lord the king may get heat. So they sought for a
fair damsel throughout all the coasts of Israel, and found Abishag a
Shunamite, and brought her to the king. And the damsel was very fair,
_and cherished the king, and ministered to him_, but the king _knew her
not_. 1 King i. 1 to 4.

161. And David gathered all the people together and went to Rabbah, and
fought against it, and took it. And he took their king's crown from off
his head, (the weight whereof was a talent of gold, with the precious
stones.) and it was set on David's head, and he brought forth the spoil
of the city in great abundance. And he brought forth the people that
were therein, _and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and
under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brick-kiln; and thus
did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon_. So David and all
the people returned unto Jerusalem. 2 Samuel xii. 29 to 31.

162. And behold (says David in his _dying moments_ to his son Solomon,)
thou hast with thee Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, of Bahurim,
which cursed me with a grievous curse, in the day when I went to
Mahanaim; but he came down to meet me at Jordan, _and I sware to him
by the Lord, saying, I will not put thee to death with the sword_. Now
therefore hold him not guiltless; for thou art a wise man, and knowest
what thou oughtest to do unto him; _but his hoary head bring thou down
to the grave with blood_. 1 Kings ii. 8, 9.




SOLOMON.

193. And he had _seven hundred wives_ princesses, and _three hundred
concubines_; and his wives turned away his heart. 1 Kings xi. 3.

164. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O princess daughter! _the
joints of thy thighs are like jewels_, the work of the hands of a
cunning workman. Thy navel is like a round goblet which wanteth not
liquor; thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies. Thy
two breasts are like two young roes that are twins. Thy neck is a tower
of ivory, thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon, by the gate of
Bath-rabbim; thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looketh toward
Damascus. Solomon's Songs vii. 1 to 4.




JOSHUA.

165, And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and
woman, young and old, and ox and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the
sword. But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the
country, _Go into the harlot's house and bring out thence the woman and
all that she hath_, as ye sware unto her. Joshua vi. 21, 22.

16.6. And it was told Joshua, saying, the five kings are found hid in a
cave at Makkedah. And Joshua said, Roll great stones by the mouth of the
cave, and set men by it for to keep them. And stay you not, but pursue
after your enemies, _and smite the hindmost of them, suffer them not to
enter into their cities_; for the Lord your God hath delivered them into
your hand. Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
these five kings unto me out of the cave. And afterwards Joshua _smote
them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees_; and they were
hanging upon the trees until the evening. Joshua x. 17 to 26.




EZEKIEL.

167. Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin
from time to time shalt thou drink. And thou shalt eat it as barley
cakes _and thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out of man_, in
their sight. And the Lord said, even thus shall the children of Israel
eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them.
Then said I, ah Lord God, behold my soul hath not been polluted; for
from my youth up even till now, have I not eaten of that which dieth of
itself, or is torn in pieces, neither came there abominable flesh into
my mouth. Then said he unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for
man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith. Ezekiel iv. 11
to 15.




ABRAHAM.

168. And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and
dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar. And Abraham
said of Sarah, his wife, _She is my sister_; and Abimelech king of Gerar
sent and took Sarah. But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and
said unto him. Behold thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou
hast taken; for she is _a man's wife_. But Abimelech had not come near
her; and he said, Lord; wilt thou slay also a righteous nation? Said he
not unto me, _She is my sister?_ and she, even she herself said, _He is
my brother_; in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have
I done this. Genesis xx. 1 to 5.

169. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, _which she had borne
unto Abraham_, mocking. Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this
bondwoman, and her son; for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir
with my son, even with Isaac. And Abraham rose up early in the morning
_and took bread and a bottle of water_, and gave it unto Hagar (putting
it on her shoulder) and the child? and sent her away, and she departed,
_and wandered in the wilderness of Beer-sheba_, Genesis xxi. 9, 10, 14.




ISAAC.

170. And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, _She
is my sister_? for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest, said he, the
men of the place should kill me for Rebekah, because she was fair to
look upon. And it came to pass when he had been there a long time, that
Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw and
behold, _Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife_. And Abimelech called
Isaac, and said, Behold of a surety she is thy wife; and how saidst
thou, _She is my sister?_ And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, lest
I die for her. Genesis xxvi. 7, 8, 9.




NOAH.

171. And he drank of the wine, and was drunken, _and he was uncovered
within his tent_. And Ham the father of Canaan _saw the nakedness of his
father_, and told his two brethren without. Genesis ix. 21, 22.




SAMSON.

172. Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an _harlot and went in unto
her_. Judges xvi. 1. judah.

173. And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his
brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was
Shuah; _and he took her and went in unto her_. And she conceived and
bare a son; and he called his name Er. Gen. xxxviii. 1 to 3.

174. And Judah said unto Onan, _Go in unto thy brother's wife_, and
marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother. And Onan knew that the
seed should not be his, and it came to pass when he went in unto his
brother's wife, _that he spilled it on the ground_, lest that he should
give seed unto his brother. Genesis xxxviii. 8, 9.

175. And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father-in-law goeth up to
Timnath, to shear his sheep. And she put her widow's garments off from
her, and covered her with a veil, and wrapped herself, and sat in an
open place which is by the way to Timnath, for she saw that Shelah was
grown, and she was not given unto him to wife. When Judah saw her, he
thought her to be an harlot, because she had covered her face. And he
turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, _let me come
in unto thee;_ (for he knew not that she was his daughter-in-law;) and
she said, _What wilt thou give me, that thou mayst come in unto me?_ And
he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock; and she said, Wilt thou
give me a pledge till thou send it. And he said, What pledge shall I
give thee! and she said, Thy signet and thy bracelets, and thy staff
that is in thine hand: and he gave it her, _and came in to her, and she
conceived by him_. And she arose and went away, and laid by her veil
from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood. And Judah sent the
kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive his pledge from
the woman's hand, but he found her not. Then he asked the men of that
place saying, Where is the harlot that was openly by the way-side? and
they said, there was no harlot in this place. And he returned to Judah,
and said I cannot find her; and also the men of the place said, That
there was no harlot in this place. And Judah said, let her take it to
her lest we be shamed; behold I sent this kid, and thou hast not found
her. And it came to pass about three months after, and it was told Judah
say-. ing, Tamar thy daughter-in-law _hath played the harlot_; and also
behold, _she is with child by whoredom_; and Judah said, Bring her forth
_and let her be burnt_. When she was brought forth, she sent to her
father-in-law saying, By the man whose these are am I with child;
and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet and
bracelets and staff. And Judah acknowledged them, and said, _She hath
been more righteous than I_; because that I gave her not to She-lah my
son; and he knew her again no more. And it came to pass in the time of
her travail, that behold _twins were in her womb_. And it came to pass
when she travailed, _that the one put out his hand_; and the midwife
took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, _This came out
first_. And it came to pass as he drew back his hand, _and behold his
brother came out_; and she said, How hast thou broken forth? this breach
be upon thee; therefore his name was called Pharez. And afterwards came
out his brother that had the scarlet thread upon his hand; and his name
was called Zarah. Genesis xxxviii. 13 to 30.




LOT.

176. And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two
daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar; and he dwelt in
a cave, he and his two daughters. And the first-born said unto the
younger, Our father is old, _and there is not a man in the earth to
come in unto us_ after the manner of all the earth. Come let us make our
father drink wine, _and we will lie with him_. that we may preserve seed
of our father. And they made their father drink wine that night; and the
first-born _went in and lay with her father_; and he perceived not when
she lay down nor when she arose. And it came to pass on the morrow, that
the first-born said unto the younger, Behold I lay yesterday with my
father; let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in and
lie with him, that we may preserve seed of my father. And they made
their father drink wine that night also; and the younger arose, and lay
with him, and he perceived not when she lay down nor when she arose.
_Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their FATHER_. Gen.
xix. 30 to 36.




RUTH.

177. Wash thyself therefore and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
thee, and get thee down to the floor; but make not thyself known unto
the man; until he shall have done eating and drinking. And it shall be
when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the place where he shall lie?
_and thou shalt go in and uncover his feet, and lay thee down; and he
will tell thee what thou shalt do_. And when Boaz had eaten and drunk,
and his heart was merry; he went to lie down at the end of the heap of
corn: _and she came softly and uncovered his feet and laid her down_.
And it came to pass at midnight that the man was afraid? and turned
himself, and behold a woman lay at his feet. And he said, Who art thou?
and she answered, I am Ruth, thine handmaiden; _spread therefore thy
shirt over thine handmaiden, for thou art a near kinsman_. And he said,
Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter: for thou hast showed more
kindness _in the latter end than at the beginning_, inasmuch as thou
followest not young men, whether poor or rich: and now my daughter, fear
not, _1 will do thee all that thou requirest,_ for all the city of my
people doth know that thou art a _virtuous_ woman. Ruth iii. 3 to 11.




RACHEL.

178. And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied
her sister, and said unto Jacob. Give me children, or else I die.. And
Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel; and he said, Am I in God's
stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb: And she said,
Behold my maid Bilhah, _go in into her; and she shall bare upon my
knees, that I may also have children by her_. And she gave him Bilhah
her handmaid to wife and Jacob _went in unto her_. And Bilhah conceived,
and bare Jacob a son. Genesis xxx. 1 to 5.

179. And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into
the two maid servants' tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of
Leah's tent, and entered into Baehel's tent. _Now Rachel had taken the
images_, and put them into the camel's furniture, _and sat upon them_,
and Laban searched all the tent but found them not. And she said to her
father, Let it not displease my lord, that I cannot rise up before thee:
_for the custom of women is upon me_: and he searched, but found not the
images. Gen, xxxi. 33 to 35.




POTIPHAR'S WIFE.

180. And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast
her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, _Lie with me_. But he refused, and
said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what is with
me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hands.
There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back
any thing from me, but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I
do this great wickedness, and sin against God? And it came to pass as
she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her to lay
by her, or be with her. _And it came to pass about this time that Joseph
went into her house to do his business: and there was none of the men of
the house there within. And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie
with me and he left his garment in her hand, and fled and got him out._
And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her
hand, and was fled forth, that she called unto the men of her house, and
spake unto them, saying, _See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us
to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud
voice._

She then told the same unblushing falsehood to Pharaoh her husband as
soon as he returned home; when he becomes indignant, and orders poor
Joseph to be cast into prison. Gen. xxxix. 7 to 20.




REUBEN.

181. And it came to pass when Israel dwelt in that land, _that Reuben
went and lay with Bilhah_, his father's concubine, and Israel heard it.
Now the sons of Jacob were twelve. Gen. xxxv. 22.

182. Reuben (says Jacob) thou art my first-born, my might, and the
beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, the excellency of
power. Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel, _because thou wentest
up to thy father's bed_; then defiledst thou it; he went up to my couch.
Gen. xlix. 3; 4.




AMNON.

183. And Amnon (David's eldest son), said unto Tamar, Bring the meat
into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand: and Tamar took the
cakes which she had made and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her
brother. And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of
her _and said unto her, Come, lie with me, my sister_. And she answered
him, Nay, my brother, do not force me, for no such thing ought to be
done in Israel; do not thou this folly. And I, whither shall I cause
my shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in
Israel; now, therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king: _for he will
not withhold me from thee_, Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice;
but? being stronger than she, _forced her and lay with her_, 2 Samuel
xiii. 10 to 14.




ABSALOM.

184 And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, [another of David's sons] Go in
unto thy father's concubines, which he hath left to keep the house, and
all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father; then shall
the hands of all that are with thee be strong. So they spread Absalom a
tent upon the top of the house, _and Absalom went in unto his father's
concubines in the sight of all Israel._ 2 Samuel xvi. 21, 22.




SHECHEM.

185. And Dinah, the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went
out to see the daughters of the land: and when Shechem, the son of Hamor
the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, _he took her and lay with
her, and defiled her_. Gen, xxxiv. 1, 2.




CHRIST.

186. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and
wife and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life
also, _he cannot be my disciple_. Luke xiv. 26.

187. _I am come to send fire on the earth_, and what will I if it be
already kindled. Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? _I
tell you nay; but rather division._ Luke xii. 49; 51.

188. Think not that I come to send peace on earth; _I come not to send
peace, but a sword_. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law. Matt. x. 34, 35.

189. Then said he unto them, But now he that hath a purse, let him take
it, and likewise his scrip; and he that hath no sword, _let him sell his
garment and buy one_. Luke xxii. 36.

190. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them bring hither, _and slay them before me_, Luke xix. 27.

191. He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be _damned._ Mark xvi. 16.

192. And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery of
the kingdom of God, but unto them that are without, all these things are
done in _parables_; That seeing they may see, _and not perceive_, and
hearing they may hear, _and not understand; lest at any time they should
be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them_. Mark iv. 11, 12.

193. And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage, and Bethany,
at the Mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith
unto them, Go your way into the village over against you; and as soon
as ye enter into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never mam sat;
_loose him and bring him_; and if any man say unto you, Why do you this?
_Say ye that the Lord hath need of him_; and straightway he will send
him hither. Mark xi. 1 to 3.

194. And it came to pass that he went through the corn-fields on the
Sabbath-day, and his disciples began as they went, _to pluck the ears
of corn_. And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, _why do they on the
Sabbath-day that which is not lawful?_ And he said unto them, have ye
never read what David did when he had need, and was a hungered, he and
they that were with him? How he went into the house of God in the days
of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the show-bread, which is not
lawful to eat, but for the priests, and gave also to them which were
with him! Mark ii. 23 to 26.

195. Now there was there, nigh unto the mountain, a great herd of swine
feeding. And all the devils besought him saying, Send us into the swine,
that we may enter into them. _And forthwith Jesus gave them leave_, and
the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine; and the herd
ran violently down a steep place into the sea (they were about _two
thousand_) and were choked in the sea. Mark v. 11, 12.

196. And on the morrow, when they were come from Bethany, he was hungry,
and seeing a fig-tree afar off, having leaves, he came, if haply he
might find any thing thereon; and when he came to it he found nothing
but leaves; _for the time of figs was not yet_. And Jesus answered
and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever: and his
disciples heard it. And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw
the fig-tree dried up from the roots; and Peter calling to remembrance,
saith unto him, Master, _behold the fig-tree which thou cursedest is
withered away_. Mark xi. 12? 13, 14, 20, 21.

[In the four preceding notes Christ is represented, both as taking or
destroying other people's property himself, as well as allowing others
to do it, _which of course is eminently moral_. ]




PETER.

197. Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high
priest's servant, _and cut off his right ear_. The servant's name was
Malchus. John xviii. 10.

198. Then took they him (Christ) and led him and brought him into the
high priest's house, and Peter followed afar off. And when they had
kindled a fire in the midst of the hall and were sat down together,
Peter sat down among them. But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by
the fire, and earnestly looked upon him, and said, this man was also
with him. _And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not_. And after
a little while another saw him, and said, thou art also of them. And
Peter said, _Man, I am not_. Luke xxii. 54 to 58.




PAUL.

199. _I robbed other churches_, taking wages of them, to do ye service.
2 Cor. xi. 8.

200. For if the truth of God hath more abounded, _through my LIE unto
his glory_, why yet am I also judged as a sinner? Romans iii. 7.

201. But if any man be ignorant, _let him be ignorant_. 1 Cor. xiv. 38.

202. Beware lest any man _spoil you through philosophy_ and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ. Col. ii. 8.

203. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
gospel unto you, than ye have received, _let him be accursed_. Gal. i.
9.

204. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, _let him be anathema
maranatha_. 1 Cor. xvi. 22.

205 A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition,
_reject_. Titus iii. 10.

206. But Elymas the sorcerer, (for so his name by interpretation)
_withstood them_, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith. Then
Saul (who also is called Paul) filled with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes
on him and said, O full of all subtlety and all mischief, thou child
of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord? And now behold, _the hand of the
Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind,_ not seeing the sun for a
season. And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness: and he
went about seeking some to lead him by the hand. Acts xiii. 8 to 11.




BARNABAS AND PAUL.

207. And some days after, Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and
visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the
Lord, and see how they do. And Barnabas determined to take with them
John, whose surname was Mark. But Paul thought not good to take him with
them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them,
to the work. _And the contention was so sharp between them that they
departed asunder one from another_; and so Barnabas took Mark,
and sailed into Cyprus. And Paul chose Silas, and departed, being
recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God. Acts xv. 36 to 40.




JOHN.

208. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, _receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed._ 2 John i. 10.




GENERAL.

209. So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and
the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, _even with
their buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt_. Isaiah xx. 4.

210. And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that she
denied the land, _and committed adultery with stones and stocks_. Jer.
iii. 9.

211. Come down and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit
on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou
shalt no more be called tender and delicate. Take the mill-stones and
grind meal, uncover thy locks, _make-bare thy leg, uncover the thigh,_
pass over the rivers. _Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame
shall be seen_; I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a
man. Isaiah xlvii. 1, 2, 3.

212. Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child?
Wherefore do I see _every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in
travail_, and all faces are turned into paleness % Jer. xxx. 6.

213. Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her
delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs, so have we been in
thy sight, O Lord. Isaiah xxvi. 17.

214. Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones;
strip ye and make ye bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. Isaiah
xxxii. 11.

215. Thus saith the Lord God, Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup
deep and large; thou shalt be laughed to scorn, and had in derision; it
containeth much. Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow,
with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister
Samaria. Ezek. xxiii. 32, 33.

216 He that is unjust, _let him be unjust still_; and he which is
filthy, _let him be filthy still_; and he that is righteous, let him
be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still. Bevel,
xxii..11.

217. And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall
wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even. And every
garment and every skin whereon is the seed of copulation, shall be
washed with water, and be unclean until the even. The woman also with
whom man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe
themselves in water, and be unclean until the even. And if any man lie
with her at all, and her flowers be upon him, he shall be unclean seven
days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean. And if a woman
have an issue of her blood many days out of the time of her separation,
or if it run beyond the time of her separation; all the days of the
issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation; she
shall be unclean. This is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him
whose seed goeth from him, and is defiled therewith; and of her that is
sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man and of
the woman, and of him that lieth with her which is unclean. Leviticus
xv. 16, 17, 18, 24, 25, 32 33.

218. Then shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring
forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity, unto the elders of the city
in the gate. But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be
not found for the damsel; then they shall bring out the damsel to the
door of her father's house, and the men of the city shall stone her with
stones that she die; because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play
the whore in her father's house; so shalt thou put evil away from among
you. Deut. xxii. 15, 20, 21.

219. Then shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the
elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, _and spit in his face_,
and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will
not build up his brother's house. Deut. xxv. 9.

220 For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections; _for even
their women did change the natural use into that which is against
nature_; and likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the
women, _burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working
that which is unseemly_, and receiving in themselves that recompense of
their error which was meet. Romans i. 26, 27.

221. Thus saith the Lord, Behold I will raise up evil against thee out
of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and
give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the
sight of this Sun. 2 Samuel xii. 11.

222. And there appeared a great wonder _in heaven_, a woman clothed
with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelve stars. And she _being with child, cried travailing in birth, and
pained to be delivered_. And there appeared another wonder in heaven,
and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and
seven crowns upon his heads. _And his tail drew the third part of the
stars of heaven,_ and did cast them to the earth; _and the dragon stood
before the woman which was ready to be delivered,_ for to devour her
child as soon as it was born. _And she brought forth a man-child_, who
was to rule all nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up
unto God, and to his throne. Eev. xii. 1 to 5.

223. And there was war _in heaven_; Michael and his angels fought
against the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels. Eev. xii. 7.

224. And he was clothed with a vesture _dipped in blood;_ and his
name is called, The Word of God. _And the armies which were in heaven_
followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.
Eev. xix. 13, 14.




PASSAGES ABSURD AND UNNATURAL.

225. Then spake Joshua to the Lord, in the day when the Lord delivered
up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight
of Israel, _Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon,_ and thou moon in the
valley of Ajalon. _And the sun stood still_, and the moon stayed,
until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this
written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of
heaven, and hastened not to go down about a whole day. Joshua x. 12, 13.

226. _The sun and moon stood still_ in their habitations; at the light
of thine arrows _they went_, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.
Habbakukiii. 11.

227. And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the Lord caused
the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, _and made the
sea dry land_, and the waters were divided. And the children of Israel
went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground; and the _waters were
a wall_ unto them on their right hand, and on their left. Exodus xiv.
21, 22. .

228. And Moses answered and said. But behold, they will not believe me,
nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say, the Lord hath not appeared
unto thee. And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand? and
he said, _A rod._ And he said, Cast it on the ground: _and it became a
serpent_; and Moses fled from before it. And the Lord said unto Moses,
Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail: and he put forth his hand
and caught it, _and it became a rod in his hand._ Exodus iv. 1 to 4.

229. And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, stretch out thy rod,
and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all
the land of Egypt. And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand
with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, _and it became lice in
man and in beast_: all the dust of the land became lice throughout all
the land of Egypt. And the magicians did so with their enchantments to
bring forth lice, but they could not; so there were lice upon man and
upon beast. Exodus viii. 16 to 18.

230. Make thee an ark of gopher-wood; rooms shalt thou make in the
ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch. And this is the
fashion which thou shalt make it of; the length of the ark shall be
three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of
it thirty cubits. A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit
shall thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in
the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make
it. And behold I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to
destroy all flesh wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven;
and every thing that is in the earth shall die. But with thee will I
establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark; thou and thy
sons, and thy wife, and thy sons wives with thee. And of every living
thing of all flesh, _two of every sort_ shalt thou bring into the ark,
to keep them alive with thee: they shall be male and female. Of fowls
after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping
thing of the earth after his kind; two of every sort shall come unto
thee to keep them alive. _And take thou unto thee of all food that is
eaten_, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for
thee, and for them. Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded
him, _so did he_. Gen. vi. 14 to 22.

231. And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters
increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lifted up above the earth.
And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth;
and the ark went upon the face of the waters. And the waters prevailed
exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills that were under
the whole heaven, were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters
prevail, and the _mountains_ were covered. Gen. vii. 17 to 20.

232. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and prayed
earnestly that it might not rain; and it rained not on the earth by the
space of _three years and six months_. James v. 17.

233. And the Lord God formed man _of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life_; and man became _a living
soul_. Gen. ii. 7.

234. And the Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept:
and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof.
And the _rib_ which the Lord God had taken from man, _made he a woman_,
and brought her unto the man. Gen. ii. 21, 2.

235. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and
fire from the Lord out of heaven: and he overthrew those cities, and all
the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew
upon the ground. But his (Lot's) wife _looked back from behind him_ and
she became a _pillar of salt_. Gen. xix. 24 to 26.

236. And he (Jacob) dreamed, and behold, _a lad-der_ set upon the earth,
and the top of it _reached to heaven_; and behold, _the angels of God
ascending and descending_ on it. And behold, _the Lord stood above it,_
and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac;
the land whereon thou liest to thee will I give it, and to thy seed.
Gen. xxviii. 12, 13.

237. And It came to pass, as they still went on and talked, that behold,
there appeared _a chariot of fire, and horses of fire_, and parted them
both asunder; and _Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven_. 2 Kings
ii. 11.

238. Now the Lord had prepared a _great fish_ (which Christ tells us in
Matt. xii. 40, was _a whale_.) to swallow up Jonah. _And Jonah was in
the belly of the fish three days and three nights_. Then Jonah prayed
unto the Lord his God _out of the fish's belly_: and the Lord spake unto
the fish, and _it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land._ Jonah i. 17, and
ii. 1, 10.

239. And he found a new _jaw bone of an ass_, and put forth his hand and
took it, and _and slew a thousand men therewith_. And Samson said, With
the jaw bone of an ass have I slain a thousand men. Judges xv. 15, 16.

240. And it came to pass, when she (Delilah) pressed him (Samson) daily
with her words, and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death;
that he told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a
razor upon my head, for I have been a Nazarite unto God from my mother's
womb; _If I be shaven then my strength will go from me,_ and I shall
become weak, and like any other man. The story then proceeds to
represent Delilah as betraying Samson into the hands of the Philistines,
who shave off the hair from his head, and afterwards put out his eyes
and imprison him. In course of time his hair begins to grow again, when
his strength returns. The Philistines then take him to their temple that
he may make sport for them, and Samson then says unto the lad that held
him by the hand, Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the
house standeth, that I may lean upon them. Now the house was full of men
and women, and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there
were upon the roof about three thousand men and women that beheld while
Samson made sport. _And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars, upon
which the house stood_, and on which it was borne up, of the one with
his right hand and of the other with his left; and Samson said. Let me
die with the Philistines, _and he bowed himself with all his might;
and the house fell upon the lords_, and upon all the people that were
therein; so the dead which he slew at his death, were more than they
which he slew in his life. Judges xvi. 16 to 30.

241. And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, _fell down
bound in the midst of the fiery burning furnace_. Then Nebuchadnezzar
came near to the mouth of the fiery burning furnace, and spake and said,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the most high God, come
forth and come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came forth
of the midst of the fire. And the princes, governors, and captains, and
the king's counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men _upon
whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was a hair of their head singed,
neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on
them_. Daniel iii. 23, 26, 27.

242. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into
the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom
thou servest continually he will deliver thee. Then the king arose Very
early in the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions. And when
he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and
the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God,
is thy God whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the
lions. Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever. _My God
hath sent his angel and hath shut the lions' mouths that they have not
hurt me_: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also
before thee. O king, have I done no hurt, Daniel vi. 16, 19, 20, 21,
22.

243. And God saw the light that it was good; and God _divided_ the
_light_ from the _darkness_, Gen. i. 4.

244. And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night; he made the stars also. And God
set them in the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the earth.
Gen. i. 16, 17.

245. And there shall be _upon every high mountain, and upon every high
hill, rivers and streams of waters_, in the day of the great slaughter,
when the towers fall. Moreover, _the light of the moon shall be as the
light of the sun_, and the light of the sun shall be _seven-fold_, as
the light of seven days' in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach
of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound. Isaiah xxx. 25,
26.

246. Again the Devil taketh him (Christ) up into an exceeding high
mountain, _and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory
of them_, Matt. iv. 8.

247. The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit
of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was full
of _bones_. And caused me to pass by them round about; and behold, there
were very many in the open valley; and lo, _they were very dry_. And he
said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord
God, thou knowest. Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and
say unto them, O _ye dry bones hear the word of the Lord_. Thus saith
the Lord God unto these bones, Behold _I will cause breath to enter into
you and ye shall live_. And I will lay sinews upon you, and bring up
flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you; and ye
shall live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied as
I was commanded; and as I prophesied there was a noise, _and behold
a shaking, and the bones came together bone to his bone_. And, when I
beheld, lo, _the sinews and the flesh came up upon them_; and the skin
covered them above; but there was no breath in them. Then said he unto
me, prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, _and say to the wind_,
Thus saith the Lord God, Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe
upon these slain, that they may live. So I prophesied as he commanded
me, _and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon
their feet_, an exceeding great army. Ezek. xxxvii. 1 to 10.

248. And it came to pass, as _they were burying a man_, that behold,
they spied a band of men, and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
Elisha: and when the man was let down, _and touched the bones of Elisha,
he revived, and stood up on his feet_. 2 Kings xiii. 21.

249. Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming in the which _all that
are in the graves shall hear his voice_. John v. 28.

250. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, (for
the _trumpet_ shall sound) and the _dead shall be raised incorruptible_,
and we shall be changed. 1 Corinth xv. 52.

251. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven _with a shout_, with
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in
Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive and remain, shall be
_caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air_;
and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 1 Thessa. iv. 16, 17.

252. And I saw the _dead_, small and great, stand before God; and the
books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of
life; and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in
the books according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which
were in it, _and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in
them_; and they were judged every man according to their works. And
death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second
death. Rev. xx. 12, 13, 14.

253. For I am he that _liveth and was dead;_ and behold I am alive for
ever more. Amen; _and have the keys of hell and of death_. Rev, i. 18..

254. But Mary stood without at the sepulchre, weeping; and as she wept
she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre. _And seeth two angels
in white, sitting_ the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where
the body of Jesus had lain. _And they say unto her_, Woman, why weepest
thou? She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and
I know not where they have laid him. And when she had thus said, she
turned herself back, _and saw Jesus standing_, and knew not that it was
Jesus. Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?
she, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou hast
borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him
away. Jesus saith unto her, Mary, she turned herself, and said unto him,
Rabboni, which is to say Master. John xx, 11 to 16.

255. But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them
when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore saith unto him, We have
seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands
the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails,
and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. _And after eight
days_ again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them; _then came
Jesus: (the door being shut) and stood in the midst,_ and said; Peace be
unto you. Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, _and behold
my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side_; and be
not faithless but believing. John xx. 24 to 27.

356. Jesus saith unto them, _Come and dine_. And none of his disciples
durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord. Jesus then
_cometh and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise_. This now
was the third time that Jesus showed himself to his disciples, _after
that he was risen from the dead_. John xxi. 12 to 14.

257. And when he had spoken these things while they beheld, _he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight_. And while they
looked steadily toward heaven, as he went up, behold two men stood by
them in white apparel: Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye
gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
Acts i. 9 to 11.

258. _Then the Spirit took me up_, and I heard behind me a voice of a
great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.
_So the Spirit lifted me up and took me away_, and I went in bitterness,
in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me.
Ezek. iii. 12, 14.

259. And he put forth the form of an hand, _and took me by a lock of
mine head, and the Spirit lift me up between earth and heaven_, and
brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner
gate, that looketh toward the north, where was the seat of the image of
jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy. Ezek. viii. 3.

260. And Habbakuk said, Lord, I never saw Babylon; neither do I know
where the den is. _Then the angel of the Lord took him by the crown,
and bare him by the hair of his head, and through the vehemence of his
spirit, set him in Babylon over the den_. And Habbakuk cried, saying,
O Daniel, Daniel, take the dinner which God hath sent thee. Bel and the
Dragon, xxxv. 6, 7.

261. Then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him,
(which is the sect of the Sadducees) and were filled with indignation.
And laid their hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison.
But the _angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors_, and
brought them forth, and said, Go, stand and speak in the temple to the
people, all the words of this life. Acts v. 17 to 20.

262. And behold, there was a great earthquake; for the angel of the
Lord descended from heaven, and came _and rolled bach the stone from the
door_ and sat upon it. Matt, xxviii. 2.

263. And _the angel of the Lord_ came again the second time, _and
touched him_, and said, Arise and eat, because thy journey is too great
for thee. 1 Kings xix. 7.

264. Then the angel of the Lord put forth the end of his staff _that
wass in his hand_, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and
there _rose up fire out of the rock_, and consumed the flesh and the
unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the Lord departed out of his sight.
Judges vi. 21.

265. Then Tobit called his son Tobias, and said unto him, My son, see
that the man have _his wages_, which went with thee, and thou must give
him more, So he called _the angel_, and he said unto him, _Take half of
all that ye have brought, and go away in safety_. Tobit xii, 1, 5.

266. Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came
unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of _an angel of
God, very terrible_; but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he
me his name. Judges xiii. 6.

267. Whose throne is inestimable, whose glory may not be comprehended,
_before whom the hosts of angels stand with trembling_, 2 Esdras viii.
21.

268. Thou shalt not suffer a _witch_ to live. Exodus xxii. 18.

269. Jesus saith unto them, Fill the water pots with water. And they
filled them up to the brim. And he saith unto them, Draw out now, and
bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare it. When the ruler of
the feast had tasted the water _that was made wine_, and knew not whence
it was, (but the servants which drew the water knew,) the governor of
the feast called the bridegroom, and saith unto him, Every man at the
beginning doth set forth good wine; and when men have well drunk, then
that which is worse; but thou hast kept the good wine until now. This
beginning of _miracles_ did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested
forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him. John ii. 7 to 11.

270. And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee. _And his servant was healed in the
self same hour._ And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his
wife's mother laid, and sick of a fever. _And he touched her hand and
the fever left her_; and she arose and ministered unto them. Matt. viii.
13, 14, 15.

271. And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.
And behold there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the
ship was covered with the waves; but he was asleep. And his disciples
came to him and awoke him, saying, Lord save us; we perish. And he saith
unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose, _and
rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm_. Matt. viii.
23 to 26.

272. And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them,
_walking on the sea_. And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea,
they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit: and they cried out for fear.
But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer; it is
I; be not afraid, And Peter answered him, and said, Lord, if it be thou,
bid me come unto thee on the water. And he said, Come. And when Peter
was come down out of the ship, _he walked on the water_, to go to Jesus.
Matt. xiv. 25 to 29.

273. And Jesus arose and followed him; so did his disciples. And when
Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels and the people
making a noise, He said unto them, Give place; _for the maid is not
dead, but sleepeth_, and they laughed him to scorn. But, when the people
were put forth, he went in, _and took her by the hand, and the maid
arose_, Matt. ix. 19, 23, 24, 25.

274. And behold, a woman _which was diseased with an issue of blood_
twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment. For
she said within herself, _If I may but touch his garment I shall
be whole_. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her he said,
Daughter, be of good comfort: _thy faith hath made thee whole_; and the
woman was made whole from that hour. Matt. ix. 20 to 22.

275. And when he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus,
come forth. _And he that was dead came forth_, bound hand and foot with
grave-clothes and his face was bound about with a napkin, Jesus saith
unto them, Loose him, _and let him go_, John xi. 43, 44.

276. And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve and said
unto him, send the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and
country round about, and lodge and get victuals: for we are here in a
desert place. BUt he said unto them? give ye them to eat, and they said,
we have no more _but five loaves and two fishes_; except we should go
and buy meat for all this people. For there were about five thousand
men. And he said to his disciples, make them sit clown by fifties in a
company. And they did so, and made them all sit down. Then he took the
five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven he blessed
them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.
_And they did eat and were all filled_, and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them _twelve baskets_.

277. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with
one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven,
as of a rushing mighty wind; and it filled all the house where they were
sitting. And there appeared unto them _cloven tongues, like as of fire_,
and it sat upon each of them. _And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost_, and began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them
utterance. Acts ii. 1 to 4.

278. And he (Moses) was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights;
_he did neither eat bread nor drink water_; and he wrote upon the tables
the words of the covenant, the ten commandments. Exod. xxxiv. 28.

279. And the angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched
him, and said, arise and eat, because thy journey is too great for thee.
And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that
meat _forty days and forty nights_, unto Horeb the Mount of God. 1 Kings
xix. 7, 8.

280. Moreover he said unto me, son of man, eat that thou findest; _eat
this roll_, (of a book) and go Speak unto the house of Israel. So I
opened my mouth, _and he caused me to eat that roll_. And he said unto
me, son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this
roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it, _and it was in my mouth as
honey for sweetness_. Ezek. iii. 1 to 3.

281. And when the ass saw the angel of the Lord, she fell down under
Balaam; and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a
staff. _And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass_, and she said unto
Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these
three times. Num. xxii. 27, 28.

282. And I beheld, and lo, the eagle rose upon her talons, _and spake to
her feathers, saying_, watch not all at once; sleep every one in his own
place, and watch by course, &c. Then I heard a voice which said unto me,
look before thee, and consider the thing that thou seest. And I beheld,
and lo, as it were _a roaring lion_ chased out of the wood; and I saw
that he _sent out a man's voice_ unto the eagle, and said, Hear thou? I
will _talk_ with thee, and the highest shall say unto thee, &c. 2 Esdras
xi. 7, 8, and xxxvi. 7, 8.

283. But _let_ man and _beast_ be covered with sackcloth, _and cry
mightily unto God_; yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that is in their hands. Jonah iii. 8.

284. And I took it and drank; and when I had drunk of it, _my heart
uttered understanding, and wis-dom grew in my breast_, for my spirit
strengthened my memory. 2 Esdras xiv. 40.

285. In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found; but _a
rod_ is for the back of him that is void of understanding. Prov. x. 13.

286. Jesus answered and said unto them, verily I say unto you, if ye
have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the
fig-tree, but also, if ye shall say unto this mountain, be thou removed,
and be thou cast into the sea, _it shall be done_. Matt. xxi. 21.

287. And the Lord' said, if ye had faith _as a grain of mustard seed,_
ye might say unto this sycamine tree be thou plucked up by the root,
and be thou planted in the sea; _and it should obey you_. Luke xvii. 6.

288. Therefore I say up to you, what things soever ye desire when ye
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Mark xi. 24.

289. _Pray without ceasing_. 1 Thess. v. 17.

290. Who is the _image of the invisible_ God; the first-born of every
creature. Coloss. i. 15-.

291. While we _look not_ at things which are seen, but at the things
_which are not seen_; for the things which are seen are temporal, but
the things which are not seen are eternal. 2 Corinth, iv. 18.

292. And it came to pass, as he was _alone_ praying, his disciples were
_with him_; and he asked them, saying, whom say the people that I am.
Luke ix. 18.

293. _I and my Father are one_. John x. 30.

294. For there are three that bare record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these-_three_ are _one_. I John v.. 7.

295.. And David _danced_ before the Lord _with all his might_; and David
was girded with a linen, ephod. 2 Samuel vi. M.

296. And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved; and _the heavens
shall be rolled together as a scroll_; and all their host shall fall
down as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from
the fig tree. Isaiah xxxiv. 4.

297. And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and
the first earth _were passed away, and there was no more sea_. Rev. xxi.
1.

298. Then said the Lord unto Moses, behold I will _rain bread from
heaven_ for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate
every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law
or no. And they gathered it every morning, ever man according to his
eating; and when the sun waxed hot it _melted_. Exod. xvi. 4, 21.

299. And it came to pass as they fled from before Israel, and were in
the going down to Beth-horon that the Lord _cast down great stones from
heaven_ upon them unto Azekah, and they died; they were more which died
with hailstones, than they whom the children of Israel slew with the
sword. Joshua x. 11

300. Then the Lord _rained_ upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrah, _brimstone
and fire_ from the Lord _out of heaven_. Gen. xix. 24.

301. And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man
of God, _then let fire come down from heaven_, and consume thee and thy
fifty, and there came down _fire from heaven_ and consumed him and his
fifty. 2 Kings i. 10.

302. And then the Lord's wrath be kindled against you, and he _shut
up the heaven that there be no rain_, and that the land yield not her
fruit, and lest ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord
giveth you. Dent. xi. 17.

303. _When heaven is shut up and there is no rain_, because they have
sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy
name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them. 1 Kings viii.
35.

304. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the
body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body I cannot tell; God
knoweth) such an one caught up to the _third heaven_. 2 Corin. xii. 2.

305. And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was _silence in
heaven_ about the space of _half an hour_. Rev. viii. 1.

306. After this I looked, and behold, _a door was opened in heaven_; and
the first voice which I heard was as it were a trumpet talking with me;
which said, come up hither, _and, 1 will shew thee things which must be
hereafter_. And immediately I was in the spirit; and behold a throne was
set in heaven, and one sat on the throne. And he that sat was to look
upon like a jasper, and a sardine stone; and there was a _rainbow round
about the throne_, in sight like unto an emerald. And round about the
throne were four and twenty seats; and upon the seats I saw four and
twenty elders sitting, _clothed in white raiment,_ and they had on their
heads _crowns of gold_. And out of the throne proceeded _lightnings and
thunder-ings_, and voices, and there were _seven lamps of fire_ burning
before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. And before the
throne there was _a sea of glass_ like unto the crystal; and in the
midst of the throne, and round about the throne _were four beasts full
of eyes before and behind._ And the first beast was like a _lion_, and
the second beast like a _calf_ and the third beast _had a face as a
man_, and the fourth beast was like a _flying eagle_. And the four
beasts had each of them _six wings_ about him, and they were full of
eyes within _and they rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Almighty which was, and is, and is to come_. Rev. iv. 1 to 8.

[This is a very beautiful description of heaven--it almost equals in
absurdity and extravagance the wild dreams of Mahomet.]

307. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the _beast_ that
ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and
shall overcome them, and kill them. Rev. xi. 7.

[It appears, then, from this and the preceding note, that there are
beasts both in hell and in heaven; whether these angelic creatures have
immortal souls or not, the theologians may decide.]

Also Notes 73, 74, and 76.




PASSAGES CONTRADICTORY.

308. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke among people afar
off; _and they shall beat their swords into plough-shares, and their
spears into pruning-hooks_; nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation; neither shall they learn war any more. Micah. iv. 3.

309. _Beat your plough-shares into swords_, and your pruning-hooks into
spears; let the weak say, I am strong. Joel iii. 10.

310. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels _and have
not charity_, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And
though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, _and have no charity_, I am nothing. 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2.

311. And as we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach
any other gospel unto you, than that ye have received, _let him be
accursed._ Gal. i. 9.

312. _Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer;_ and ye know that no
murderer hath eternal life abiding in him. 1 John iii. 15.

313. If any man come to me, _and hate not his father and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters_, yea, and his own life
also, he cannot be my disciple. Luke xiv. 26.

314. Then said Jesus unto them, put up again thy sword into his place;
_for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword._ Matt.
xxvi. 52.

315. Then said he unto them, but now he that hath a purse, let him take
it, and likewise his scrip; _and he that hath no sword let him sell his
garment and buy one_. Luke xxii. 38.

316. But I say unto you, _that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall
smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also_. Matt. v. 39.

317. _Whoso sheddeth maris blood, by man shall his blood be shed_; for
in the image of God made he man. Gen. ix. 6.

318. But I say unto you, love your enemies, _bless them that curse you_,
do good to them that hate you, _and pray for them that despitefully use
you and persecute you._ Matt. v. 44.

319. Then said he unto his disciples, it is impossible but that offences
will come; _but woe unto him through whom they come_, Luke xvii. 1.

320. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words; when ye
depart out of that house or city, _shake off the dust of your feet._
Matt. x. 14.

321. Thou shalt have _no other Gods before me_. Exodus xx. 3.

322. And God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and
let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. Gen. i. 26.

323. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them, for I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God, _visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth generations of them that
hate me_. Exod. xx. 5.

324. The soul that sinneth it shall die; the son _shall not bear the
iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of
the son_; the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Ezek. xviii. 20.

325. But the children of the murderers he slew not; according unto
that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, wherein the
Lord commanded, saying, _the fathers shall not be put to death for the
children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers_; but every
man shall be put to death for his own sin, 2 Kings xiv. 6.

326. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it _holy_. Six days shalt thou
labor, and do _all_ thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God; in it _thou shalt not do any work_, thou nor thy son? nor
thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor
the stranger that is within thy gates. Exod. xx. 8, 9, 10.

327. And he entered again into the synagogue: and there was a man there
which had a withered hand. And they watched him, whether he would heal
him on the Sabbath day; _that they might accuse him_. And he saith unto
the man which had the withered hand, stand forth. And he said unto them.
_is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days or to do evil?_ to save
life, or to kill? but they held their peace. And when he had looked
round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of
their hearts, he saith unto the man, _stretch forth thine hand;_ and
he stretched it out, and his hand was restored whole as the other. Mark
iii. 1 to 5.

328. _Honor thy father and thy mother;_ that thy days may be long upon
the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Exod. xx. 12.

329. Thou shalt not kill. Exod. xx. 14.

330. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and _slay them before me_. Luke xix. 27.

331. And he said unto them, thus saith the Lord God of Israel, put
every man his sword by his side? and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, _and slay every man his brother_, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbor. Exod. xxxii. 27.

332. Thou shalt not commit _adultery_. Exodus xx. 14.

333. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: when as his mother
Mary was _espoused_ to Joseph, before they came together, _she was found
with child of the Holy Ghost_. Matt. i. 18.

Vide Note 141.

334. Thou shalt not _steal_. Exod. xx. 15.

335. And I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians;
and it shall come to pass, that when ye go, _ye shall not go empty_. But
every woman shall borrow of her neighbor, and of her that sojourn-eth
in her house, jewels of silver and jewels of gold, and raiment; _and
ye shall put them upon your sons and upon your daughters; and ye shall
spoil the Egyptians_. Exodus iii. 21. 22.

Vide Note 142.

336. The Lord is _good to all_; and his _tender mercies_ are over all
his works. Psalms cxlv. 9.

337. Thus saith the Lord of hosts? I remember that which Amalek did to
Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way when he came up from Egypt.
Now go, and smite Amalek, _and utterly destroy all that they have, and
spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and
sheep, camel and ass_. 1 Sam. xv. 2, 3.

338. The Lord is gracious, _and full of compassion; slow to anger, and
of great mercy_. Psalm cxlv. 8.

339. And he smote the men of Beth-Shemeth, _because they had looked into
the ark of the Lord_, even he smote of the people, _fifty thousand and
three score and ten men_: and the people lamented, because the Lord had
smitten many of the people with a great slaughter. 1 Samuel vi. 19.

340. Who is a God like unto thee, _that pardoneth iniquity_, and passeth
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not
his anger for ever, _because he delighteth in mercy_. Micah. vii. 18.

341. And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee, _thou
shalt smite them and utterly destroy them_; thou shalt make no covenant
with them, _nor shew mercy unto them_. Deut. vii. 2.

342. The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, _and will not at all
acquit the wicked_; the Lord hath his way in the whirlwind, and in the
storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. Nahum i. 3.

343. So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just. _And shall cast them
into the furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth._
Matthew xiii. 49, 50.

344. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from
the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: _for I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more_. Jer.
xxxi. 34.

345. Behold all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the
soul of the son is mine; _the soul that sinneth it shall die_. Ezek.
xviii. 4.

346. And rend your heart and not your garments, _and turn unto the Lord
your God_; for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, _and of great
kindness_, and repenteth him of the evil. Joel ii. 13.

347. And I will bring _distress_ upon men, that they shall walk like
blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord; _and their blood
shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung_. Zeph, i. 17.

348. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count
slackness,) but is long suffering to usward, _not willing that amy
should perish_, but that all should come to repentance. 2 Peter iii, 9.

349. The Lord hath made all things for himself; yea, _even the wicked
for the day of evil_. Prov. xvi. 4.

350. _For thou lovest all things that are and abhorrest nothing_ which
thou hast made; for never wouldst thou have made any thing, if thou
hadst hated it, Wis. of Sol. xi. 24.

351. For God loveth _none but him that dwelleth with wisdom_. Wis. of
Sol. vii. 28,.

352. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour;
Who will have all men to be saved, _and to come unto the knowledge of
the truth_. 1 Tim, ii. 3, 4.

353. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, _that they
should believe a LIE_. 2 Thes, ii. 11.

354. Yet saith the house of Israel, the way of the Lord is not equal,
O, house of Israel, _are not my ways equal?_ are not your ways unequal?
Ezekiel xviii. 29.

355. For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God; the Lord thy God
_hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself above all people
that are upon the face of the earth_. Dent, vii. 6.

356. _Lying lips are abomination to the Lord_; but they that deal truly
are his delight. Prov. xii. 22.

357. Now therefore behold, _the Lord hath put a lying spirit in
the mouth of all these thy prophets_, and the Lord hath spoken evil
concerning thee, 1 Kings xxii. 22.

358. For God sent not his son into the world, to condemn the world; _but
that the world through him might be saved_. John iii. 17.

359. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth; _I came not to
send peace but a sword_. For I am come to set a man at variance against
his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law. Matt. x. 34; 5.

Also Notes 186 and 187.

360. _Wisdom is the principal thing_; therefore get wisdom; and with all
thy getting, _get understanding_. Prov. iv. 7.

361. _For in much wisdom is much grief_; and he that _increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow_. Eccles. i. 18.

362. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; _be ye
therefore wise as serpents_, and harmless as doves. Matt. x. 16.

363. For it is written, _I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,_ and
will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. 1 Cor. i. 19.

364. _The righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree_; he shall grow
like a cedar in Lebanon. Psalms xcii. 12.

365. _The righteous perisheth_, and no man layeth it to heart: and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. Isaiah lvii. 1.

366. As it is written, _There is none righteous, nay not ONE_. Romans
iii. 10.

367. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that
ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a _righteous man_
availeth much. James v. 16.

368. Pray without ceasing. 1 Thes. v. 17.

369. And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you; _yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear_; your hands are
full of blood. Isaiah i. 15.

370. Therefore we conclude, _that a man is justified by faith without
the deeds of the law_, Romans iii. 28.

371. Ye see then _how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith
only_. James ii. 24.

372. _For by grace are ye saved through faith_, and that not of
yourselves; it is the gift of God. Ephes, ii. 8.

373. But wilt thou know, O vain man, _that faith without works is dead?_
James ii. 20.

374. As the cloud is consumed, and vanisheth away; _so he that goeth
down to the grave, shall come up no more_. Job vii. 9.

375. And the graves were opened; _and many bodies of saints which slept
arose, And came out of the graves after his resurrection_ and went into
the holy city, and appeared unto many. Matt, xxvii. 52, 53.

Also Notes 254, 255, 256 and 257.

376. In the beginning God _created_ the heaven and the earth. Gen. i. 1.

377. And the earth was _without form and void_, Gen. i. 2.

378. And God saw the light that it was good; and God divided _the light
from the darkness_. Gen i. 4, [This was on the first day.]

379. _And God made two great lights; the greater light_ to rule the day,
and the _lesser light_ to rule the night, he made the stars also. Gen.
i. 16. [This was on the _fourth_ day.]

380. And God saw every thing that he had made and behold, _it was very
good_, and the evening and the morning were the sixth day. Gen. i. 31.

381. _The earth was also corrupt before God_; and the earth was filled
with violence. Gen. vi. 11.

382. Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints. _yea, the heavens are
not clean in his sight_. Job xv. 15.

383. All _things were made by him_; and without him was not any thing
made that was made. John i. 3.

384. _For by him were all things created that are in heaven, or that are
in earth, visible and invisible_, whether they be thrones, or dominions,
or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him and for
him. Coloss. i. 16.

385. For God _made not death_; neither hath he pleasure in the
destruction of the living. Wis. of Sol. i. 13.

386. For God _is not the author of confusion_, but of peace, as in all
churches of the saints. 1 Cor. xiv. 33.

387. One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh; _but
the earth abideth forever_. Eccles. i. 4.

388. _All these things live and remain for ever_, for all uses, and they
are all obedient. Eccles. xlii. 23.

389. So shall it be _at the end of the world_; the angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just. Matt. xiii. 49.

390. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat, _the earth also, and the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up_. 2 Peter iii. 10.

Also Note 294.

391. _For his anger endureth but a moment_; in his favor is life;
weeping may endure for a night; but joy cometh in the morning. Psalms
xxx. 5.

392. And the Lord's anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them
wander in the wilderness _forty years_, until all the generation that
had done evil in the sight of the Lord was consumed. Numb. xxxii. 13.

393. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God
cannot be tempted with evil, _neither tempteth he any man_. James i. 13.

394. And it came to pass after these things, _that God did tempt
Abraham_, and said unto him, Abraham, and he said, Behold, here I am.
Gen. xxii. 1.

395. _And lead us not into temptation_, but deliver us from evil. For
thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.
Matt. vi. 13.

396. _And no man hath ascended up into heaven but he that came down from
heaven_, even the Son of Man which is in heaven. John iii. 13.

397. And it came to pass, as they still went on and talked, that behold,
there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them
both asunder; _and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven_. 2 Kings
ii. 11.

398. And I (Jesus,) say unto you, my friends, _Be not afraid of them
that kill the body_, and after that have no more that they can do. Luke
xii. 4.

399. After these things Jesus walked in Galilee; for he would not walk
in Jewry, _because the Jews sought to kill him_. John vii. 1.

400. For there are _three_ that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. 1 John v. 7.

401. And the Lord God said. Behold, the man is become as one of his, to
know good and evil. And now lest he put forth his hand, and take also of
the tree of life, and eat and live for ever. Gen. iii. 2.

402. There is one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope
of your calling. One Lord, one faith, one baptism. _One God and father
of all_, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. Ephesians
iv. 4 to 6.

403. For there is _one God_, and one mediator between God and men, the
man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy ii. 5.

404. Remember the former things of old; for I am God, _and there is none
else; I am God, and there is none like me_. Isaiah xlvi. 9.

405. _I and my father are one_. John x. 30.

406. But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works; that ye
may know and believe _that the Father is in me, and I in him_. John x.
38.

407. I am the _true vine, and my Father is the husbandman_. John xv. 1.

408. And the Father himself, _which hath sent me,_ hath born witness
of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.
John v. 37.

409. The Father loveth the Son, _and hath given all things into his
hand_. John iii. 35.

Also Note 401.

410. _No man hath seen God at any time_; the only begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him. John i. 18.

411. Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto, _whom no man hath seen nor can see_; to whom be honor and
power everlasting, 1 Timothy vi. 16.

412. And the Lord spake unto Moses _face to face_ as a man speaketh unto
his friend. Exod. xxxiii. 11.

413. Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and _seventy_ of the
elders of Israel. _And they saw the God of Israel_; and there was under
his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire-stone, and as it were the
body of heaven in his clearness. Exod. xxiv. 9, 10.

Also Notes 17, 132? 133, 134, 135 and 136.

414. And he said, Thou canst not see my face; _for there shall no man
see me, and live_. Exodus xxxiii. 20.

415. And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: _for I have seen God
face to face_, and my life is preserved. Gen. xxxii. 30.

Also Note 410.

416. Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear his voice, _and shall come forth_, they
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. John v. 28, 29.

417. And I saw the _dead_, small and great, _stand before God_; and the
books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of
life; and _the dead were judged_ out of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works. Rev, xx. 12.

418. For that which befalleth the sons of men _be-falleth beasts; even
one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth so dieth the other_; yea,
they have all one breath; so that a man _hath no pre-eminence over a
beast_; for all is vanity. _All go unto one place_; all are of the dust,
_and all turn to dust again_. Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth
upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward, to the earth?
Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better than that a man should
rejoice in his own works, for that is _his_ portion; for who shall bring
him to see _what shall be after him?_ Eccle. iii. 19 to 22.

Also Note 372.

419. The Father loveth the Son, and hath given _all things into his
hand_. John iii. 35.

420. For though he (the Son) was crucified _through weakness_, yet he
liveth _by the power of God_. For we also are weak in him, but we shall
live with him _by the power of God_ toward you. 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

421. And he (Judas) cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and
departed, and went and _hanged himself_. Matt, xxvii. 5.

422. Now this man (Judas) _purchased a field_ with the reward of
iniquity; and falling headlong, _he burst asunder in the midst_, and
all his bowels gushed out. Acts i. 1-8.

423. And Jesus said unto them, How many loaves have ye? and they said
_seven_ and a _few_ little fishes. And he took the _seven loaves_ and
the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his disciples.
and the disciples to the multitude. And they did all eat, and were
filled; and they took up of the broken meat that was left, _seven_
baskets full. And they that did eat were _four thousand_ men, beside
women and children. Matt. xv. 34 to 38.

424. But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat, and they said, We have
no more but _five loaves_ and _two fishes_; except we should go and buy
meat for all this people. For there were _about five thousand men_. And
he said to his disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company.
Then he took the _five_ loaves and the _two_ fishes, and looking up
to heaven he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to set
before the multitude. And they did eat, and were all filled; and there
was taken up of fragments that remained to them _twelve baskets_. Luke
ix. 13, 14, 16, 17.

Vide Note 275.

425. And set up over his head, his accusation written, _this is Jesus
the King of the Jews_. Matt. xxvii. 37.

426. And the superscription of his accusation was written over, _the
King of the Jews_. Mark xv. 26.

427. And a superscription also was written over him, in letters of
Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, _this is the King of the Jews_. Luke
xxiii. 38.

428. And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross, and the writing
was _Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews_. John xix. 19.

429. But, while he thought on these things, behold, _the angel of the
Lord_ appeared unto _him_ (Joseph) in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son
of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is
conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. Matt. i. 20.

[In the following note the Angel is represented, not as appearing unto
Joseph, as above, but unto Mary his wife.]

430. And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary; for thou hast found
favor with God. And behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus. Then said Mary unto the
angel, how shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel
answered and said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy
thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Luke
i. 30 to 35.

431. In the end of the Sabbath, _as it began to dawn_ towards the first
day of the week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the
sepulchre. Matt, xxviii. 1.

432. And when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother
of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and
anoint him. And very early in the morning, the first day of the week,
they came unto the sepulchre _at the rising of the sun_. Mark xvi. 1,2.

433. The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene, early, _when it
was yet dark_, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from
the sepulchre. John xx. 1.

434. Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning,
_they_ came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had
prepared, and certain others with them. Luke xxiv. 1.

[The individuals spoken of in this note as coming to the sepulchre,
we learn in the 10th v. are _Mary Magdalene_, and Joanna, and Mary the
mother of James, _and other women_. Now we are told in note 430, (Mark
xvi. 1) that it was Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, _and
Salome_, that came; in note 429 (Matt, xxviii. 1) that it was only Mary
Magdalene, and the _other Mary_; and in note 43 i (John xx. 1) that it
was only Mary Magdalene.]

435. And behold there was a great earthquake; for the angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came _and rolled back the stone from the
door, and sat upon it_. Matt, xxviii. 2.

436. And they said among themselves, who shall roll us away the stone
from the door of the sepulchre? (And when they looked they saw that the
stone was rolled away;) for it was very great. And _entering_ into the
sepulchre, _they saw a young man_ (the angel of the Lord) _sitting
on the right side_, clothed in a long white garment; and they were
affrighted. Mark xvi. 3, 4, 5.

[Thus, in one of these notes the angel is represented as sitting
_outside_ the sepulchre upon the stone which he rolled from the door,
and in the other, as sitting _within_ the sepulchre on the right side.]

437. And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. And
it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men
(angels of the Lord) _stood_ by them in shining garments. Luke xxiv. 3
and 4.

[In notes 435, 436, and 438, the angels of the Lord are represented, not
as _standing_, as above, but as _sitting_.]

438. But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping; and as she wept
she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre. And seeth _two_ angels
in white, sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where
the body of Jesus had lain. John xx, 11, 12.

[In this, and note 437, there are represented as being _two_ angels,
while according to notes 435 and 434, there was only _one_. In this note
also, as well as in note 434, we are told that they had _white_ garments
on, and in note 435, we are told they were _shining_ garments. We
are likewise told in this note, that Mary merely _looked_ into the
sepulchre; while in note 436, we are positively informed, that she and
those who accompanied her, _went into it_.]

439. And the _angel_ answered and said unto the women, fear not ye; for
I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here; for
he is risen, as he said; come, see the place where the Lord lay, Matt,
xxviii. 5, 6.

440. And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus saith unto her, Woman,
why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing him to be the
gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me
where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. Jesus saith unto
her. Mary. She turned herself and saith unto him? Rabboni, which is
to say, Master. Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet
ascended unto my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them. I
ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God.
John xx. 14 to.17.

[In the former of these notes, the _angel_ is represented as telling
the women of Christ's rising from the dead; in the latter, _Christ_ is
represented as telling them _himself_.]

441. And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the
dead; and behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; _there shall ye see
him_. Lo, I have told you. Then the eleven disciples _went away into
Galilee_, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them. And when _they
saw him they worshipped him_; but some doubted. Matt, xxviii. 7, 16, 17.

442. And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and
_found the eleven gathered together,_ and them that were with them,
Saying, the Lord is risen indeed and hath appeared to Simon. And they
told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in
breaking of bread. And as they thus spake, _Jesus himself stood in the
midst of them_, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. Luke xxiv. 33 to
36.

[Now we are told in the first of these notes, that the eleven disciples
went to _Galilee_ to meet Jesus according to appointment, where they saw
him, and worshipped him; while in the latter we are informed that
they did no such thing, but that _Jesus appeared unto them_ quite
unexpectedly, as they were assembled together at Jerusalem.]

443. So then, _after the Lord had spoken unto them_. (the eleven
apostles that sat at meat,) _he was received up into heaven_, and sat on
the right hand of God. Mark xvi. 19.

404. _And he led them_ (the eleven Apostles) _out as far as to Bethany_;
and he lift up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, _while
he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven._
Luke xxiv.50, 51.

[So we learn from one of these notes, that Christ ascended into heaven,
_from the place where the apostles were sat at meat_, after he had done
speaking to them; and from the other, _that he first led them out to
Bethany_, and that _then_ his ascension took place.]

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Biblical Extracts, by Robert Cooper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIBLICAL EXTRACTS ***

***** This file should be named 37700.txt or 37700.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/7/0/37700/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
