The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memorials of the Independent Churches in
Northamptonshire, by Thomas Coleman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Memorials of the Independent Churches in Northamptonshire
       with biographical notices of their pastors, and some account
       of the puritan ministers who laboured in the county.

Author: Thomas Coleman

Release Date: October 12, 2011 [EBook #37730]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORIALS--INDEPENDENT CHURCHES ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Julia Neufeld and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









  MEMORIALS
  OF
  THE INDEPENDENT CHURCHES
  IN
  NORTHAMPTONSHIRE;

  WITH
  BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES OF THEIR PASTORS,

  AND SOME ACCOUNT OF
  THE PURITAN MINISTERS WHO LABOURED IN THE COUNTY.

  BY
  THOMAS COLEMAN.

  LONDON:
  JOHN SNOW, 35, PATERNOSTER ROW.

  1853.




INTRODUCTION.


In presenting some historical Memorials of the Independent Churches in
the County of Northampton, it may be proper to take a glance at "the
rise and progress" of Nonconformity from the early days of the
Reformation.

When the Pope's supremacy was denied and some change in the Church was
sanctioned by Henry the Eighth, there were a number of Protestants in
England who desired the reformation from Popery to be carried further
than was agreeable to the reigning monarch and those that had the
ascendancy in his counsels. The reformers acknowledged "that corruptions
had been a thousand years introducing, which could not be all discovered
and thrown out at once"; and yet the ruling powers sought by "Acts of
Uniformity" to put a stop to all further improvement.

In the days of Queen Elizabeth, when the Protestant exiles returned who
had been driven to the Continent by the persecutions in the reign of
Mary, there was a considerable increase in the number of ministers who
were dissatisfied with the reformation of the Anglican Church. When the
Act had passed, in the year 1559, entitled "An Act for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and Administration of the
Sacraments," there were many ministers connected with the Church who
could never submit to its requirements. They were men who pleaded for a
_purer_ mode of worship and discipline than the authorities would allow;
and hence they were called _Puritans_. They refused to wear the
vestments, to read the whole of the liturgical service, and to comply
with many of the ceremonial observances required; they regarded them as
relics of Popery, contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ,
and opposed to the purity of his Church.

They suffered much during the reigns of Elizabeth and the first two
English Sovereigns of the Stuart line. "The Star Chamber" and "the High
Commission Court" were established, before which they were summoned, and
where they were required to answer questions proposed, that would have
made them their own accusers. If they refused to answer, they were
punished for contumacy; if they complied, they were punished for
Nonconformity.

To promote the reformation in the Church which they desired, the Puritan
ministers formed associations, instituted classes, held meetings, and
appointed lectures, which they preached alternately at their different
Churches.

The County of Northampton was distinguished as one of the strongholds of
Puritanism. There were a considerable number of Puritan divines in the
Churches in this County: here, the meetings of their associations were
frequently held; and here, in several of the towns, their lectures were
delivered; and though they had to suffer much, yet they had some noble
friends in the County, who endeavoured to hold over them the shield of
their protection. These were the men who, by their principles, their
preaching, and their writings, were the means of promoting evangelical
truth and piety in the country; and they were the men who preserved the
liberties of Englishmen, when they were in danger of being trampled in
the dust. While Hume, the historian, treats their principles as
frivolous and their conduct as ridiculous, he bestows upon them this
high eulogium: "So absolute was the authority of the Crown, that the
precious spark of liberty had been kindled and was preserved by the
Puritans alone; and it was to this sect that the English owe the whole
freedom of their constitution."

At the commencement of the reign of James I., when Bancroft was
Archbishop of Canterbury, the clergy were commanded to renew their
subscription to the requirements of the Church. More than seven hundred
of them refused; and in that number there were fifty-seven
non-subscribing ministers in Northamptonshire.

At a meeting of their Association, held in Northampton, the ministers
signed the following confession: "That they believed the word of God
contained in the Old and New Testaments to be the perfect rule of faith
and manners; and that it ought to be read and known by all people; and
that the authority of it exceeds all authority, not of the Pope only,
but of the Church also, and of councils, fathers, men, and angels."

The liberty enjoyed in the days of the Commonwealth many of them
improved to the noblest purposes--prizing the advantages they possessed,
even where they did not approve of the ruling powers.

At the restoration of the second Charles they hoped, from the fair
promises made by the King, that some changes would have been made in
their favour, so that they might have ministered in the Church without
being required to violate the dictates of conscience; but the enemies of
further reformation gained the ascendancy, and strove to drive from the
Church the Puritan divines: they succeeded in passing "the Act of
Uniformity" of 1662, which made the terms of conformity so strait that
more than two thousand ministers were ejected by it, choosing rather to
resign their livings and all their worldly prospects, and to cast
themselves on the care of Providence, than submit to what was required;
for this Act demanded their "unfeigned assent and consent to all and
everything contained in the Book of Common Prayer." It came into
operation August 24th, 1662, on Bartholomew-day--the day when the
massacre of the Protestants in France took place ninety years before,
hence called by some "Black Bartholomew." It is stated, that this day
was chosen for this Act to take effect because the Nonconforming
ministers would then be deprived of their year's income, which would be
due shortly after.

The great Mr. Locke styles the ministers who refused to conform,
"learned, pious, orthodox divines."

It has been, we think, justly observed, "that ecclesiastical history
furnishes no such instance as this of a noble army of confessors at one
time--it is an honour peculiar to the English Dissenters. Never has the
world seen such a sacrifice to principle."

From this time the name of _Puritan_ was exchanged for that of
_Nonconformist_.

These were the men that laid the foundation of a large number of the
Dissenting Churches which remain to this day. In the County of
Northampton there were sixty ministers who were ejected by this Act.
Fourteen of this number afterwards conformed; but of one of them it is
remarked, "that he never went up the pulpit stairs with comfort after he
had conformed--that he was at last but half a Conformist, for which he
was frequently cited into the Spiritual Court: he freely suffered his
children to go and hear the ejected ministers, and always maintained a
brotherly affection towards them."

They were exposed to great trials, and suffered much persecution, after
their ejectment. To prevent them from preaching, "The Conventicle Act"
was passed, forbidding more than five adult persons to meet together for
worship different from the forms of the Church of England, on pain of
very severe penalties. After this came "The Five Mile Act," which
forbade them to reside within five miles of any corporate town where
they had formerly preached, or from keeping school, or taking boarders,
under a penalty of forty pounds. Thus many were driven from their
families and their homes; and many were heavily fined and repeatedly
imprisoned. It was in the midst of sufferings of this nature that
several of the Churches were formed, the Memorials of which are here
presented.

When the glorious revolution by William the Third was effected, a very
pleasing change in their circumstances took place. "The Act of
Toleration" that then passed was viewed by them as a great blessing.
Advancing knowledge on the principles of religious liberty may have led
us to see that such an Act falls far short of that complete state of
freedom to which we should aspire; yet there was abundant reason for our
forefathers highly to value the liberty it gave them, and they blessed
the memory of him by whom it was obtained. After the passing of this
Act, the term _Nonconformist_ was exchanged for that of _Dissenter_, as
applied to those who availed themselves of the advantages it gave. This
is the name they now bear, and which they will probably continue to bear
until the time when our civil rulers shall cease to raise one
denomination of Christians above another, or to legislate for the Church
of Christ.

A hundred and twenty years ago, Doddridge entered upon his work as
pastor and tutor at Northampton. These offices he filled during twenty
years; and he evidently obtained, by his spirit, his preaching, his
writings, and his labours as a tutor, great influence in the Churches in
the County, which continued to be felt many years after his death. A
minister who was ordained over one of these Churches forty years ago
observes, "It always appeared to me a pleasing fact, as indicating the
hold that Doddridge had obtained on the hearts of the Northamptonshire
Nonconformists, that his hymns were almost everywhere in use in
conjunction with Watts, and in all the old books used in my day the two
were bound up together."

The following character of the Independent Churches in this County is
given by Job Orton, from the knowledge he obtained of them while
resident at Northampton, first as student, afterwards as assistant, with
Doddridge, leaving him in the year 1742. Writing to a young minister, he
observes--"I am sorry you have met with such poor encouragement, and
especially with any ill treatment, from the people in Northamptonshire.
I know them well: some of them are narrow and bigoted, but in general
they are serious exemplary Christians, and the bulk of them are not
disposed to use a minister ill who is not imprudent, and doth not
directly oppose their favourite notions, which is the only way to make
people hold them the faster. They are not disposed to censure a person
who preaches in a serious and experimental manner, and in an evangelical
strain, though he does not use many of their favourite phrases, but will
bear almost anything from the pulpit where the main thing is not
wanting."

The idea of the present Work originated in a conversation with the
author of the Centenary Memorial of Doddridge, at the Autumnal Meetings
of the Congregational Union, held at Northampton, 1851. If the Writer
could have prevailed on highly esteemed brethren in the County to have
undertaken the work, he would gladly have done so; but the impression
which he had of its desirableness and adaptation for usefulness
produced a conviction that the attempt should be made. He has done what
he could. The loss of early records in some cases, and the entire
neglect to form them in others, has rendered the accounts of some of the
Churches very defective; but in some cases the origin and history of the
Churches can be correctly traced.

Materials have been collected from all the sources that supplied any, to
which the Writer could have access. His hope is, that the work will tend
to serve the cause of evangelical truth and piety, that it will
illustrate the nature and importance of Christian Churches formed and
sustained on the voluntary principle, and that it may aid in some degree
to extend their influence and increase their efficiency. He commends it
to the candid attention of the reader, and to the blessing of the Great
Head of the Church.

Ashley, December 14th, 1852.

N. B. The Memorials commence with the Churches in Northampton, and the
other Churches in the County are placed in chronological order,
according to the date of their formation, so far as that could be
ascertained.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.                                                       PAGE

  Memorials of the Independent Churches in Northampton:--
    SECTION 1.--Introductory Statement                                1
    SECTION 2.--The Independent Church at Castle Hill                 9
    SECTION 3.--The Independent Church at King's Street              37
    SECTION 4.--The Independent Church at Commercial Street          42

  CHAPTER II.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Rowell                      46

  CHAPTER III.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Kettering                   80

  CHAPTER IV.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Market Harborough          119

  CHAPTER V.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Ashley and Wilbarston      146

  CHAPTER VI.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Welford                    155

  CHAPTER VII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Creaton                    179

  CHAPTER VIII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Daventry                   186

  CHAPTER IX.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Wellingborough:--

    SECTION 1.--The Independent Church at Cheese Lane               210
    SECTION 2.--The Independent Church at West End                  226
    SECTION 3.--The Independent Church at Salem Chapel              246

  CHAPTER X.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Oundle                     250

  CHAPTER XI.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Weedon Beck                262

  CHAPTER XII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Long Buckby                268

  CHAPTER XIII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Potterspury                275

  CHAPTER XIV.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Yardley Hastings           291

  CHAPTER XV.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Kilsby and Crick           304

  CHAPTER XVI.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Brigstock                  314

  CHAPTER XVII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Weldon and Corby           327

  CHAPTER XVIII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Yelvertoft                 335

  CHAPTER XIX.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Wollaston                  344

  CHAPTER XX.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Peterborough               352

  CHAPTER XXI.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Towcester                  357

  CHAPTER XXII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Old                        361

  CHAPTER XXIII.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Everdon                    367

  CHAPTER XXIV.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Brackley                   369

  CHAPTER XXV.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Byfield                    371

  CHAPTER XXVI.

  Memorials of the Independent Church at Paulerspury                373

  CHAPTER XXVII.

  Home Missionary Stations--1. King's Cliffe and Nassington;
  2. Borough Fen; 3. Middleton                                      376

  APPENDIX                                                          381




CHAPTER I.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCHES IN NORTHAMPTON.


SECTION 1.--INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT.

Northampton has been distinguished in the history of this country by the
struggles there maintained for the liberties of Englishmen; nor has it
been unknown in the efforts that have been made to secure the liberty of
Christian worship and the purity of divine institutions.

Soon after that "morning star of the Reformation," John Wickliffe,
appeared, about the year 1369, his doctrines were introduced into
Northampton, and met with much favour in the town. Notwithstanding the
earnest opposition of the clergy, they were cherished by several persons
of rank, the Mayor himself being tainted with the heresy. A formal
complaint was made to the King in council by one Richard Stannisworth, a
woolstapler, that the chief magistrate, John Fox, harboured in his house
James Collyn, a fierce maintainer of Lollardy (as the sentiments of
Wickliffe were called), in Northampton, and that they encouraged the
preaching of the Lollards, contrary to the prohibition of the Bishop of
Lincoln. Thus it appears that there were numbers at that time in
Northampton ready to welcome the days of reformation from the
corruptions of Popery.

When the Reformation was introduced, and sanctioned by the rulers of
England, amongst those who sought a greater degree of purity in the
worship of God than the sovereign would allow, and who could not conform
to the relics of Romanism that were retained, were several devoted men
who laboured and suffered in Northampton.

Francis Merbury was a minister at Northampton during this period, when
the Puritans struggled to obtain a change in the existing state of
things. He was brought into many troubles for Nonconformity, being
several times cast into prison. On Nov. 5th, 1578, he was convened
before the High Commission, where he underwent a severe examination, and
was sent a prisoner to the Marshalsea.

Edward Snape, after being educated in the University of Cambridge,
became minister of Saint Peter's Church, Northampton. He was a decided
Nonconformist, a laborious preacher, and a zealous advocate for a pure
reformation of the Church. It is stated that when the parishioners of
St. Peter's understood that he did not account himself a full minister
until he should be chosen by some particular congregation, they
immediately chose him to be their minister. In 1590 he was brought into
trouble on account of the Associations held in Northamptonshire and
Warwickshire. He was a zealous and active member of these assemblies,
for which he was summoned before the High Commission. He moved the Mayor
of Northampton to unite with other towns in presenting a supplication to
the Queen, humbly beseeching her Majesty to hear their cries, and grant
them a more pure ecclesiastical discipline.

The following anecdote is related of this persecuted servant of God: "He
was cast into prison by the bishops for his Nonconformity; and all his
money being expended by his long confinement, he met with much unkind
usage from the gaoler. The good man being one day on his knees in
fervent prayer to God, and the window of his chamber being open, he
observed something thrown into the room; but he resolved to finish his
prayer before he examined what it was. When he rose from his knees, he
found to his great surprise that it was a purse full of gold. By this
unexpected supply he was more comfortable in his situation, and enabled
to make his keeper more humane ever after. "The Lord heareth the young
ravens that cry; how much more," it is observed, in connexion with this,
"will he hear his afflicted people?"

Humphrey Fenn was several years minister at Northampton--a most learned
and venerable divine, whose ministry was rendered very successful: yet
he underwent many troubles for Nonconformity. While at Northampton he
experienced the cruel oppression of the times--was apprehended and
committed to close prison, where he remained a long time. During his
confinement the inhabitants of Northampton presented a supplication to
Queen Elizabeth, humbly and earnestly desiring her Majesty to grant his
release, and his restoration to his beloved ministry. In this
supplication they affirmed, upon their dutiful allegiance, that during
his abode in that place he had lived a honest and a peaceable life; and
they gave a high character of his diligence in preaching, his obedience
to God, and to those in authority. It does not appear whether this
application was at all successful. Mr. Fenn, with some others, presented
a long letter to the Queen in vindication of their own innocency; but we
have not discovered how long they remained in prison after that period.

John Penry, a very distinguished Puritan, after leaving the University,
was settled for some time at Northampton. He was brought before the High
Commissioners for Nonconformity, and after examination, cast into
prison. After a month's confinement, he was discharged; but when he had
obtained his release, they sent their pursuivants to apprehend him, and
again commit him to prison. Walton, one of them, went immediately to
Northampton, and upon entering Mr. Penry's house ransacked his study,
and took away all the books and papers which he thought proper; but Mr.
Penry was not to be found. Upon the publication of 'Martin Mar-Prelate,'
he was again apprehended.

He became at length a member of a Church of Brownists, meeting about
London, sometimes in the fields and woods, in the dead of the night, to
avoid the fury of the prelates. During his imprisonment he wrote a most
pious, affectionate, and encouraging letter to Mr. F. Johnson, the
pastor, and the rest of the brethren. It is addressed "to the distressed
and faithful congregation of Christ in London, and all the members
thereof, whether in bonds or at liberty;" and he concludes by
subscribing himself, "their loving brother in the patience and
sufferings of the Gospel, John Penry, a witness of Christ in this life,
and a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed." He at length lost
his life for the cause to which he was devoted, for he was executed May
29th, 1593.

Arthur Wake was another of these worthies, who had some connexion with
Northampton. He was a son of John Wake, Esq., descended from an ancient
and honourable family. He became a most popular and useful preacher. In
1565 he was presented to the living of Great Billing, in
Northamptonshire. He was very much persecuted for his Nonconformity, and
at length deprived of his living. In the year 1593 he was residing at
Northampton, and engaged as minister of Saint John's Hospital in this
town. It is stated that "he was a divine of good learning, great piety,
and a zealous, laborious, and useful preacher."

By the rigorous proceedings of the ruling prelates the Church was
deprived of many of its brightest ornaments, and nearly all its faithful
pastors were ejected, especially in Northamptonshire. In the vicinity of
Northampton there was William Fleshurne, or Fletcher, B.D., rector of
Abington, in 1588. Of him it is recorded, that in 1590 he was one of the
Puritan ministers who associated in general synods and particular
classes at Northampton, Fawsley, and other places, to promote the new
discipline in opposition to the Established Church. He obtained the
vicarage of Moulton in 1607, and held it till his death; but appears to
have resided at Abington, where he was buried the 3rd of May, 1627.

Dr. John Preston was born at Heyford, in Northamptonshire, in the parish
of Bugbrook, 1578. He became a very popular preacher, but met with
considerable opposition on account of his Puritan principles. He had a
strong constitution, which he wore out in the study and in the pulpit.
Being desirous of dying in his native county and among his old friends,
he retired into Northamptonshire, where he departed this life in a most
pious and devout manner in the 41st year of his age, and was buried in
Fawsley Church, old Mr. Dod, minister of the place, preaching his
funeral sermon to a numerous auditory. His practical works and sermons
were printed by his own order after his decease.

William Prandlove was a respectable Puritan minister, who about the year
1562 became vicar of Fawsley, in Northamptonshire, and in 1577 he became
rector of Lamport, in the same county. He united with his brethren in
their private associations, and took an active part in promoting the
desired ecclesiastical discipline, for which, in the year 1590, he was
apprehended and cast into prison, where he remained a long time. He was
after carried before the High Commission and the Star Chamber, where he
underwent the severe scrutiny of his ecclesiastical inquisitors.

In connexion with these statements relating to Puritan ministers who
maintained and suffered for their principles in the county town of
Northamptonshire and its immediate vicinity, it may not be considered
unsuitable to state that a Sir Richard Knightley, at Fawsley in this
county, who received the honour of knighthood from the Earl of
Leicester, at Fotheringay, in the 8th of Elizabeth, 1566, was one of the
earliest and most zealous patrons of the Puritans, or opposers of the
new Act for the Uniformity of Worship, who assumed the importance of an
organized party in 1568. Their publications, principally from the pen of
John Ap-Henry, better known by the assumed name of Martin Mar-Prelate,
were industriously though secretly disseminated by means of a travelling
printing press, conducted by one Walgrave. To elude detection, the
scene of its operations was frequently changed. It was first set up at
Mousley, in Surrey, from whence it was removed to Fawsley, and worked in
a private upper room, approached only by a winding staircase. Its next
stage was to Norton, another of Sir Richard's seats. It was subsequently
conveyed to Coventry, Woolston, in Warwickshire, and finally to
Manchester, where it was seized by the Earl of Derby. For these
clandestine proceedings Sir Richard and his associates were summoned
before the Court of Star Chamber, and heavily fined; but Archbishop
Whitgift, though one of the most prominent objects of their attack, with
a truly Christian spirit obtained by his intercession a remission of
their sentence. In the succeeding reign, Sir Richard ventured, with Sir
Edward Montague, Sir Francis Hastings, and 60 or 80 other gentlemen, to
petition the King on behalf of the Puritan clergy of this county; but
they were severely rebuked in the Star Chamber and at the Council Table
for their presumption, and Sir Richard was dismissed both from the
lieutenancy and the commission of the peace.

There is another name that is connected with Fawsley and the county of
Northampton, to which we should like to devote a single page--the name
of John Dod, A.M., generally styled "the Decalogist," from his
celebrated exposition of the Ten Commandments. He resided several years
at Fawsley, under the patronage of the Knightley family. This learned
Puritan divine was the youngest son of John Dod, Esq., of Shacklach, in
Cheshire, where he was born in 1555. He was educated at Jesus College,
Cambridge. He was successively minister of Hanwell, in Oxfordshire,
Fenny Drayton, in Leicestershire, Canons Ashby and Fawsley in this
county. In a work published in 1635, entitled 'A Plain and Familiar
Exposition of the Lord's Prayer,' there is a dedication to his much
honoured, loving friend, Mr. Richard Knightley; where he states, "I
dedicate this book unto you, that as the Lord is my witness that I pray
daily for you by name (and so, by his assistance, I purpose to do while
I live), so I must leave some testimony behind me to men after my death
(which I continually wait for) of my unfeigned and hearty thankfulness
for all your favours and goodness to me and mine." He survived ten years
after this, and died at the very advanced age of 90 years--was buried at
Fawsley, 19th of August, 1645. He published a number of different works;
but his sayings acquired great provincial celebrity, and have been
printed in various forms. Fuller characterizes him as "by nature a
witty, by industry a learned, by grace a godly, divine." His life was
written by Samuel Clarke.

Mr. Dod was several times silenced for his want of entire conformity to
the established system; but he maintained his principles to the last,
being distinguished by his fervent spirit of devotion, his entire
reliance on God, his submission to the Divine will, his trust in the
Redeemer, his heavenly-mindedness. "The righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance."

Though this Work chiefly relates to one denomination of Nonconformists
in Northamptonshire, it appeared to us desirable to include a short
notice of these early advocates of Nonconformity, especially in the town
of Northampton, though they did not generally come out from the Church
as by law established; for they laboured to obtain a further
reformation, and would rather suffer than conform to all that was
required. Their principles and their spirit gradually led on to all
that has since been manifested in the support of genuine, evangelical,
vital, voluntary Christianity, in the different communities that have
separated from the Established Church.


SECTION 2.--THE CHURCH AT CASTLE HILL.

There are some places of worship which attain notoriety entirely from
some celebrated individual that has been connected with them. The
talents, the learning, the preaching, or the writings of one of the
ministers, have identified the place with his name.

This is the case with the Meeting House at Castle Hill, Northampton. A
plain structure, resembling many others that were built about the same
period, it is regarded with the deepest interest, as the place where
Doddridge spent the greater part of his life as a pastor. In that place
Doddridge laboured; there stands the pulpit in which Doddridge preached;
to that vestry Doddridge retired; there he often watched and prayed; at
that table he oft presented the memorials of a Saviour's love, and
poured forth from the fulness of an affectionate, fervent heart, the
strains of an exalted faith and piety.

No certain record can be found of the first formation of the Church
assembling in this place. Its origin is lost in obscurity. When the "Act
of Uniformity" passed, Mr. Jeremiah Lewis, rector of Saint Giles's,
Northampton, was ejected from his living; but such was his natural
reserve, and such his retired habits, that it does not appear that he
ever preached after his ejectment. He did not long survive that event.
"He was a man of great meekness; remarkable for his prudence; much
beloved by the neighbouring ministers."

Mr. Samuel Blower, who was ejected from Woodstock, in Oxfordshire, is
recorded as the first pastor of this Church. Of his history but little
is known. He was educated at Oxford, and was a Fellow of Magdalen
College. Of his general character we are informed, "that he was of a
meek temper, peaceable principles, and a godly life;" of his sentiments,
that "he had very exalted thoughts of divine grace and redeeming love;"
of the prevailing spirit of his ministry, "that he discovered a very
tender regard to young persons, and would often address himself very
affectionately to them, not only in his sermons, but in his visits; and
that he rejoiced much when he saw anything hopeful in their characters:"
of his method of preaching, that "he affected not a pompous way; nor did
he dispense the truths of the Gospel with the wisdom of man's words,
knowing that that was not so likely to be attended with a divine
blessing--Scripture revelations, in Scripture language, were the main
subjects of his discourses:" of his friendships we are told that "he was
a most desirable friend, being free and communicative, candid in the
last degree, of a very sympathizing spirit with those in affliction, and
particularly mindful of them in his prayers; and he was so firm and
constant where he professed friendship, that it must be some very ill
thing indeed that was the occasion of his breaking it off." Of his
devoted piety it is said, "that wherever he had an interest, he was for
improving it for God to his utmost, and took every opportunity to do
so."

He published a funeral sermon for Mrs. Elizabeth Tub, from Psalm xviii.
46: "The Lord liveth, and blessed be my rock," &c. Mr. Blower
afterwards removed to Abingdon, in Berks, where he died in 1701.

The records of this Church commence with the following statement:--

    _Acts and Memoirs of the particular Church of Christ at Northampton,
    of which Mr. Samuel Blower was pastor._

    In the year 1695, this Church did, upon the departure of the Rev.
    Mr. Blower, their pastor, give their unanimous call to Thomas
    Shepherd to succeed him in the pastoral office, who thereupon
    accepting the call, did actually succeed him in the office
    aforesaid.

The form of the Church Covenant:--

    We, this Church of Christ, whose names are underwritten, having
    given up, ourselves to the Lord and one to another according to the
    will of God, do promise and covenant, in the presence of God, to
    walk together in all the laws and ordinances of Christ, according to
    the rules of his Gospel, through Jesus Christ so strengthening us.
    (This was subscribed by about 164 names.)

A memorandum on the next page states, "That Thomas Shepherd, accepting
the call this Church gave him, did own and declare his willingness and
consent to walk with them as a pastor with his people, so long as they
could walk comfortably together in all the ways and ordinances of the
Lord."

Under date of September 11th, 1696, we have the following statement,
from which it appears that Mr. Shepherd's ministry at Northampton was of
short duration:--

    At a Church-meeting then holden, it was publicly owned by this
    Church that Thomas Shepherd, their present pastor, was not under
    obligation to a continuance with them, by virtue of any conditional
    consent or promise made upon sitting down. The conditions not being
    observed by this people, my engagements to them thereupon must needs
    cease.

About a year and a half from this time, _i.e._, February 25th, 1698, Mr.
John Hunt was chosen the pastor of this Church. His father was one of
the ejected ministers, a Mr. William Hunt, ejected from the vicarage of
Sutton, in Cambridgeshire. He was a man of eminent piety and great
usefulness, and two of his sons became devoted ministers among the
Dissenters. The pastor of this Church was first at Royston, and from
thence came to Northampton, and afterwards he became minister of the
Independent Church at Newport Pagnell. He appears to have inserted the
following passage from Philip Henry's 'Life' among the Church
records:--"Those ministers who will rule by love and meekness need no
laws or canons to rule by, other than those of the holy Scriptures."

He was a man of considerable talent, and wrote several valuable works.
There appear to have been 100 members admitted to the Church during the
ministry of Mr. Hunt; that ministry closed at Northampton in 1709. He
died at Tunstead, in Norfolk, in 1730. On February 22nd, 1709, after
divers repeated calls, and days and times of seeking God, Rev. Thomas
Tingey gave his acceptance of the call of this people, together with the
reason of it, and was solemnly ordained unto the pastoral office and
charge of this Church of Christ--Mr. Dowley, of Lutterworth, Mr. King,
of Wellingborough, Mr. Some, of Harborough, Mr. Norris, of Welford, Mr.
Ironmonger, of Buckingham, Mr. Jackson, of Buckby, Mr. Mason, of
Spaldwich, and Mr. Wills, about to be settled at Kettering, and Mr.
Dale, of Creaton, being present.

Mr. Tingey had previously been minister at Newport Pagnell, so that Mr.
Hunt's removal was an exchange of situations with him. Mr. Tingey was
an evangelical and able minister, and very zealously exerted himself,
even beyond his strength, to preach the Gospel in destitute towns and
villages around. On leaving Northampton he became pastor of an
Independent Church in Fetter Lane. Dr. Ridgley preached his funeral
sermon, and published it, in which he gives him a high character as an
able and successful minister. He died November 1st, 1729, a few weeks
after his settlement in London.

The ministry of Mr. Tingey appears to have continued about twenty years,
until the first part of the year 1729, for on September 28th of that
year we find the first invitation given to Doddridge, with a view to the
pastoral office.

As we have a more full account of this pastorate than of any other over
the Church at Castle Hill, and as it is invested with some peculiar
interest from the labours of Doddridge, so we think it proper to present
the particulars to some extent before the reader. The following is a
copy of the invitation:--

    _From the Dissenting Congregation at Castle Hill, Northampton._

    The Church of Christ in Northampton sendeth greeting.

    REVEREND SIR,--The dispensations of God's providence towards us in
    suffering the removal of our late pastor is very awful, and we hope
    hath lain with weight upon our hearts. It hath urged us to make
    prayer and supplication that God, the Great Shepherd, would appear
    and direct us in this difficult and weighty matter, and send among
    us one whom he will eminently own and make a great blessing unto us.

    Sir, we have had some taste of your ministerial ability in your
    occasional labours amongst us, which have given a general
    satisfaction to the congregation; but this matter being so
    important, we humbly apply ourselves to you, that you would come
    and preach among us as a candidate for a month. We leave our
    brethren, who will bring this, to use what further arguments they
    may think meet, and recommend you to the wisdom and conduct of the
    divine Spirit, and continue our prayers and supplications to the
    great God for our direction. We subscribe our names by the order and
    consent of the whole Church. (Signed by ten persons.)

The prospect of this removal to Northampton became a matter of great
concern to Doddridge and his friends. He had recently commenced his
academy at Harborough; he was engaged as assistant to Mr. Some; the
latter was very unwilling for him to entertain the idea of removing at
this time; and from his representations, and the regard Doddridge had
for his friendship, with some other circumstances, he had almost arrived
at a determined refusal. But in the Church at Northampton there was much
concern about the matter, and they did all in their power to obtain a
compliance; and it was as if God worked with them. They made such
representations to the ministers who were likely to have influence with
Doddridge, as to engage them on their side. Mr. Clarke, of St. Alban's,
wrote, October 21st, 1729--

    DEAR SIR,--Your resolution with respect to Northampton I could not
    but approve, according to the view I then had of the matter; but
    to-day Mr. Bliss, of that town, called upon me with a letter from
    the Church, in which they represent how unanimously and earnestly
    they desired your settlement among them, and how ready they should
    be in every particular to make the removal agreeable to you; and
    that as to the objection from your attendance upon your pupils, they
    would gladly accept of what time you could spare without any damage
    to them, as they are sensible that you have abilities to go through
    with both employments. They further urged, that should you refuse
    their invitation, it might expose them to the danger of division,
    and they could not join unanimously in any other call. Mr. Bliss
    also told me that they could have a house fit for your academy on
    easy terms, and that they would furnish some of the rooms for you at
    their own expense; and that if Mrs. Jennings did not think fit to
    remove her family, and is out of pocket by having provided for the
    reception of your pupils, they would make her a handsome present to
    reimburse her. In short, that the people were so set upon having you
    on any terms, that they would do anything for you in their power,
    and earnestly desired me to press you to consent.

    I must own, their very great zeal in this matter weighs very much
    with me; and the more so, because it would give you the prospect of
    being of great service there, and by that means in all that county,
    where you might be an instrument of promoting a more catholic
    spirit, as well as of bringing in souls to Christ. I am ready to
    think that God has some special work for you to do there.

And Mr. Some, the most decided and earnest opponent of the change, goes
to Northampton to converse with the people about the matter, intending
to prevail on them to give it up; and he, in writing to Doddridge, says,
"The hearts of the people are moved altogether as the trees of a wood
when bent by the wind; and they are under such strong impressions about
your coming to them, that it is impossible for a man to converse with
them without feeling something for them. The mention of your name
diffuses life and spirit through the whole body, and nothing can be
heard of but Mr. Doddridge. I find myself in the utmost perplexity, and
know not what to say or do. I think I am like _Saul among the prophets_;
and that the same spirit which is in the people begins to seize me
also."

Still, before his removal from Harborough, he undergoes a great
struggle. He had almost decided, notwithstanding all this, to remain
there; went to Northampton to "lay down his good friends there as
gently as he could"; preached to them with this view from "When he could
not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done." He
thinks much of the weight of business that would lie upon him as tutor
and pastor; of his own youth; the largeness of the congregation, and
having no prospect of an assistant. But he is passing through a room of
the house where he lodges, and hears a child reading a chapter in the
Bible to its mother;--the only words he distinctly catches are, "As thy
day so shall thy strength be." This deeply impressed him, yet he
persisted in his refusal. Then a deacon of the Church, whose father was
ill, presents an urgent request for him to improve his father's death
when he is taken away. He dies that night. Doddridge is detained by his
promise for the funeral. He is greatly assisted; many attend, and
express the greatest satisfaction in his labours. While waiting for this
funeral the young people come to him in a body, and entreat his
continuance, promising to submit to every method of instruction he might
propose. At length he is so overcome as to be convinced that it is his
duty to accept the invitation, though still directly contrary to the
advice and wishes of his friends; yet, seeing the hand of God in it, he
breaks through all other restraints. After much earnest prayer,
correspondence, and consultations, Doddridge sends his answer to the
invitation to the pastoral office, of which the following is a copy:--

    _To the Congregation at Northampton, on my acceptance of their
    Invitation to undertake the Pastoral Charge._

                                             _December 6th, 1729._

    MY DEAR FRIENDS,--After a serious and impartial consideration of
    your case, and repeated addresses to the Great Father of Light for
    his guidance and direction, I can at length assure you that I am
    determined by his permission to accept of your kind invitation, and
    undertake the pastoral care of you, with the most ardent feelings of
    sincere gratitude and affection.

    You will easily apprehend that I could not form this resolution
    without a great deal of anguish, both with regard to those friends
    whom I am called upon to resign, and in reference to that great and
    difficult work that lies before me, in the care of your large
    congregation and my academy. But I hope that I have sincerely
    devoted my soul to God and my Redeemer; and therefore I would humbly
    yield myself up to what, in present circumstances, I apprehend to be
    his will. I take this important step with fear and trembling, yet
    with a humble confidence in him, and with the hope that in the midst
    of these great difficulties he will not leave me entirely destitute
    of that _presence_ which I desire to prefer to everything which life
    can bestow.

    As for you, my brethren, let me entreat of you, that "if there be
    any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
    of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercy, fulfil ye my joy." Let me
    beseech you to remember, that by accepting your call I have
    entrusted the happiness of my life into your hands. Prepare
    yourselves, therefore, to cover my many infirmities with the mantle
    of your love, and continue to treat me with the same kindness and
    gentleness as those dear and excellent friends have done whom I am
    now about to leave in compassion to your souls; for God knows that
    no temporal advantage you could have offered would have engaged me
    to relinquish them.

    May my heavenly Father comfort my heart in what is now determined,
    by giving an abundant success to my ministrations among you, so that
    a multitude of souls may have reason to praise him on that account!
    and let me beg that you will bear me daily on your hearts before his
    throne in prayer, and seek for me that extraordinary assistance
    without which I must infallibly sink under the great work I have
    thus undertaken.

    I shall continue to recommend you, my dearly beloved, to the grace
    of Almighty God, the great Shepherd of his sheep, with that
    affection which now so peculiarly becomes your most devoted friend
    and servant, in the bonds of our common Lord,

                                                 PHILIP DODDRIDGE.

The account of the ordination we present, as inserted by Doddridge in
the records of the Church:--

    After repeated solicitations, long deliberation, and earnest prayer
    to God for direction, I came to the resolution to accept the
    invitation of my dear and most affectionate friends at Northampton
    on Saturday, December 6th, 1729, and certified the Church of that
    resolution by a letter that evening. I removed from Harborough and
    came to settle here on Wednesday, December 24th. On Thursday, March
    19th, 1730, I was solemnly set apart to the pastoral office by
    prayer, and fasting, and imposition of hands. Mr. Goodrich began
    with prayer and reading Eph. iv.; Mr. Dawson prayed; then Mr. Watson
    preached from 1 Tim. iii. 1, "If a man desire the office of a
    bishop, he desireth a good work." Mr. Norris then read the call of
    the Church, of which I declared my acceptance; he took my
    confessions of faith and ordination vows, and then proceeded to set
    me apart by prayer. Immediately afterwards, Mr. Clarke, of St.
    Alban's, gave the charge to me; and Mr. Saunders, of Kettering, the
    exhortation to the people; and Mr. Mattock concluded the whole
    solemnity by prayer.

    It was a delightful, and I hope it will prove a very profitable,
    day. I write this memoranda of it under the remembrance of a painful
    and threatening illness, which detained me from my public work the
    two ensuing Sabbaths. The event is still dubious; but I leave my
    life and my dear flock in the hand of the great Shepherd, hoping
    what passed on my ordination-day will be an engagement to me to live
    more usefully, or an encouragement to die more cheerfully, than I
    should otherwise have done. Amen.

    I administered the Lord's Supper, for the first time, on Lord's-day,
    April 12th, 1730. I hope we had much of the presence of God with
    us, and may regard it as a token for good. On the 4th of February it
    pleased God to add to us eight persons, in whose character and
    experience we find great reason to be fully satisfied.

The number of names entered in the Church-book, as we consider by the
hand of Doddridge, is 342.

After about ten years' labour as pastor, tutor, and author, finding the
state of the Church not to his satisfaction, and feeling that he could
not attend to it as it appeared to him to require, he endeavoured to
engage the Church to choose some assistants to him in his work among the
people, under the name of elders. They acceded to the request of their
pastor, and unanimously made choice of the Rev. Job Orton, Rev. John
Evans, as also of Mr. John Brown, to assist the pastor in his care of
the society; and also desired Mr. Samuel Heyworth, by divine providence
resident among them, though a member of the Church at Rowell, to assist,
by his counsels and labours, in the same office. They were solemnly
recommended to God by prayer at a Church-meeting, February 26, 1740,
having then signified their acceptance of the call.

These elders appeared at once to enter with an earnest spirit on the
duties of their office. After several meetings amongst themselves, with
the concurrence of the pastor and deacons they drew up a letter, to be
presented to the Church, expressive of what they considered to be the
duties to which they were called, and of what they regarded as necessary
to the good order and prosperity of the society. The letter was
gratefully received by the Church. Special Church-meetings were
appointed to consider the proposals it contained, and the unanimous
sanction of the members present was given to what the elders desired.
Regarding the letter as an interesting document, we shall here present
it before the reader:--

    _The Elders and Deacons of the Church of Christ assembling on Castle
    Hill, Northampton, to their brethren of the Church, greeting._

    DEAR BRETHREN, BELOVED IN THE LORD,--As we are chosen, in common
    with our pastor, to watch over you, and serve among you in offices
    relating to the public honour, edification, and comfort of the
    society, we think it our duty to address ourselves to you with one
    consent, on a subject which appears to us of great importance.

    You cannot but know, dear brethren, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
    whose servants we are, has by his apostles commanded his Churches
    that they "withdraw themselves from every brother who walketh
    disorderly, and not according to the traditions received from them;
    that they mark those that cause scandals among them; and that if any
    obey not the word, that they note that man, and have no fellowship
    with him, that he may be ashamed; and that if any brother be a
    fornicator, or covetous, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
    extortioner" (and, upon the same principle, if he be a liar, or one
    that defrauds others), "they should not eat with such a one; but
    that" (though such as are without are to be referred to the judgment
    of God) "they judge those that are within, and put away from among
    themselves such wicked persons." These, brethren, are the precepts
    of Christ, according to which, by our entering into Church
    fellowship, we engaged to walk; and we apprehend that the neglect of
    these precepts, and the discipline in the Church of Christ which
    should be founded upon them, is a great evil, which often provokes
    God to withdraw from his people, and to hinder the success of other
    ordinances while this is neglected. We do therefore, in the name of
    our Lord Jesus Christ, beseech you that ye would attend to these
    precepts, and would consent to proper measures for the regular
    exercise of discipline among us. And as we have observed that
    several have withdrawn themselves from the table of the Lord,
    though their names stand as members among us, we desire that the
    Church would take it into consideration, and that if it shall be
    found (as they fear it will) that some have withdrawn on account of
    such irregularities in their behaviour as have given scandal and
    offence, we cannot think the matter ought to rest merely in their
    withdrawing from us, but that it is our duty as a Church solemnly to
    admonish them, and, where the offence has been great and public, to
    separate them from our communion, till God shall give them
    repentance to the acknowledgment of their sin; after which, it is
    our undoubted duty, on a suitable time of trial, with proper
    declarations of their repentance, to admit them again in the spirit
    of love and rejoicing in their recovery.

    We do therefore, in concurrence with our pastor, by whose
    approbation we write these things, exhort you, in the name of our
    Lord Jesus Christ, that you enter into a serious disquisition of
    these things; and advise, that you appoint a day in which they may
    be solemnly discussed, at which the members of the Church shall be
    present, and such only; at which time we, the elders, are ready to
    exhibit a list of several persons absenting themselves from
    communion, of whose cases the Church will do well to judge, that
    such measures may be taken concerning them as the precepts of our
    common Lord direct; and we desire that the elders may now be
    commissioned, in the name of the Church, to give notice to such
    persons, if they think proper to attend at that meeting, that if
    they have anything to offer in favour of themselves and their own
    conduct, they may be heard, and all due regard be paid to their
    defence; they being also in the name of the Church informed, that if
    they do not so attend, their absenting themselves without sufficient
    reason assigned will be taken as a confession of their being
    incapable of offering any excuse, so that the Church will
    accordingly proceed against them.

    To this, as our unanimous advice to the Church, we have here set our
    hands, that if any of us then should be absent, our approbation of
    these measures may be evidently declared; and we pray that God may
    guide you in all your deliberations and resolutions, to the glory
    of his name, and the honour and edification of this Society.

    _April 2nd, 1741._

After this follows a number of cases presented to the Church for
suitable admonition and discipline. One entry we will quote, as
deserving the attention of the Churches of Christ at the present day:--

    It is the unanimous judgment of this Church, that the frequent acts
    of bankruptcy which have happened in Dissenting congregations, as
    well as elsewhere, have brought so great a dishonour on religion,
    and occasioned so much mischief and reproach, that we think
    ourselves obliged in duty to enter our public protest and caution on
    this head; and we do hereby declare, that if any persons in stated
    communion with us shall become a bankrupt, or, as it is commonly
    expressed, fail in the world, he must expect to be cut off from our
    body, unless he do within two months give to the Church, by the
    elders, either in word or writing, such an account of his affairs as
    shall convince us that his fall was owing not to his own sin and
    folly, but to the afflicting hand of God upon him; in which case,
    far from adding affliction to the afflicted, we hope that as God
    shall enable us we shall be ready to vindicate, comfort, and assist
    him, as his friends and brethren in Christ.

    Signed, in the name and presence of the Church, this 1st day of May,
    1741, by the pastor and deacons.

Shortly after this Doddridge is deprived of his valuable assistant in
the academy and the Church, Job Orton; and he parts with him in a manner
that indicates the high sense he entertained of his worth, and the
affectionate attachment he felt to him. When it was decided for him to
leave, we find this record:--

    Our dear and reverend brother, Mr. Job Orton, having declared his
    purpose of leaving us, on the invitation of the united Church at
    Shrewsbury, was solemnly recommended to God by the prayers of the
    Church, several hours being spent in that exercise, and then was
    dismissed to the said Church at Shrewsbury by the following letter,
    sent by the pastor, in the name of the  Church:--

"_The Church of Christ assembling on Castle Hill, Northampton, to the
Church of Christ in Salop assembling_.

    "DEAR BRETHREN AND FRIENDS, BELOVED IN THE LORD,--As the providence
    of God hath seen fit to remove from us to you our reverend and dear
    brother, Mr. Job Orton, who has for many years resided amongst us,
    and has of late years, with great honour and acceptance, ministered
    unto us and assisted us under the office of an elder; though we
    cannot resign him without the most affectionate and tender concern
    and deep regret, yet, being obliged to acquiesce in the
    determination of the great Head of the Church, though to us a very
    painful one, we think it our duty by these letters to dismiss him
    from our stated communion to yours; which accordingly we hereby do,
    blessing God for all the advantages we have enjoyed by his ministry
    and presence, and earnestly praying that his labours may not only be
    highly acceptable and delightful to you, as we are persuaded they
    must be, but that they may be crowned with abundant success. We
    cannot doubt but your conduct to him will be so obliging and
    affectionate, as abundantly to demonstrate the sense you have of the
    singular favour of Providence to you in sending among you so able,
    so faithful, and so zealous a labourer; and we earnestly desire your
    prayers for us, that God may make up to us, by his immediate
    presence and blessing, the unspeakable and otherwise irreparable
    loss which we sustain by his removal from us.

    "Signed, by the unanimous direction of the Church, at their
    Church-meeting, October 1st, 1741, in the name of the whole society,

                                               "PHILIP DODDRIDGE."

Another memoranda by Doddridge we shall here insert:--

                                                 _May 2nd, 1748._

    I reviewed the list of the Church from the beginning, and found that
    from 1694, when Mr. Hunt was settled as their pastor (that is,
    within the compass of 54 years), 784 members have been admitted,
    inclusive of those then found--that is, one year with another, more
    than 14 members each year: of which 240 only continue alive and
    reside still among us; of which, 58 were admitted before my
    settlement with the Church;--and, as I have admitted 299, they show
    that 117, who have been admitted from that time, are either removed
    or dead, besides many others who were admitted before.

    N.B.--Seventy-eight have been my pupils.

This would average, during the ministry of Doddridge, 16 admissions in a
year.

The following letter of Doddridge, written about this period, containing
some statements relating to his Church and his feelings as a pastor, we
think never before published, may here be suitably introduced. It was
addressed to "the Rev. Mr. Ryland, in Warwick," father of the late Dr.
Ryland, of Bristol, and afterwards minister of College Street Chapel,
Northampton.


                                    _Northampton, May 17th, 1747._

    REV. AND DEAR SIR,--I am much obliged to you for your affectionate
    letter, and shall be very ready to give you a visit and a sermon, if
    Providence give me a convenient opportunity; but my motions are at
    present uncertain, depending partly on some visits I expect from my
    friends, and partly upon other circumstances. Be assured, Sir, that
    if I have an opportunity I shall be very glad to see you and serve
    you to the best of my little power, and think myself happy in an
    opportunity of doing anything to promote the kingdom of Christ
    amongst you or elsewhere. I beg your prayers for me. Through the
    Divine goodness I continue well. I have been much afflicted by the
    breach made in our Church by the Moravians, who have got from us a
    little congregation. The affliction has been increased by the death
    of some very promising and hopeful persons, especially of one who
    died last night, and whose age, circumstances, and character
    concurred to give us the greatest hopes of usefulness from him; so
    that it is one of the greatest blows of that kind that I have
    received since I came hither. My spirits are much grieved and
    oppressed; pray that I may be enabled to wait on the Lord with quiet
    submission and humble hope.

    We congratulate you on your marriage, and heartily recommend you and
    Mrs. Ryland to the Divine blessing.

                  I am, Rev. and dear Sir,
        Your affectionate brother and obliged humble servant,

                                                     P. DODDRIDGE.


One more entry we have in the Church-book, relating to his success as a
pastor:--

_Some Remarks which have occurred to me on the State of the Church since
    January 1st, 1747, which I note for the Instruction of any future
    Pastor._

    At the time above mentioned, I took a review of the number of Church
    members, which I found more decreased since Michaelmas, 1745, than I
    ever knew it to be in double that time; for I found that since that
    time we have received only 15 members, and have lost 17; 12 have
    died or removed the last year, and only 8 of the 15 have been
    admitted this year; so that our decrease since Michaelmas, 1745, is
    2, and since this time twelve-months, on the whole, 4--a very
    discouraging circumstance, especially considering how much I have
    abounded in exhortations to the Lord's table during the last year.

    N.B.--The _omission_ of the names of three, since recollected, who
    were admitted in 1745, made the state of affairs appear more
    melancholy than I afterwards found it to be.

His last statement is--"In looking over the account for the year 1749, I
find that 22 had been admitted, and 22 removed by death or otherwise; so
that we were just as at the beginning of the year--in all, 239."

These statements rather surprise us; considering what the writer of them
had devolving upon him in the care of his academy, in his extensive
correspondence, in his numerous and valuable publications, that he
should, amidst all this, pay so particular and minute attention to the
state of the Church of which he was pastor. It shows strikingly the
activity, ardour, and entire devotedness of his spirit. But, alas! it
was too active and ardent for the material framework long to sustain the
efforts to which it was impelled. Hence the very next entry we meet with
is, "That the Rev. Philip Doddridge, Doctor of Divinity, after being
twenty-one years pastor of this Church, died at Lisbon, to which place
he had resorted for the recovery of his health, on the 26th of October,
1751, we may truly say, to the unspeakable loss of this Church."

How he lived and how he died is very extensively known, by the Memoir
published by Orton--the "Centenary Memorial" of him recently sent forth
by Stoughton; so that, though we would fain linger over his memory, yet
anything further respecting him would seem to be out of place here.

We happen to have in our possession a copy of the poem sacred to the
memory of Doddridge, as it was first published by its author, Mr. Henry
Moore, who had been one of the Doctor's students, and was afterwards
settled as a minister in Devonshire. It is the same poem in substance as
is given by Orton at the close of his 'Memoirs of Doddridge'; but it is
there considerably altered from this first copy. It is thus inscribed to
Mrs. Doddridge:--

    Permit me, Madam, to present to you the following poem, as a
    testimony of my high veneration for the memory of my deceased tutor,
    and my tender sympathy with his afflicted family.

  I am, Madam, your most obliged humble servant,

                                                      H---- M----.

  _Northampton, February, 1st, 1752._


We extract the following lines from pages 7-9:--

  O, snatch'd for ever, ever from our view,
  Thou best, thou greatest of thy kind, adieu!
  Thou, in whose ample, comprehensive mind,
  All the ten thousand streams of science join'd;--
  All the fair train of social virtues smil'd,
  And bright religion beam'd divinely mild.
  Ah, love shall listen with delight no more,
  While from thy lips Truth pours her sacred store;--
  No more, while studious to instruct and please,
  You temper serious sense with graceful ease;--
  No more, with zeal for God and virtue fired,
  By reason govern'd, and by heaven inspired,
  Thy various eloquence our ears shall charm,
  Command our passions, and our bosoms warm;
  Bid in our breast seraphic raptures roll,
  And spread the generous flame from soul to soul;
  While sinners start, by conscious terror stung,
  And tremble at the thunder of thy tongue.

  Once more, adieu! O friend, instructor, guide,
  With whom our hopes, our fairest prospects died.
  With what fond zeal we press'd the throne divine,
  To rescue from the grave a life like thine!
  If ardent prayers--if streaming sorrows, shed
  In all the bitterness of soul--could plead,
  Our prayers, O Doddridge! had revers'd thy doom,
  And tens of thousands wept thee from the tomb.
  But cease, rash Muse--oh, tremble to repine!
  'Tis heaven demands him, and we must resign.
  All-perfect Goodness ever wills the best:
  Then bow submissive to the high behest,
  And silent drop the tributary tear
  That nature's forced to pay to friendship dear.
  Though heaven forbids us to indulge our grief,
  A tear it will allow--the soul's relief.
  Yet who would wish him still confin'd below,
  Struggling with dire disease, or loads of woe?

  Then dry the tear, suppress the rising sigh,
  Weep not for him who could rejoice to die.
  E'en when the quiv'ring pulse, the panting breath,
  And clay-cold sweat, presag'd th' approach of death,
  His steady soul, by conscious virtue arm'd,
  No inward stings or gathering clouds alarm'd.
  Calm as the silent surface of the sea,
  When ev'n the gentle breeze has ceased to play,
  Fair hope, strong faith, his sinking soul sustain'd,
  In smiling peace each rising care seren'd;
  Heav'n on the saint shed down her cheering ray,
  And open'd on his mind her dawning day.
  Then his warm breast with bliss ecstatic glow'd,
  Fir'd with th' approaching vision of his God.
  Impatient of his soul-confining chains,
  Eager he welcom'd the dissolving pains;
  Already seem'd on seraphs' wings to rise,
  Already spurn'd his dust, and tower'd into the skies.

  Methought I saw him mount the starry way,
  His temples beaming with celestial day.
  Rapt in a flamy car, sublime he flew--
  The flamy car fire-breathing coursers drew;
  Swift as the lightning glimpse he flash'd along;
  While, waiting for his flight, a white-rob'd throng
  (Once wretched souls, enslaved by Satan's yoke,
  Whose painful bonds his arduous labours broke),
  Grateful and happy, smile to see him rise,
  And hail him welcome to th' applauding skies;
  Ten thousand harps, harmonious as the spheres,
  Proclaim their joy, and charm his ravish'd ears.

In proceeding with the Memorials of this Church, now bereft of its
beloved and honoured Doddridge, we find that the Rev. Robert Gilbert was
called to be the pastor, and entered upon the pastoral charge at
Lady-day, 1753. This worthy man died December 28th, 1760. We are unable
to ascertain what was the condition of the Church during the ministry of
Mr. Gilbert; but have some reason to conclude that it was not in a
united or prosperous state. Considerable difficulty might be expected to
attend the choice of a successor to such a pastor as the one that had
immediately preceded; and this more fully appeared after Mr. Gilbert's
short course of labour had closed.

Mr. Hextal was the next pastor of the Church. He was a native of
Broughton, near Kettering; became a member of the Church at Kettering
under Mr. Saunders; for which, see the Memorials of the Church at
Kettering. He was a student at Northampton under Dr. Doddridge; first
settled at Creaton, then at Sudbury, from which place he came to
Northampton. We have no record of the time when he entered on his
ministry at Castle Hill, and no account of anything that transpired
during his ministry; but under the date of April 16, 1775, we have this
record: "It was this day agreed, by a majority of eighteen brethren of
this Church, to dismiss the Rev. Mr. Hextal from his office as pastor,
minister, and teacher." This appears to have led to very painful
altercations between the friends of Mr. Hextal and those that were
opposed to him, which ultimately led to a separation from the Church and
congregation. Those who were attached to Mr. Hextal endeavoured to
regain the pulpit for him by a process of law, pleading the right of the
subscribers to a vote for the pastor; but this was overruled, as
contrary to the deed which gives "the power to the Church (upon giving
six days' notice by the deacons) to elect, place, and displace a
minister as they think proper." The result was, that Mr. Hextal's
friends withdrew, and built the Chapel in King Street, where Mr. Hextal
ministered till the close of his life. The names of thirty members are
given, as having been first admonished for withdrawing themselves from
the Church, and, refusing to return, were declared as no longer standing
in this relation to them. The name of Mary Doddridge occurs amongst
those who had withdrawn. In 'Orton's Letters to Dissenting Ministers,'
we have the following passage, in a letter dated December 26, 1762: "My
last letters from Northampton encourage me to hope that Mr. Hextal will
be comfortable and useful there." To this, Mr. Palmer, the editor,
appends the following note:--

    An amiable and respectable minister, who removed from Sudbury on
    account of dissensions occasioned by a party spirit in electing
    members of Parliament, and succeeded Mr. Gilbert in the congregation
    of which Dr. Doddridge had been pastor, where he soon met with
    equally cruel usage, and was obliged to withdraw to a new Chapel
    which his friends erected for him, where he ended his days in peace.
    His great candour and benevolence gave occasion to morose-minded
    people, who disliked some that espoused his cause, to charge him
    with a want of orthodoxy; whereas, in point of sentiment, he was in
    fact higher than the generality of acknowledged Calvinists. Such is
    the blindness of bigotry.

These unhappy circumstances greatly diminished the numbers in the
Church. Under date of April 24th, 1777, we find the names of only 64
members, showing a great decrease since the death of Doddridge.

Rev. John Horsey was unanimously invited to the pastoral office February
2nd, 1777, and testified his acceptance of it on the 2nd of March. He
was dismissed from the Church at Ringwood, to be received as a member of
the Church at Northampton, and then ordained as the minister. The
following is the account Mr. Horsey gives of the ordination service:--

    Having accepted the pressing solicitations of my friends, I was
    solemnly separated to the pastoral office over the Church of Christ
    assembling on Castle Hill, Northampton, on May 14th, 1777. Mr.
    Scott, of Hinkley, began with prayer, and reading the 100th Psalm
    and 3rd Chapter 1st Epistle to Timothy. Mr. Towle, of London,
    delivered an introductory discourse, received the Church's account
    of the steps they had previously taken, read by Mr. John Wood,
    together with a renewal of their call; I testified likewise my
    acceptance of it, and delivered my confession of faith. Mr.
    Saunders, of Bedworth, set me apart by prayer and imposition of
    hands; Mr. King, of Welford, gave the charge, founded on 1st Cor.
    iv. 2; Mr. Rowley, of Warwick, prayed; Dr. Mayo, of London, preached
    on 2nd Cor. iv. 5; and Mr. Bull, of Newport, concluded in prayer.
    Our assisting friends officiated respectively with an amiable order
    and propriety, the Divine Spirit was eminently with us, and his
    blessing, we hope, will attend the important transactions of the
    day.

    _June 1st._--I administered the Lord's Supper for the first time; it
    was a very comfortable season. May God grant us his presence in our
    future engagements of a similar nature!

Mr. Horsey's ministry over this people extended to the lengthened period
of fifty years, during which time 170 members were added to the Church.
He died on May 12th, 1827. Mr. Horsey was a man of very gentlemanly
appearance and manners, great ease, affability, and much kindness; his
style as a preacher pleasing, and rather attractive, not distinguished
by much energy; but we have heard that in the first years of his
ministry at Northampton it was popular, and drew together a rather
crowded congregation.

Much has been said and written respecting Mr. Horsey's deficiency in
orthodox views, or in distinct statements on some of the great points of
evangelical truth. He had the charge of the academy for a time after its
removal from Daventry, at the resignation of Mr. Belsham. Suspicions
arising as to his sentiments on the person and work of Christ, he
resigned his office as tutor, and the academy was for a time broken up;
nor was the Church or congregation after this in a flourishing state
under the ministry of Mr. Horsey. The attendance declined; the number of
members diminished. This may be the case under certain circumstances
where there is no deficiency in truth, or piety, or ability, on the part
of the ministry, and hence may present no certain criterion of the one
or the other; and there were a number, we believe, of truly pious devout
persons of evangelical sentiments, who continued under the ministry of
Mr. Horsey, esteemed his character, and prized his preaching. Yet it
must be allowed, we apprehend, that there was a certain vagueness in his
statements respecting the person and work of the Redeemer, which showed
either that the mind of the preacher was not earnestly intent on
discovering and grasping the truth, under a powerful impression of the
value of the truth, or that it had formed opinions to which it was
unwilling to give a clear and distinct utterance; but Mr. Horsey
manifested the spirit of devotion, and a humble reliance on Christ as
the Saviour of sinners, and would be found "looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life."

When Mr. Horsey's infirmities increased so as to render him incapable of
fulfilling all the duties of his office, Mr. Charles Hyatt was invited
to become co-pastor; but Mr. Horsey being removed by death before this
connexion had been completed, Mr. Hyatt was then invited to take the
pastoral charge, which he accepted, and was ordained September 25th,
1827. We present Mr. Hyatt's account of the engagements of the day:--

    After solemn deliberation and prayer to God for direction, I
    accepted the invitation of my kind friends at Castle Hill to become
    their pastor, and conveyed that resolution in a letter to the
    Church, 1827. On Wednesday, September 26th, I was solemnly
    recognized as the pastor of the Church. Mr. Edwards, of King's Head
    Lane (now King Street) Meeting, commenced the services of the day by
    reading and prayer; Mr. Robertson, of Wellingborough, delivered the
    introductory discourse; Mr. Toller, of Kettering, asked the usual
    questions; Mr. Hyatt, senior, offered up the ordination prayer; Mr.
    Morrell, of Wymondley, delivered the charge, founded on Rev. ii. 10;
    Mr. Fletcher, of Stepney, preached to the people, from 1st Cor. xvi.
    14; Mr. Gray, of College Lane, concluded with prayer. It was a most
    delightful and interesting service. Nearly 50 ministers were
    present, and the impressions then made will, it is hoped, never wear
    away.

After this settlement, some of the friends of the late Mr. Horsey
separated from the Church and congregation, and commenced the Unitarian
interest in the town. On this subject we present the following
statement--

    Friday, November 22nd, 1827, we held our first Church-meeting, when
    the following letter was read to the Church:--

    "_To the Church of Christ assembling under the pastoral care of the
                         Rev. Charles Hyatt._

    "We, the undersigned members of the Church of Christ assembling in
    Castle Hill Meeting, having, in obedience to the dictates of our
    consciences, united in the formation of a society of Christians,
    whose worship is directed solely to the one God the Father,
    agreeably to the express injunctions of our Saviour, deem it proper
    to withdraw, and hereby beg leave to announce our withdrawment, from
    the worship and communion of the Church to which we have hitherto
    belonged, on account of the discordance existing between the mode of
    worship as there practised and that which we believe to have been
    enjoined and observed by Christ and his apostles."--(Signed by nine
    members.)

The individuals who signed this letter, in connexion with some of the
subscribers, formed themselves into a society professing Unitarian
sentiments.

The list of the members at Castle Hill after this contains but fifty
names.

Mr. Hyatt's ministry in Northampton continued six years and three
months, when he removed to be co-pastor with his father in London. He
preached his farewell sermon March 21st, 1833. Something more than
eighty members appear to have been admitted during this period.

Mr. Hyatt was the son of the Rev. Charles Hyatt, of Shadwell, London. He
was born in the year 1805. Trained in the fear of God, he resolved, on
leaving school, to devote himself to studies preparatory to the
Christian ministry. Although but fifteen years of age when he formed
this resolution, yet he was eligible for admission into Wymondley
College, under the auspices of the trustees of Mr. Coward, and
accordingly he entered there in 1820, under the patronage of Dr.
Collyer. He honourably occupied six years in his studies, and then
became the pastor of the Church at Northampton.

He was strongly urged by his father to resign his charge at Northampton,
to undertake the co-pastorate with him in the Church at Ebenezer Chapel,
Shadwell--the people having invited him to this office. His acquiescence
in this request proved a great source of comfort to his venerable
father, with whom he indeed laboured "as a son with the father" in the
Gospel. He took an active part in the labours of the British and Foreign
Sailors' Society, and, in 1844, was chosen to be its secretary. The
growing infirmities of his honoured father threw the whole weight of
pastoral duties upon him; and his frame, always delicate and prone to
disease, began to yield to the pressure of labour, which was too much
for his strength. On the 16th of June, 1846, his venerated father died;
and in nine short months after this, the happy spirit of the son was
gathered to his fathers. This change came upon him somewhat by surprise.
It is a well known symptom in pulmonary disorders, to look for
restoration to health and activity even to the last; and when,
therefore, he learned from his physician that there was no hope of his
ultimate recovery, it was to him an unexpected announcement. But it
caused him neither depression nor alarm. He was prepared for the event;
and in the last days of his sickness he was favoured with a continued
rapture of love, hope, and joy, which was never interrupted but by the
paroxysms of pain which terminated his amiable and holy life. He died in
the 42nd year of his age.

Rev. John Bennett succeeded Mr. Hyatt in the pastoral charge at Castle
Hill in June, 1833, and is the present minister of this Church. The
number of communicants at the present time is 160. There are 300
children in the Sabbath-schools.

Since the commencement of Mr. Bennett's pastorate, four young men have
gone out from this Church into the regular ministry. Three members of
the Church are almost constantly engaged in village-preaching; but there
are no stations connected with the Chapel.

The present Meeting House was built in the year 1695. It is just
according to the general fashion of Dissenting places of worship of that
era, in respectable towns--a plain building, entirely destitute of
architectural ornaments, three galleries, and large pillars to support
the roof. Commodious school-rooms were built for the Sabbath-school in
the year 1825, at a cost probably of L500. About fourteen years ago the
lower part of the Chapel was entirely repaired; lobbies made for the
gallery stairs, stone steps to the galleries, new aisles, and cost about
L400. It has just undergone considerable alterations--pillars removed,
new roof, and new galleries, at a cost of L500. It was re-opened for
worship on Wednesday, the 6th of October. We have been favoured with the
following account of the services by the pastor:--

    On the Wednesday morning the Rev. J. Sherman, of Surrey Chapel,
    preached an admirable sermon, to a very large and deeply interested
    audience, the Rev. T. Thomas, of Wellingborough, having commenced
    the service with reading and prayer. In the evening the service was
    opened by the Rev. W. Todman, of Yardley, Hastings, who read the
    Scriptures and prayed. The Rev. Dr. Archer, of London, then
    delivered a most eloquent discourse, which was listened to with the
    deepest interest by an audience which filled the Chapel to
    overflowing. The friends dined together, and took tea at the Milton
    Hall. On the following Sabbath the Rev. H. Toller, of Market
    Harborough, preached morning and evening, with his customary power
    and acceptance, to overflowing congregations. The various
    collections amounted to more than L85. The cordial and fraternal
    spirit manifested by the other Dissenting Churches in the town was
    such as to afford the deepest gratification to the friends of the
    Redeemer at Castle Hill. Altogether, the occasion will long be
    remembered with pleasure and thankfulness by this ancient Christian
    society.

In the vestry are Doddridge's table, chair, and looking-glass.

The present state of the Church at Castle Hill is such as, we have no
doubt, excites grateful emotions to the God of all grace from the pastor
and his flock; and in the words of their beloved Doddridge they would
say,--

  "Th' eternal Shepherd still survives,
    New comfort to impart;
  His eye still guides us, and his voice
    Still animates our heart."


SECTION 3.--THE CHURCH AT KING'S-STREET.

When discord and contentions arise in a Christian society they are
productive of great evils--opposed to the spirit of the Gospel, they
prove a hindrance to the advancement of individual piety, and to the
extension of the kingdom of Christ among men. Yet the God who "makes the
wrath of man to praise him," often overrules the disagreements that
arise in his Churches for "the furtherance of the Gospel." In the
preceding account of the Church at Castle Hill it will have been seen
that during the ministry of Mr. Hextal dissensions arose, which led to
his dismissal from his office as pastor by a majority of the Church.

In the month of August, 1774, Mr. Hextal was afflicted with a disease
which rendered him incapable of fulfilling all his duties as pastor of
the Church at Castle Hill. It was therefore determined to invite an
assistant; and it appears that the greater part of the Church wished to
have a minister who was not quite agreeable to Mr. Hextal and the major
part of the subscribers. This was the occasion of much dissension. A
great deal of acrimonious feeling was manifested; pamphlets were written
on both sides; and at length a separation ensued; the Chapel in King
Street was built, and Mr. Hextal carried on his ministry there. It was
erected in the year 1776.

In a preface written by Mr. Hextal to one of the pamphlets that was
published, we find the following paragraph, which we extract as
expressive of the principles he maintained, and the spirit he wished to
exemplify and promote. After censuring the injudicious zeal of some, he
observes,--

    I mention these things, not to encourage a disregard or indifference
    about the peculiar doctrines of the Gospel--far be such a thought
    from me. I believe them, and will earnestly contend for them in the
    spirit of meekness. The doctrine of the divinity of Christ, on which
    I humbly apprehend the efficacy of his atonement depends; the fall
    of man, or his lost estate by the great apostacy; the deity of the
    Spirit, and the necessity of his influences to renew fallen man to
    the divine life, are doctrines I believe evidently discovered in
    Scripture. These I have constantly insisted upon in the course of my
    ministry, for the truth of which I can appeal to those who have
    heard me ever since I came to this place. But it has ever been my
    opinion, that these doctrines, which I look upon as the
    distinguishing glory of the Gospel, should be maintained in the
    spirit of love and candour, with soft words and the strongest
    arguments we can use; and sorry I am that the word 'candour' should
    sound harsh, and give offence to any Christians, especially to any
    that belong to the Church and congregation that enjoyed so long such
    a burning and shining light as Dr. Doddridge, in whose example and
    ministry the zeal for Gospel truth adorned with moderation,
    benevolence, and charity, appeared with such an amiable lustre; and
    who, "though dead, yet speaketh" in his learned, valuable, and
    useful writings. * * * May we all be thoroughly convinced, and
    helped to act agreeable to the conviction, that he is the brightest
    ornament of his Christian profession, the best friend to the Church
    of Christ, and partakes most of the temper of heaven, who best loves
    all of every denomination that he thinks bear the name of Jesus, and
    most readily exercises candour and forbearance to those who differ
    from him in non-essentials. Should the separation here be permitted
    to continue, may we live in peace, and sincerely pray for each
    other.

Here Mr. Hextal laboured until the close of his ministry, and ended his
days amongst this people, dying at the age of 66 years.

The following inscription is on a tablet in the Chapel:--

                             LOVE ONE ANOTHER.

    Sacred to the memory of the Rev. WILLIAM HEXTAL, a faithful minister
    of the Gospel, and sometime pastor of this Christian society; who
    remarkably exhibited in his life what he warmly recommended from the
    pulpit,--unfeigned piety to God, and universal benevolence to men.

    Having endured many and great afflictions, both in body and mind, he
    entered into the rest which remains for the people of God, November
    4th, 1777, aged 66.

Mr. Porter was the next pastor of the Church, entering on his office a
short time after the death of Mr. Hextal. The register of baptisms, it
is stated, was begun A.D. 1778, by Thomas Porter, pastor of the
congregation that assembles in Kingshead Lane, Northampton. The last
entry made by Mr. Porter is of a baptism that took place August 8th,
1784; the next being by Mr. Edwards, August 13th, 1786; so that Mr.
Porter's ministry was not continued for much more than six years.

About the year 1786, Mr. B. L. Edwards became the pastor of this Church,
and filled this office for 45 years, as he died January 2nd, 1831, aged
66 years. The following account of Mr. Edwards appeared in the
_Congregational Magazine_, shortly after his death:--

    Mr. Edwards pursued his preparatory studies for the ministry at the
    Theological Institution then conducted at Hoxton, we believe under
    the tuition of Drs. Savage, Kippis, and Rees; and from thence he
    proceeded to the station which for so many years he has occupied
    with an unblemished character. As a minister of Christ, he united
    orthodoxy of sentiment with liberality of spirit; as a man, he was
    admired most by those who were best acquainted with him--warm and
    faithful in his friendships, of a most enlarged benevolence, and
    universally regarded as the ardent and consistent advocate of civil
    and religious liberty throughout the world. The later years of life
    were distinguished by a growing spirituality of mind; and as he drew
    near to the close of his labours upon earth, he seemed to increase
    in the fervour of his public ministrations. The illness which
    terminated in his death was of short duration. On the second Sabbath
    in December he preached three times: on the afternoon of the day he
    delivered a funeral discourse, founded on the exhortation of Christ
    to his disciples, "Be ye also ready," and distinguished by unusual
    earnestness and deep solemnity; and in the evening he closed his
    public labours by a sermon from Psalm xxxi. 19. Though from that
    time till within three or four days of his departure he was too
    unwell to leave the house, yet no painful apprehensions of immediate
    danger were excited in the minds of his friends. On the Thursday
    night preceding his dissolution he became, however, materially
    worse, from which time he rapidly declined, until, on the morning of
    the Sabbath, he received the summons, and entered into rest. An
    individual who on two occasions saw him during his illness, was
    gratified with the delightful frame of spirit he discovered when
    speaking of the heavenly world, and the blessedness of those who had
    reached that place. He is understood to have declared, a short time
    before his departure, his simple reliance upon the atonement of
    Christ; and in the anticipation of the great change, to have adopted
    the words of the Apostle, "I know whom I have believed." The nature
    of his afflictions, however, prevented him from conversing much; and
    though he expressed sufficient to satisfy his friends as to the
    calm and happy state of his mind, their hope of his meetness for the
    kingdom of heaven rests upon the evidence which a long life
    furnishes to them spent in the cause of Christ, and for the good of
    men.

    His mortal remains were committed to the earth on the 11th of
    January, in the presence of a large assembly, within the walls of
    the place in which, for so long a period, he had preached the Gospel
    of the grace of God. Mr. Griffiths, of Buckby, delivered the funeral
    oration; Mr. B. Hobson, of Welford, and Mr. T. Toller, of Kettering,
    conducted the devotional parts of the service. On the Sabbath
    following, the funeral sermon was preached to a crowded auditory,
    from a part of the 7th and 8th verses of the 4th chapter of the 2nd
    Epistle to Timothy, by Mr. James Robertson, of Wellingborough. Mr.
    Edwards for many years filled the office of Secretary to the
    Association of Independent Ministers of the County of Northampton,
    and was a liberal and disinterested supporter of the Provident
    Society connected with it.

The following inscription is in the Chapel for Mr. Edwards:--

     To the memory of BENJ. LOYD EDWARDS,
  upwards of 45 years the able, conscientious,
  and affectionate pastor of the congregation
         assembling within these walls,
  this tablet is placed by his bereaved flock,
    as a testimonial of his faithfulness in,
      and their gratitude for, a connexion
          which terminated only with
  his lamented death, on the 11th of January, 1831,
          in the 67th year of his age.

Mr. John Woodward became the pastor of the Church July 1st, 1832. It
appears that though this congregation has been highly respectable, yet
the number of Church members has been comparatively few; for when Mr.
Woodward became pastor, a list of members is given, numbering 33. From
this time to April 5th, 1835, when Mr. Woodward resigned, 15 persons
had been admitted to the fellowship of the Church.

The next pastor was Mr. Thomas Milner, M.A., known as the author of 'The
Seven Churches of Asia;' 'The Life and Times of Dr. Watts;' 'Scripture
and Astronomy;' 'Gallery of Nature;' 'Descriptive Atlas of Astronomy,'
&c., &c.

November 28th, 1847, Mr. G. Nicholson, B.A., the present pastor, entered
on his labours here. Since that time 25 persons have been admitted to
the Church, so that the present number of communicants is 72.

During the ministry of Mr. Milner new school-rooms were erected, at a
cost of L336. 6_s._ 5_d._ There are 95 children in the Sabbath-schools.

The accommodation in the Chapel, we are informed, is not so great as it
ought to be; nearly every seat being taken, so that there is no surplus
room to which to invite the poor. Architectural difficulties have
hitherto stood in the way of enlargement, but it is hoped that some way
of surmounting them will, in no very distant period, be found.


SECTION 4.--COMMERCIAL STREET CHAPEL.

The Independent Chapel in Commercial Street, Northampton, presents a
pleasing memorial of the Christian zeal and liberality of the late
Thomas Wilson, Esq., of Highbury Place, London--a gentleman who devoted
his time, his energies, and his property to the promotion of the cause
of Christ, more immediately among Protestant Dissenters of the
Independent denomination.

Mr. Wilson's attention was directed to the town of Northampton as a
place which, on account of its increasing population, required some
additional efforts for promoting the kingdom of the Redeemer. After many
inquiries had been made for ground that would present an eligible site
on which to erect a Chapel, a purchase was made in Commercial Street for
L600; and a neat and respectable Chapel, sixty-two feet by forty-two,
was there erected, at a cost of L2,000, besides L100 for alterations.
This was at a considerable distance from other places of worship.

The Chapel was opened for public service on the 9th of April, 1829. The
Rev. J. A. James, of Birmingham, preached a very excellent sermon in the
morning, on sanctification, from John xvii. 17--"Sanctify them through
thy truth; thy word is truth."

Rev. J. Stratten, of Paddington, preached with much energy in the
evening, from 2 Thess. iii. 1--"Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the
word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified."

The Chapel was for some time supplied by the Rev. Messrs. Blackburn and
J. Clayton, of London; Adkins, of Southampton; Gear, of Harborough;
Johnson, of Farnham; and Prust, of Highbury College.

After the Rev. Edmund Thornton Prust had finished his studies at
Highbury, he was invited by the congregation, no Church having then been
formed, to supply for six months.

On the 1st of December, 1829, a Christian Church was formed in the
presence of Mr. Walter Scott, late of Rowell, now of Airdale, and the
late J. Pinkerton, of Weedon.

Mr. Prust was afterwards chosen to the pastoral office by the Church
and congregation unitedly, and was ordained on the 21st of April, 1830,
when the following ministers were engaged:--Mr. B. L. Edwards, of
Northampton, read the Scriptures and prayed--Thomas Toller, of
Kettering, delivered the introductory discourse--John Sibree, of
Coventry, asked the questions, and received the confession of
faith--Walter Scott, of Rowell, offered the ordination prayer--John
Leifchild, of Bristol (now Dr. Leifchild, of London), gave the charge,
from 1 Tim. iv. 6, "A good minister of Jesus Christ," which was
published by request--Charles Hyatt, sen., of London, concluded with
prayer.

In the evening the Rev. C. J. Hyatt, of Northampton, read and prayed--J.
W. Percy, of Warwick, preached to the people, from 1 Thess. v. 13,
14--W. Gray, of Northampton, concluded with prayer.

The following reference is made to the services of the day, in an
advertisement prefixed to the printed charge:--

    The ordination was attended by a number of his brethren of the town
    and neighbourhood, of several denominations, who gave on that
    occasion an instance of brotherly love and concord that will not
    soon be forgotten. The young minister, with his only remaining
    parent, and the patron of the Institution from whence he had
    emanated, seated on either side, received the following address from
    a minister of his native city, who was well authorized to bear on
    that occasion a public testimony to his respectable attainments, his
    unblemished reputation, and his amiable manners, which from a child
    had procured him the esteem of a large circle of friends and
    acquaintance. A spirit of fervent love, of ardent prayer, and of
    devout seriousness, characterized the services of the day, and
    inspired the hearts of all who witnessed them with hopes of the most
    pleasing results.

Twenty-two years have passed since then, and those pleasing results
have, through the blessing of the great Head of the Church, to a great
extent been realized. The Church, which was originally formed of eight
members who had received dismissions from Churches to which they had
previously belonged, has received from the commencement to the present
time 315 members. The present number of communicants is about 150. The
number of scholars in the Sabbath-schools is about 400.

Since the decease of Mr. Wilson, a marble tablet has been erected in the
porch of the Chapel, with the following inscription:--

    This Chapel was built A.D. 1829, at the sole expense of the late
    Thomas Wilson, Esq., of Highbury Place, London.

    This tablet is erected in grateful commemoration of his liberality.

The congregation have erected galleries in the Chapel, with organ, and
an additional school-room, at a cost of nearly L1000. A commodious
school-room has also been lately built, on a site adjoining the
Chapel-yard, for Sunday and Day Infant-schools, with class-rooms for
senior scholars. The daily Infant-school numbers more than 120 children,
and the Sunday Infant Class about 170. A tablet in the school-room has
the following inscription:--"This School-room was built A.D. 1851, for
the use of Sunday and Day Infant Schools in connexion with Commercial
Street Chapel, and in memory of Stephen Prust, Esq., of Bristol, who was
only prevented by death from erecting it himself."

In looking at the whole, encouraging indications, we consider, may be
very clearly discerned of the Divine blessing attending the word of
heavenly truth, and giving sanction and success to the efforts of his
servants.




CHAPTER II.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT ROWELL.


In the days of the Commonwealth, when Cromwell was Lord Protector of
England, a greater degree of liberty for the worship of God and the
preaching of the Gospel was enjoyed, than had been known for many
centuries before, or was again known till the revolution by William.
During this period there came to Rowell, a populous village in the
county of Northampton, Mr. John Beverley, a devoted Puritan, to preach
the Gospel of Christ. This was in the year 1654. His labours were
rendered successful in bringing a number of persons to an acquaintance
with the Saviour he preached; and they were willing to make a profession
of their faith in Christ Jesus. He directed those who had received the
Redeemer to form themselves into a Congregational Church, for the
enjoyment of divine ordinances in their purity.

Mr. Beverley appears to have been a man of eminent devotedness to God,
partaking largely of the spirit of evangelical, practical, and
experimental piety. His attainments in learning were considerable: he
had been a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge; but he dedicated all
that he had attained to the service of God in the ministry of the
Gospel. He had a living offered to him worth L200 per annum, but he
preferred labouring at Rowell, where he was not sure of L50; and he
greatly rejoiced in the success that attended his labours. In the year
1655, those who had been converted under his ministry became united
together in the fellowship of the Gospel as a Christian society. A
Church covenant was drawn up, and signed by every member. This being the
earliest of the kind that we have discovered among the Northamptonshire
Churches, it may not be unsuitable to give it a place in these
Memorials.

       _The memor. of a Covenant renewed and subscribed by the
                   reformed Church at Rowell._

    Whereas, being by nature enemies to God and aliens from his covenant
    of mercy, hateful and hating one another, it pleased God of his free
    grace to admit us into covenant privileges by baptism, wherein we
    engaged, and whereby we were bound, to walk as new creatures adopted
    and redeemed, wholly attending to his blessed will revealed in the
    Gospel, we do now, with shame and loathing of ourselves, most
    solemnly acknowledge to his glory that we have most abominably
    corrupted ourselves, his worship, and the holy covenant of our
    peace, to the blemish of our holy profession, the scandalizing of
    many, the grief of God's Holy Spirit and people, and now, through
    mercy, to the grief of our own spirits; so that we abhor ourselves
    for all our former ignorant and disorderly walking. And seeing how
    God hath called upon us by his word and Spirit to lay hold yet again
    of his covenant, as in a proper season of reformation--seeing he is
    pleased to continue the proposal of such an unworthy people to
    himself, lo! how can we be ashamed of his truth and Gospel? We do,
    therefore, humbly tender ourselves to Jesus Christ and his ministry,
    in this renewed profession and covenant subscribed--viz., that,
    through the grace of God, we will constantly maintain and walk
    according to the whole will of God revealed in the Scriptures, and
    comprised in the articles above mentioned;[1] professing them
    against all error, heresy, and profaneness, in due order, as
    members of this one particular Church, for enjoyment of all Christ's
    ordinances, performance of all members' duties, in subjection to our
    pastors, ruling officers, and to each other in the Lord; holding due
    communion with all other reformed Churches of Christ in the world,
    that so we may be built up in knowledge and holiness, better to
    maintain our obedience to Christ, the common interest of the saints,
    and so more please and glorify God. Accordingly attest to remember
    his covenant and us, in the approaching day of our blessed Lord and
    Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory for ever. Amen.

    Anno Domini 1655.

    (Signed, John Beverley, Pastor; John Ponder, John Cooper, Elders;
    John Fox, Ralph Mun, Deacons. Then follow the names of thirty
    members.)


[1] The articles of faith contained in the Church-book are entitled, "A
Translation and Collection out of Dr. Francis Junius his Ecclesiasticus,
as concerning the nature and administration of the Church of God,
Professor of Divinity in Leiden, a choice University, in Holland, about
1595."


Mr. Beverley's was a short but a useful course at Rowell. After about
four years' labour amongst them, he was removed by death, June 2nd,
1658. Some extracts we have seen from his diary strikingly indicate the
possession of deep and experimental piety, and show that he often had
great enjoyment in intercourse with God. It was seen in his spirit and
conduct that he was a "man of God." His labours at Rowell, though short,
were attended with the most important and permanent result, the benefits
of which were experienced by the descendants of his flock.

He was a zealous advocate for the Congregational principles of Church
government, writing several tracts in their support, addressing a letter
to Dr. Owen, entreating him to employ his powers in their defence, in
which he says--

    To whom should such a truth, in such an extremity, betake herself
    for relief among all her children rather than to yourself, or such
    as you can prevail with? and judge, if you can justly, any more fit
    than yourself, even yourself, who have such a name in the learned
    and Christian world already, as that your very appearing might be
    sufficient vindication. May I not charge you in Christ's name to
    rise up once more for Christ, and for this part of his truth, also
    as in a former Church case, Esther iv. 14? What account can be
    given, but that God, foreseeing how useful you might be in such a
    juncture for relief of his truth now abused, did choose to set
    yourself in that signal place at Oxford, even for so signal a
    service, for such a signal portion of truth? And can you forbear to
    extend your hand in such a cause, who can dispatch so noble a work
    with such ease and facility?

It is justly observed by Mr. Maurice, that Mr. Beverley was a man of
great zeal for the cause of God, guided by that wisdom which is from
above. This zeal was expressed in his own personal labours for Christ,
in the place and among the people where Providence had fixed him; in his
great concern for those places within his knowledge where the Gospel was
not preached; and then in his earnest endeavours to stir up his
fellow-labourers to be found forward in all their duty to Christ and his
house.

When Mr. Beverley was removed by death, the Church at Rowell was "young
and tender"; yet its members had been so well instructed in the things
of the Gospel, and in their connexion with each other as a Christian
society, that they exhorted each other and prayed together, and went
constantly to Desborough for a time, two miles distant, to attend on the
ministry of Mr. Browning, who, being afterwards ejected from his living,
became pastor of the Church at Rowell.

Of Mr. Browning's early life, conversion to God, and entrance on the
ministry, some account has been preserved, from which we obtain the
following information:--That he descended from pious parents--was a
child of many prayers--that his parents early dedicated him to God with
a view to the ministry of the Gospel, and sent him to Oxford with this
design; but his conduct was such as to cause great grief to them, and to
involve himself in distress. After some years he was brought, by the
divine blessing on the faithful preaching of the Gospel, to deep
conviction of sin, and a real return unto God. He became united to a
Church at Coggeshall, in Essex; his pastor and friends encouraged him to
devote himself to the ministry. He went with Mr. Simms, his pastor, to a
commencement at Cambridge, where he met Mr. Beverley, of Rowell, and Mr.
Beverley was the means of introducing him to the people at Desborough;
who, after hearing him preach, gave him a unanimous invitation to become
their pastor, in the year 1657. He laboured successfully amongst them
during five years, when, on the passing of "the Act of Uniformity," he
gave up the living, rather than comply with the terms required.

He then received an invitation to become the pastor of the Church at
Rowell, which had been under the care of Mr. Beverley; and then the
pious people at Desborough united with those at Rowell to form one
society, under Mr. Browning's ministry. Though it was a stormy day, and
scenes of trial, opposition, and suffering were before them, yet this
worthy minister undertook the charge, dwelt amongst them, and preached
the Gospel unto them; maintaining with great fervour and clearness the
doctrines of divine grace, with the purity of God's worship, and the
interests of holiness. In these trying days, his labours were successful
in bringing, during his ministry at Rowell, about 135 persons to be
united to the Church, many of whom came from different places around. In
the year 1684, we have a brief statement in the records of the Church
of this nature:--"From this time dates a sore persecution and scattering
which lay upon us, that we hardly got together, much less obtained
Church-meetings." A note to this statement observes, "This proceeding
condemned afterwards by the Church." Again: "Kept a night in prayer to
God, humbling ourselves before him. We partook of the Lord's Supper, and
admitted two members." So anxious were they to be faithful to their God
and to their principles in this time of trial.

Mr. Browning was for some time confined in Northampton gaol for
preaching the Gospel. From thence he wrote several letters to his flock
in different places where they were resident. There is one published
addressed to the Church at Rowell, another to the brethren of the Church
at Broughton. From the former we give the following extract, as showing
Mr. Browning's spirit, and the wise and pious counsels he gave to his
people.

He addresses them as "his dear brethren and beloved," and in one part of
the letter observes:--

    You are under the awe of that word, Heb. x. 23--25. A suffering day
    is the trial of our love to Christ. When there is no opposition it
    is easy. Do not hypocrites do so? But this is the commendation of
    Christ's followers; they "follow him whithersoever he goeth." "These
    are they that came out of great tribulation; they are before the
    throne, and serve him night and day; and he that sitteth on the
    throne shall dwell among them; the Lamb in the midst of the throne
    shall feed them, and shall wipe away tears from their eyes." Come,
    my brethren, you weep now. Our tender Father has a handkerchief in
    his hand to wipe away our tears, ere long. Do not offend with
    weeping; too many tears may defile. "Woman, why weepest thou?" was
    our Lord's inquiry. Tears of joy become the saints, and there is no
    danger in them; they will be sure to drop into his bosom, and draw
    out, it may be the like in him; for he rejoices over us with
    singing, he rests in his love. Oh, my brethren, methinks I am with
    you, weeping with you, joying with you, praying with you, and
    hearing with you. It is true fellowship my soul has with you at a
    distance. I long after you much in the Lord; yet rejoicingly stay
    his good pleasure. I would not come out a moment before his time. I
    would not take a step without his direction. I am wonderfully well,
    better and better. The cup of affliction for the Gospel is sweeter,
    the deeper; a stronger cordial, the nearer the bottom--I mean death
    itself. Oh the joy, unspeakable and glorious, the dying martyrs of
    Jesus have had! How full freight have been their souls in their
    passage to their port! I tell you, if you knew what Christ's
    prisoners some of them enjoyed in their gaols, you would not fear
    their condition, but long for it; and I am persuaded, could their
    enemies conceive of their comfort, in mere vexation of heart they
    would stay their persecutions. "Therefore, my brethren, my joy, my
    crown, stand fast in the Lord;" rejoice greatly to run your race;
    fear not their fear; sit loose from the world; allot yourselves this
    portion, that God has allotted you, "through many tribulations to
    enter into the kingdom of heaven." Come, the worst is death, and
    that is the best of all. What, do we stick at dying for him, who
    stuck not at it for us? Do we find difficulty in that, which will be
    an entrance into glory? Do princes dread their coronation days? or
    any loath to come to their nuptials? Foolish hearts! why do we err,
    not knowing, rather, not believing the Scriptures? I must stay my
    pen to dry my eyes, because of the overflowing of God's love upon my
    soul. And now I see, if I had not something to keep me down, I could
    not bear the loads of God's favour. Blessed be God, blessed be God!
    "let every one that hath breath praise the Lord." "Oh, love the
    Lord, ye his saints!" My brethren, do not budge. Keep your ground:
    the Scripture is your law, God is your king. Your principles are
    sober; your practices are peaceable; your obedience to superiors
    known, in all those things wherein your obedience is required. If
    men have nothing against you but in the matters of your God, rejoice
    and triumph in all your persecutions.

The following entry we find in the records of the Church relating to the
death of Mr. Browning:--Mr. Thomas Browning, pastor of this Church, was
gathered to his Father's house in peace, in an evil, persecuting day,
May 9th, 1685, having served his Lord in this house with much pains and
many tears, with much presence and success, about 23 years.

After this, trials pressed heavily upon them, so that we are informed
"the Church had but little communion for some months, till God put it
into our hearts to humble ourselves, reform his house, and set upon his
work, almost lost by five or six years' persecution, and the death of
our pastor. We kept a solemn day of prayer, April 22nd, 1686, with good
encouragement in it, by drawing out an account of God's dealings with
the souls of those following." Then are given the names of seven persons
admitted to the Church. Others were added in subsequent months of the
same year; and admonitions were given to those who had fallen back for
fear of persecution.

After an interval of four years, when a great and momentous change had
taken place in the government and in the prospects of England, by the
accomplishment of the glorious revolution by William, Prince of Orange;
and when, by the passing of the "Act of Toleration," Nonconformists
could no longer be persecuted according to law--a measure which our
forefathers hailed with great joy, and which made a great change from
their former condition--the Church at Rowell heard of the piety and
talents of Mr. Richard Davis, who was a member of a Church in London of
which Mr. Thomas Cole was pastor. Mr. Davis came to them on probation,
and they highly approved of his services--desired him to obtain his
dismission from the Church of which he was a member, that he might be
received amongst them; and then they invited him to take the pastoral
oversight of them, which invitation he willingly accepted. The account
of his ordination is given in the following terms:--

    On the seventh day, March 22nd, 1689, the said Richard Davis, by
    fasting and prayer of the Church, and imposition of the hands of the
    eldership in the name of the said Church, was set apart to and
    installed in the office of pastor or bishop of the said Church of
    Christ at Rowell; being the answer of many prayers of the said
    Church. The neighbouring Churches were made acquainted with their
    design, and sent to, that they might be present by their messengers
    to behold their faith and order; but when they saw how it was to
    proceed, several of the neighbouring ministers withdrew, saying,
    there was no business for them.

In this the Church at Rowell, with their pastor, proceeded according to
what they considered to be the primitive model; but it was different to
the practice of the Churches around them, and the pastors coming only to
be spectators of their proceedings was by no means pleasing to them;
hence they appear not to have looked with a very favourable eye on Mr.
Davis, or on the subsequent proceedings of his Church.

Mr. Davis was born in Cardiganshire, in South Wales, in 1658; had a
liberal education in his own country; and after some years removed to
London, where he rose to such attainments in literature, that he was
looked upon as well qualified to fill the office of master in a general
school in the great city; and for several years he continued in a
laborious and faithful discharge of its duties. He became a man of
earnest, consistent piety.

In the first part of his acquaintance with divine things he sought an
interview with Dr. Owen--with Christian kindness he was received. The
Doctor inquired of him, "Young man, pray after what manner do you think
to go to God?" Mr. Davis answered, "Sir, through the Mediator." To which
the Doctor replied, "Young man, that is easily said; but I do assure you
that it is another thing to go to God through the Mediator indeed than
perhaps many men, who make use of the expression, are aware of. I myself
preached Christ some years when I had but very little, if any,
experimental acquaintance with access to God through Christ, until the
Lord was pleased to visit me with sore affliction, whereby I was brought
to the mouth of the grave, and under which my soul was oppressed with
horror and darkness; but God graciously relieved my soul in the powerful
application of Psalm cxxx. 4, "But there is forgiveness with thee, that
thou mayest be feared;" from whence I received special instruction,
peace, and comfort in drawing near to God through the Mediator, and
preached thereupon immediately after my recovery." So free was this
great man of God in communicating to others what he had felt, which,
with other suitable remarks then made, was of great use to Mr. Davis,
who, resolving to follow the Lord fully, made a profession of his faith
in Christ, and became united to a Congregational Church. He was soon
after urged to devote himself to Christ in the ministry of the Gospel.
He began to preach, and "with that savour of spirit," it is said, "that
warmth of soul, that zeal and judgment, that those who heard were
amazed, and glorified God in him." Leaving the advantages of London, he
came down to Rowell and became the pastor of this Church. He entered
upon his work here with great earnestness of spirit, and pursued it
with great and untiring energy. But the methods he adopted were very
different to those which generally prevailed amongst the regular pastors
of the day. Such was the ardour of his zeal that he could not confine
himself within the bounds of the congregation that met at Rowell, or to
the places immediately around them. His course of labour somewhat
resembled that of Bunyan, of whom it is said, "that he took the whole
circuit of Bedfordshire, and some neighbouring counties, for his
diocese." But Mr. Davis did not confine these services for the diffusion
of divine truth to his own personal ministry, but he called out and
employed the brethren in the Church who were considered to be endowed
with suitable gifts and attainments in the knowledge of the Gospel, to
go and preach the word of the Lord in places that were destitute of a
Gospel ministry. He employed what is denominated "a lay agency" to a
considerable extent. There were many in those days who were strictly
observant of ecclesiastical regularity, who thought none should preach
but those who were educated for the work and ordained to the office. The
proceedings of Mr. Davis gave great offence to such, and they severely
censured this part of his procedure. The view which he took of the
subject, and which he promoted among his people, is thus stated in the
records of the Church:--

    The Church unanimously agreed, that though human learning was good
    in its place, yet it was not essentially necessary in the
    qualifications of any to be sent forth to preach the Gospel; and the
    Church unanimously agreed, that a Church of Christ had power within
    itself to choose, approve of, ordain, or send forth any to preach
    the Gospel, either by virtue of office, or otherwise in a
    probationary way in order to office, without calling in the
    assistance of the officers or elders of other Churches to approve
    with them, unless at any time they thought it necessary to desire
    their assistance by way of advice.

Hence the Gospel was preached, to a large extent, by the pastor and some
of the members of the Church at Rowell. Considerable numbers were
brought from different places to become united to that Church. Those who
were too distant to attend regularly the Sabbath services at Rowell,
held meetings for prayer and religious intercourse where they resided;
sometimes having the Lord's Supper administered to them, and sometimes
attending with the united Church at Rowell. In some places this gave
rise to another Church being formed, when the numbers were sufficient to
sustain an interest, and to have a pastor of their own; this was the
case at Wellingborough, Ringstead, Kimbolton, &c. It is said that the
members of the Church have come to Rowell a distance of 20 miles and
more, travelling with lighted lanterns part of the way on the winter
mornings, and in the same manner on their return in the evening.

An interesting account is preserved of the method adopted, when the
members that resided in Wellingborough and its vicinity were dismissed
from the Church at Rowell, to be formed into another Church of the same
order meeting at Wellingborough.

    There were dismissed from us these following, to build a Church for
    Christ at Wellingborough, which dismission ran in these words:--

    "Whereas it is the appointed way of the Lord Jesus (as it may be
    evidently manifest and deduced from the primitive practice), when
    Churches are growing too big and unwieldy to answer the ends of
    communion comfortably, and suitable to the design of Congregational
    societies, that they then divide and multiply into more Churches,
    whereby the Gospel as to its faith, order, and worship, may come to
    be spread, propagated, and commended to many dark places and
    corners, by multiplying the golden candlesticks that are properly to
    hold forth the light thereof; the work of conversion, and the great
    method divinely appointed for gathering in the flock of God, may be
    most ably managed; the comfort and establishment of the saints by
    instruction and exhortation, with the due exercise of authority, and
    mutual holy watch and care, may be more effectually carried on; the
    conveniences of believers, their families and neighbours, most
    charitably consulted and provided for; and antichrist working in its
    various invented forms of Churches, as diocesan, provincial,
    national, patriarchal, and catholic, as under one universal pastor
    and pope, fully prevented: this Church therefore of the living God,
    that chiefly assembles at Rowell, has declared over and again this
    to be their judgment, that when any of those dear brethren and
    sisters that live remotely from Rowell increase into a complete
    number, so as to be able to answer the ends of their dividing and
    inchurching, and to bear the weight of those duties incumbent on a
    particular independent Church of Christ (in all which there must be
    high living by faith in the Lord Jesus), that this Church of Christ
    will not only consent to their dividing for to inchurch apart, but
    have declared it is their duty so to do. Hereupon, after the Lord
    Jesus having increased this Church of Christ into a great number
    through his mighty blessing, and especially that branch of them that
    lives in and near Wellingborough, our dearly beloved brethren and
    sisters there and thereabouts have requested us to dismiss them from
    us for this end, that they might incorporate into a Church
    distinctly and apart from us, and independent of us; we, therefore,
    by virtue of power and authority leagued by the Lord Jesus amongst
    us, with our officers, by the present do (they having first
    acknowledged their faith and oneness with us in the faith and order
    of the Gospel) dismiss our dearly beloved brethren (then follow the
    names of the brethren), and also with the like proviso dismiss our
    dearly beloved sisters (then follow the names of the female
    members), for that aforementioned end of incorporating together as
    an Independent Church; declaring that these, or any of these, as
    then actually dismissed from us, that same moment they actually
    incorporate by actually covenanting with the Lord and one another in
    the presence of messengers delegated and appointed by us for that
    affair, and not another--and those of them that do not at first
    covenant, shall be deemed still members of us till they actually
    covenant with that body; but do then declare them dismissed from us,
    and give our consent for them so to do, when they shall so covenant.
    Now, committing them to the Lord Jesus, to be blessed with the
    blessings of the upper and nether springs, and with all manner of
    spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus our Lord, that they may multiply
    and increase accordingly to many hundreds, and be fed and watered
    every moment by the Lamb in the midst of the throne, we do in
    testimony of this our letter of dismission put our names."

    (There were included in this dismission 27 brethren, 45 sisters.)

A certain gentleman once asked Mr. Davis "what business he had to go up
and down babbling?" for so he called the preaching of the Gospel. Mr.
Davis, in the presence of all, turned to him, and, with a countenance
which testified a good cause and a good conscience, said, "Sir, I was
upon the work of my Lord and Master, Jesus Christ. Do you know him?"
Whereupon the gentleman was struck with silence, and many more with
amazement.

The preaching of Mr. Davis, we suppose, must have been very fervent and
affectionate, calculated to a very considerable degree to work upon the
passions. It was probably in connexion with this that some disorders
arose in their public assemblies. Some females became hysterical, and
cried out; and various indications of strongly excited feeling were
manifest for a time; and numerous cases of affliction, many of them
nervous disorders, appeared amongst them. These things being noised
abroad, and exaggerated, caused some reproach.

The subject is thus noticed in the records of the Church:--"Feb. 17th,
1691, a day was kept solemnly by fasting and prayer for the afflicted,
where Satan raged extremely; and the faith of God's children was by the
uplifted arm of the mighty God of Jacob made to rise proportionably, to
the praise of the glory of God in Christ; and since that day, through
the goodness of God, the distemper has much abated on several, as a
testimony that our God is the God hearing prayer in Zion." Again: "May
23rd, 1691, was a day kept solemnly in fasting and prayer for the
afflicted, when God was eminently present; and at the close of the day
some of our brethren, naming the awful name of Jesus of Nazareth,
brought several of them to themselves, to our great amazement, and as an
earnest to encourage our faith that that glorious name ere long will
make them perfectly whole." Again: "June 31st, 1691, was kept, the
greatest part of the day, solemnly in prayer for the afflicted, for the
discovery of any secret mystery of iniquity, if any was at work in
reference to them; and for the more clear discovery of the matter of
Thomas Haley, because it had been such a thorn in the flesh of this
Church of Christ."--We present these extracts to show that there was
something rather peculiar in the state of the Church at this time, and
in the view they took of the circumstances that arose.

As a specimen of the spirit of the times we may state, that there was a
pamphlet published by the opposers of Mr. Davis, entitled, 'A plain and
just Account of a most horrid and dismal Plague begun at Rowell, alias
Rothwell, in Northamptonshire, which hath infected many places round
about; or, a faithful Narrative of the execrable and noisome Errors, and
abominable and damnable Heresies, vented by Richard Davis, pretended
pastor to a people at Rowell, and by his emissaries, the shoemakers,
joiners, dyers, taylors, weavers, farmers, &c.; together with a brief
account 1. Of his and his parties' practices; 2. Visions and
revelations; 3. Great boasts; 4. Admission of members into their
society; 5. His people's self-condemnedness; 6. The number and quality
of his hearers' admired fits; 7. Some queries to the country people as
matter for further search; 8. An expostulation and advice to the people
of Rowell. By Mr. P. Rehakosht, &c., inhabiting on the east side of the
seat of the Plague. London: printed for the Author, 1692.' Whoever this
author might be, the spirit of his work reflects far greater discredit
on himself than any of its charges do on the pastor and his flock. Mr.
Davis condescended to reply, and near the close of his pamphlet we find
the following noble passage:

    If there be any errors I maintain, I care not how soon they fall,
    though I fell with them; nay, if I could be convinced that I
    erroneously worded any matter, I should soon publicly declare
    against my own wording. It is not my own honour I seek, but the
    honour of him that sent me; and I hope I am always ready to bury my
    own honour in shame, provided I could secure thereby his name from
    dishonour and contempt. I should think hard of no confession of mine
    that should give glory to God. But if it be the truth of Christ I am
    assaulted for (as thereto I am persuaded it is), then all the
    attempts against it will be in vain: his truth is like
    himself--eternal, and will abide steadfast, bright, and insuperable,
    when I and my opposers are moulded to dust and ashes. In parting, I
    shall again recommend to them Gamaliel's prudent advice, viz., to
    let us alone; for if this council be not of God, it will fall of
    itself; but if it be of God, it shall stand in spite of all their
    rage and persecution, and they themselves will at last be found
    fighters against God.

Mr. Davis had to pass through a large measure of censure and rebuke from
his brethren. Intelligence was conveyed to the London ministers of Mr.
Davis's very disorderly proceedings in sending out the members of his
Church to preach; also, respecting disorders in the assemblies, and some
reports of erroneous doctrine, as if he were approaching Antinomianism.
Remonstrances were sent down to him. Mr. Davis stood upon his defence.
He was harshly treated; and being of an ardent temperament, some things
would be done and said by him that the prudent would not justify. A
public controversy arose. Pamphlets were published on both sides; and
neither side, perhaps, could be considered blameless in the matter. That
there were some eccentricities in the case of Mr. Davis, and some
incautious expressions, every impartial person we suppose would allow;
but the spirit of fervent piety, the ardent attachment to the doctrines
of divine grace, combined with a deep sense of the obligations to
Christian holiness, and some eminent attainments in the divine life,
with great labours, and much success, commend Mr. Davis to the grateful
remembrance of all the friends of truth and piety.

The following testimony was borne to the sentiments and preaching of Mr.
Davis, by the members of the Church at Rowell:--

    We, the members of the Church of Christ over which Mr. R. Davis is
    pastor, and his constant hearers, having seriously considered the
    principles laid to his charge, do declare and testify they are
    utterly false, and that the current of his doctrine has been as he
    himself has laid it down. And further, the design of his preaching
    amongst us has been to offer pardoning grace, through the blood of
    Christ, freely to sinners; to press them to accept thereof on pain
    of damnation; to press us to holiness, from the principle of saving
    faith; to advance the person and offices of the Lord
    Jesus--likewise, the person, offices, graces, and gifts of the
    Spirit; and likewise, to advance electing grace reigning through the
    righteousness of Christ Jesus. We also attest, that all those evil
    practices laid to his charge, and especially the ridiculous
    falsehoods about admissions, are abominable untruths;--whereunto we
    have subscribed our names at the general Church-meeting, it being a
    solemn day of fasting and prayer.

    (Signed by 40 brethren, members of the Church.)

The authors of the 'History of Dissenters' state: "With all his
peculiarities and extravagancies, which were probably increased by the
unkind and bitter opposition of his brethren, Richard Davis appears to
have been a very pious man, and an extraordinary zealous minister of
Christ. From some occasional sermons of his which were published, it is
plainly seen that he must have been remarkably popular. There is a
simplicity, an animation, and a pungency in them, which, if seconded by
a suitable elocution, must have made a powerful impression on the hearts
of his hearers. His zeal was of the most ardent kind; and England at
that time, perhaps, scarcely could produce a man of more ardent labours
in the Redeemer's cause. Not satisfied with performing the duties of the
pastoral office to his flock at Rowell, he added the character of an
itinerant too, and extended his journeys 80 miles in every direction
around the place of his abode. His converts became members of his
Church; and as they lived at a distance, and could only attend on
particular occasions, they had religious meetings among themselves for
prayer, for conversation, for preaching, as opportunities were
afforded. That they might enjoy these in the greatest abundance, he
called forth the most intelligent members of the Church into action, and
employed them in itinerating within his extensive circle.

"Of these lay preachers, whom Mr. Davis sent out, several afterwards
became pastors of Churches, formed from the societies which he had
collected in the towns and villages in which he was wont to preach. To
the honour of Mr. Davis it may be mentioned, that he had imbibed a
principle, the want of which at that time was exceedingly injurious to
the cause of religion, and circumscribed within narrow limits the
usefulness of many excellent men--it may be named the principle of
propagation. On this principle did Mr. Davis act, and he united in
himself the office and character of pastor, itinerant, and primitive
bishop, presiding over his humble presbyters who aided him in the
labours of his diocese. While we throw a veil of compassion over his
infirmities, it must give pleasure to every friend of religion to
witness the fervour of his zeal, and the multiplicity of his labours, to
extend the knowledge of Christ as far as his exertions could possibly
reach. Let posterity give to his memory the praise which is justly due,
and hail Richard Davis as the morning star of propagation."--_History of
Dissenters_, vol. i. p. 396.

In the year 1691 deaconesses were chosen to act in this Church. Though
this is not a general practice now in the Churches, it is still thought
by many learned men that there are references to such appointments in
the writings of the apostles. Phebe is considered to have been a
deaconess of the Church at Cenchrea; and those whose qualifications the
Apostle points out in his letter to Timothy, which our translators
understood to be the wives of the deacons, are thought by many to be
persons appointed to this office, "deaconesses."

Mr. Davis died in the 56th year of his age. When constant prevailing
indisposition made it evident that his end was drawing nigh, the mutual
affection expressed between him and the Church of which he was pastor
was very remarkable. He would say to them with the greatest tenderness,
"I die, but God will surely visit you;" while he would wrestle in prayer
on their behalf, that the great Shepherd would take care of them in the
wilderness. And their cries ascended to heaven for his stay amongst
them; and floods of tears did they pour out to their heavenly Father on
this occasion. But the time was come when he must die. His work was
done; he must be called to his rest. Under date of September 10th, 1714,
we have the following record:--"Mr. Richard Davis, pastor, after he had
faithfully, with hard labour and travail, through many and great
difficulties, slanders, reproaches, and persecutions, for about
five-and-twenty years, served the Lord in this house, he was taken to
rest, and to receive the crown of glory."

About a month previous to this, it was concluded at a Church-meeting to
invite Mr. Maurice as an assistant to Mr. Davis. On the death of Mr.
Davis, Mr. Maurice was invited to the pastoral office, which invitation
he accepted, and was solemnly set apart to the office in the presence of
messengers from other Churches, with fasting and prayer, on the 6th of
January, 1715.

Mr. Maurice was a native of Wales; a member of one of the Churches in
the principality; by them called to the ministry; settled for a time at
Olney, in Buckinghamshire, and from thence removed to Rowell. The
ministry of Mr. Maurice, in this situation, was continued for nearly 24
years, as he died at Rowell, 1738. He was a laborious and successful
preacher of the Gospel; and his pen was employed in expounding and
enforcing divine truth, and in illustrating the great principles of
Congregational Church polity and the social influence of religion. The
congregation continued to be large and increasing, so that on May 29th,
1734, it is recorded, "A talk concerning, and some subscriptions
towards, enlarging the Meeting House, if the Lord will." And it appears
that the present Meeting House was built in the course of the next year;
for Mr. Maurice published a sermon from Psalm cxxii. 4, entitled, 'The
tribes of the Lord appearing before him; or, families in public worship:
a Sermon preached at the Opening of the new Meeting House at Rowell,
November 9th, 1735.' Near the close of the discourse Mr. Maurice
observes,--

    With regard to the place, where now for the first time we are met to
    worship the Lord, if it is possible in any sense for the stone to
    cry out of the wall, and the beam in the timber to answer it; if
    stones can speak, as our Lord said they would, if the children of
    men held their peace--then God has a voice in this work of his
    providence, which the man of wisdom will hear.

    It calls upon us to bless the Lord for our established liberty of
    conscience, and for the amazing methods Providence made use of to
    procure, continue, and confirm it. Our fathers were glad to meet
    together in woods, deserts, and desolate places, for the worship
    of God, as much as they could out of the way of barbarous, cruel,
    and bloody informers; and yet were often hunted out and found by
    these servants of the powers of darkness, and put in prisons and
    dungeons for the sake of the truth--their families deprived of the
    necessaries of life by merciless and terrible fines and seizures:
    but, blessed be the Lord for the Revolution! and may the glorious
    and immortal memory of King William be in great esteem by all the
    Churches of Christ; and among them let us, let our children, and
    their children's children bear a part, in high praises to the God of
    tender providence at the remembrance of deliverances and
    enlargements past; and through the same tender mercies conveyed to
    us, and we hope to be continued to the end of time, may we be helped
    to make the best use and improvement of our liberty in all religious
    zeal for the faith and worship of our Redeemer; in sincere
    evangelical love to each other; and on all occasions in cheerful
    acknowledgments of duty to that illustrious family under whose wings
    it is preserved to us, by the providence of the Most High.

    And we are called to own His grace who giveth the everlasting
    Gospel, and gathereth poor sinners under the sound of it, making our
    assemblies so numerous as to stand in need of so large a place; and
    thankful we should be to the same Almighty hand for giving capacity,
    and a willing mind, to so many of us to contribute cheerfully to the
    charge. We hope generations to come will bless God for this; and as
    for us, we must say as David did: "What are we, that we should be
    able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of
    thee, and of thine own have we given thee." The generous assistance
    of our friends in London and elsewhere I hope we shall always
    thankfully acknowledge, and own the bountiful hand of our God
    therein; and I can never, without being deeply affected, relate or
    think of the extraordinary kindness of a religious family, descended
    from one of the godly elders first fixed in this Church of Christ.
    What things does our God treasure up in his providence! Nor should
    we forget to be thankful to the Lord, who, through all the work,
    though attended with many difficulties and some dangers, mercifully
    preserved all the persons concerned, so that without bruises or
    wounds they can view their finished work.

A controversy arose during the ministry of Mr. Maurice on the point,
"Whether it was the duty of unconverted sinners who heard the Gospel to
believe in Jesus Christ." Mr. Maurice was greatly concerned that such a
question should arise, and published a small pamphlet, entitled, 'The
Modern Question modestly stated.' To this there was a reply published;
and then he wrote, 'The Modern Question confirmed and proved,' viz.,
that the eternal God does by his word make it the duty of poor
unconverted sinners, who hear the Gospel preached or published, to
believe in Jesus Christ.' This was not printed until after Mr. Maurice's
death, for it is said to be "by Matthias Maurice, late pastor to a
Church at Rowell, in Northamptonshire, 1739." It has an address to the
reader by Mr. Bradbury, of London, who says, "The author of this work
was a person whose learning, temper, and piety, made him very dear to
me. At his desire I have perused and published these papers. He has in
his letters assured me of the great concern this affair gave him, when a
question of so much importance to the work of ministers and the duty of
mankind came to be a matter of debate. The Church, to whom he was an
affectionate pastor, has lain under a reproach which this book, and
their desires to have it published, will effectually roll away."

We introduce this work chiefly on account of a statement it contains
from the Church. Prefixed to this little volume we find the following,
signed by 52 of the brethren of the Church:--

    _The testimony of the Church of Christ at Rowell, against the
    pernicious new opinion, at their Meeting, August 31st, 1737._

    Whereas of late it has been stated, embraced, and maintained by
    some, that God does nowhere in the Scripture make it _the duty_ of
    poor unconverted sinners, who hear the Gospel preached, to believe
    in Jesus Christ for salvation, we, the Church of Christ at Rowell,
    being greatly concerned that God's revealed will should be so
    daringly opposed, and earnestly desirous that we, and our children,
    and all that name the name of Christ, may for ever be delivered from
    such a pernicious dangerous error, do in the most solemn manner, in
    the presence of the great God and our Saviour, testify our
    abhorrence thereof, and declare, that in the strength of Christ we
    will contend earnestly for the doctrine of faith once delivered to
    the saints, of which doctrine we look upon this to be a very
    valuable part--that God does in his word make it _the duty_ of poor
    unconverted sinners who hear the Gospel preached, to be truly
    concerned for their souls and believe in Jesus Christ for salvation.
    The denial of this we look upon to be a denial of the law of God,
    not to be borne with in an orderly Church, and attended with
    dangerous consequences against the Gospel and all the life and power
    of evangelical, practical religion. Wherefore, what God delivered to
    our fathers, and what our fathers in his fear delivered down to us,
    we think ourselves bound in conscience to deliver to our children;
    namely, that God does command unconverted sinners to repent and
    believe in his Son for everlasting salvation; and may our children
    deliver this with greater zeal, and with most desirable success, to
    following generations. Amen.

Mr. Maurice published a volume entitled, 'Faith Encouraged'; 'Faith
working by Love--Four Sermons on 1 John iii. 23;' 'Monuments of Mercy;
or, Some of the distinguishing Favours of Christ to his Congregational
Church at Rowell;' also, a sermon on 'The help of the Holy Spirit in
prayer.' But his most interesting and useful work we consider to be,
'Social Religion Exemplified, in several Dialogues, giving an account of
the first Settlement of Christianity in the city of Caerludd, and of the
administration of the ordinances and discipline of the Gospel in the
Church there planted: with the remarkable success with which Christ
blessed his own institutions to the recovering of its backsliding
members, the satisfaction of those who were under spiritual distresses,
and the edification and comfort of the whole Society;--in which many
cases of conscience are judiciously answered.' This is a copy of the
title-page of the first edition, 1740. It appears that this work came
out in separate parts, and that the whole was not published until some
time after the death of Mr. Maurice.

There were 134 members of the Church when Mr. Maurice died.

The next pastor was Mr. Jonathan Sanderson. Application was first made
to Mr. Wheeler, of Axminster, in Devonshire, who came and preached to
them four Sabbaths, but entirely declined all thoughts of settling with
them. After this, Mr. Job Orton was invited; but he declined accepting
the invitation. Then application was made to Mr. Sanderson, who promised
to come and assist them for three or four Sabbaths, when he had finished
his studies with Mr. Eames. After a trial he was invited to become their
pastor; when he thought the call of God so clear and plain, that he
could not refuse complying with it, though considerable offers, more to
his temporal advantage, were made to him. In May, 1741, he was set apart
to the office. He gives the following account of the solemnity:--

    On this day, the Church renewed their call to me to take upon me the
    pastoral charge of them under the great Shepherd. Upon that, after
    having given the Church a particular account of my faith, publicly
    declared my acceptation of their call to the pastoral office, I gave
    up myself in a solemn manner to the great work they had called me
    to. Ebenezer.

       *       *       *       *       *

    On June 3rd of the same year we had a day of prayer appointed, and
    invited several sister Churches in communion with us to join in
    seeking a blessing upon us as a Church, and upon my poor labours
    amongst them.

    Dr. Doddridge spake to the people, and Mr. Hall, of London, gave me
    a word of exhortation upon the occasion.

The ministry of Mr. Sanderson was devoted and useful, but short. Only
six years after the time of his settlement we find it recorded, "Mr.
Jonathan Sanderson fell sweetly asleep in Christ Jesus, April 18th,
1747."

When he entered on his office, and transcribed the names of those that
were then members of the Church, he wrote--"The Lord grant that the
Church of Christ at Rowell may increase in numbers, gifts, and graces,
and purity, under the pastoral care of their unworthy servant, for
Christ's sake, J. S. So be it. Amen." 38 members were added to the
Church during his short ministry.

Mr. Sanderson was a native of Bradfield, a village about eight miles
from Sheffield, in Yorkshire. He became early devoted to God, and
dedicated himself sincerely to the work of the sanctuary. In the year
1737, when about 19 years of age, he entered a seminary in London,
patronized by the Independent Fund, then under the direction of Mr.
Eames, F.R.S., who, in the esteem of his contemporaries, was one of the
most learned men of the age. The piety of Mr. Sanderson when at the
academy appears to have been of the most decided, humble, evangelical,
and experimental character. His preaching was very acceptable and
useful, so that opportunities were presented to him to have settled in
London, and he was advised by some of the ministers of his acquaintance
to do so; but he yielded to the invitation of the people at Rowell, and
believed that he saw plainly the finger of God pointing him there. He
was received with much kindness and cordiality, and was greatly
encouraged in the prospect of usefulness there presented. He was
welcomed into the county by Dr. Doddridge, who addressed to him the
following letter, almost immediately after he came to Rowell:--

    Permit me, my dear brother and friend--for so, though personally
    unknown, I will take the liberty to call you; permit me, with the
    utmost sincerity and pleasure, to assure you of my thankfulness to
    the great Shepherd of Israel for bringing you into these parts, to
    be employed among us, and under him, in the delightful work of
    feeding his flock, his pleasant flock.

    I rejoice to hear by many hands of the acceptance you meet with at
    Rowell, and of the respect you have of neighbouring brethren and
    friends, who are so happy as to be at all acquainted with you;
    respect, which I fully concluded from the manner of your writing (in
    which I saw at once so much of the gentleman, the scholar, and the
    Christian) you could not fail to meet with in these parts, where, I
    bless God, we are not utterly forsaken of the spirit of serious
    piety and faithful friendship. Were not my engagements so many as
    they are, and now increasing by the care of finishing my 'Expositor'
    as soon as possible, I would have waited upon you before this. But I
    send these to beg the favour of you to breakfast with me at Mr.
    Saul's, at Kettering, Thursday se'nnight, if God spare our lives
    till then; and to contrive your affairs so as to go with me from
    thence to Wellingborough, where I shall dine that day, if God
    permit. By this means I shall have the pleasure of enjoying your
    company, and also of introducing you to the acquaintance of a friend
    or two there, with whom, if you do not yet know, it will be
    agreeable to you to form an acquaintance, or if you do know them, to
    improve that acquaintance.

    I desire you would make my cordial service acceptable to all my dear
    friends at Rowell, for whom I have an unfeigned and tender regard;
    and assure yourself that I have all imaginable propensity to enter
    into a free, easy, and respectful friendship with you; and that,
    heartily recommending you to Him in whom, I hope, our friendship
    does and will centre,

                    I am, Reverend and dear Sir,
          Your most affectionate brother and humble servant,
                                                     P. DODDRIDGE.

  _Northampton, March 16th, 1740._


Mr. Sanderson commenced his labours at Rowell with great diligence and
zeal; tokens of the divine blessing attended his labours. But his frame
appears to have been too feeble to sustain the amount of labour in which
he engaged, and it was not very long before symptoms of an unfavourable
nature were discovered.

Notwithstanding the great affection manifested towards him at first, and
the encouraging prospect opening before him, trials soon arose among his
people. There were some whose spirit and conduct had been the occasion
of painful trial to his predecessor, Mr. Maurice; and they began, but
too quickly, to show a similar spirit towards him: those who denied the
Gospel call to sinners as such, and who wanted all the privileges of
Christianity without its obligations. Some of them soon withdrew their
subscriptions from him, and talked of building a new Meeting. There was
a worthy deacon of his Church, who stood firmly by him, and who wrote a
very sensible letter, kindly and faithfully expostulating with them on
their conduct; in the course of which he observes, "We are not without
several sad instances which have fallen under our own cognizance, of
Churches who, upon ceasing to contribute to a handsome maintenance of
their pastor what was in their power, without injury to their families,
have gradually dwindled and come to nothing. The reason of this, we
apprehend, is very obvious; for when Churches cease to walk in the path
of duty, the blessed God is pleased to suspend the influence of his
grace, and to visit them with his afflictive hand. We are not arguing
for a superfluity, for that you are incapable of doing; but only for a
proper expression of love and kindness to your pastor," &c.

Mr. Sanderson proved to be consumptive, and gradually grew worse, until
he was removed by death in the 29th year of his age.

Dr. Doddridge was amongst the number that visited him in his last
illness; and after his visit he wrote a kind letter to the father of Mr.
Sanderson, in which he says, "Greatly have I loved him and esteemed him,
as one of the most completely excellent and accomplished persons of his
age that I have ever known. Greatly has God honoured him, as the
instrument of usefulness, during these few years of ministerial
service."

After the death of Mr. Sanderson, a friend wrote--"Poor Rowell lies in
sackcloth. Oh, that she might know in this her day the things that make
for her peace! They have my best wishes and earnest prayers that the
Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, may find out a man to stand
in the gap, and fill up the breach which he has so awfully made, that
the congregation of the Lord may not be as sheep which have no
shepherd."

In the year 1741 Dr. Doddridge published two sermons, the substance of
which had been delivered at Rowell--'The Scripture doctrine of Salvation
by Grace through Faith, illustrated and improved.' In an address
prefixed to these discourses to the Church and congregation of
Protestants at Rowell he says,--

    I cannot conclude this short address without congratulating you on
    the abundant goodness of God to you as a Church, in bringing among
    you that worthy and excellent person, Mr. Sanderson, under whose
    pastoral care you are now so happily placed. I know he is a faithful
    witness to the truths of the Gospel, and rejoice in that rich
    abundance of gifts and graces which renders him so fit to state and
    improve them in the most advantageous as well as the most agreeable
    and delightful manner. I hope and believe that the grace he so
    humbly owns his dependence upon will add happy success to his
    labours; and I heartily pray that you and neighbouring Churches may
    long be happy in him, and that God, who has by such various and
    gracious interpositions in your favour expressed his paternal care
    of you, may still delight to dwell among you.

Shortly after the death of Mr. Sanderson, Mr. Moses Gregson was chosen,
with great unanimity, to the pastoral office. His ordination took place
April 20th, 1748. Upon this occasion, the service was conducted in the
method generally adopted in other Dissenting Churches. Dr. Doddridge
asked the usual questions, and took the confession of faith; Mr. King,
of London, preached to the people; and Dr. Guyse gave the charge.

Mr. Gregson continued pastor for about forty years. During the course of
his ministry 88 members were admitted to the Church. When years
increased and infirmities came on, so as to render him incapable of
discharging all the duties of his office, Mr. John Wood was invited to
become co-pastor with Mr. Gregson; but before Mr. Wood entered on this
office, the death of Mr. Gregson took place. In consequence of this
change Mr. Wood was invited to become the pastor of the Church, which he
accepted, and was set apart to the office in September, 1789; when Mr.
Smith, of Bedford, delivered the introductory discourse; Mr. Wood, of
Creaton, offered the ordination prayer; Mr. Horsey, of Northampton,
delivered the charge; and Mr. Toller, of Kettering, preached to the
people.

No records are preserved of the pastorate of Mr. Wood, though it
continued until March 25th, 1811, a period of twenty-one years and six
months, when Mr. Wood resigned his office as pastor of the Church at
Rowell.

After an interval of two years, Mr. Walter Scott, from Hoxton Academy,
was set apart to the pastoral office, on the 20th of May, 1813. On that
occasion, Mr. Whitehead, of Creaton, delivered the introductory
discourse; ordination prayer, Mr. Toller, of Kettering; charge, Mr.
Gill, of Harborough, from 2 Tim. iv. 22; sermon, by Mr. Richards, from 1
Thess. v. 12, 13. In the evening, Mr. Griffiths, of Long Buckby,
preached from Zech. vii. 25.

Mr. Scott's ministry was highly acceptable and useful, distinguished by
a great fulness and rich variety of matter, and greatly valued through
the county. It continued for twenty years, until the year 1833, during
which period about 130 members were added to the Church.

New school-rooms were erected in the front of the front of the Chapel in
the year 1826.

With his labours as pastor, Mr. Scott united the duties of tutor. For
several years he had under his care a number of young men, most of whom
were designed for the ministry, in a course of preparatory training,
previous to their entering the Academy at Hoxton, afterwards Highbury.
His labours in this department were considered to be eminently useful,
so as ultimately to raise him to a higher sphere as a tutor.

In the year 1833 Mr. Scott received an invitation to become the
resident Divinity Tutor of the College at Airedale, near Bradford,
Yorkshire, with which he at length considered it his duty to comply.
When it was first presented to him, "he laid it before the Church,
desiring their advice and prayer. They unanimously expressed their
desire that he would remain with them; and some of them did so in the
strongest terms, stating it as their conviction that he ought not by any
means to leave. After serious consideration, prayer to the Divine Being,
and asking the advice of several ministers, he however came to the
conclusion that it was his duty to leave. The Church in general were
brought to say, "the will of the Lord be done."

Some idea may be formed of Mr. Scott's habits while at Rowell, from a
passage in an address delivered to the students at Airedale, and
published in the year 1835. Recommending them in one part of it
carefully to attend to the preservation of their health, he says,--

    I would, in a special manner, recommend to you to take regular,
    abundant, and systematic exercise. On this subject I can speak with
    confidence, not only from observation, but from experience of both
    the most painful and the most pleasant kind. I assure you, that by
    neglecting exercise, by untimely late hours, and immoderate study, I
    injured most seriously my health. By systematic, determined,
    vigorous exercise, I have banished disease, regained my health, and
    even increased the vigour of both mind and body. Had it not been for
    exercise and attention to diet, as the means in the hand of God, it
    is my firm persuasion, rather it is with me matter of absolute
    certainty, that, instead of being able in the possession of good
    health to address you on this occasion, I should have been the
    helpless victim of more diseases than one which had begun to invade
    my frame; or rather, I should have been numbered with the dead. I
    have observed several running the same course which I had partly
    run, without having been arrested in it as I was; and the
    consequence has been, that though they were younger than I was, and
    at one time quite as healthy, they have years ago been consigned to
    the tomb.... I am very much disposed to believe, or rather I have no
    doubt, that, had the history of students and ministers in general
    been accurately written, the way in which they have neglected their
    health, entailed diseases on their frame, and shortened their lives,
    would furnish some of the most striking instances on record in the
    pages of history, of imprudence in those who ought to be eminent for
    prudence, and of folly in those whose office it is to teach wisdom
    to others. I have no doubt that some early and apparently premature
    removals of eminent ministers from this world, which have been
    thought to be most mysterious and unaccountable dispensations of
    divine providence, would be found to be the necessary result of
    their own conduct, in neglecting some of the most obvious rules of
    prudence for the preservation of their health. To have prevented
    that removal, God must have wrought a miracle.

Mr. Scott is also the author of one of the volumes of Congregational
Lectures on 'The Existence and Agency of Evil Spirits.'

After the removal of Mr. Scott, the Church at Rowell was supplied by
several ministers, for some time remaining unsettled. On the 5th of
October, 1836, Mr. Gallsworthy, a student at Airedale, visited Rowell,
and preached for seven Sabbaths, when the Church unanimously agreed to
invite him to become their pastor. This invitation he accepted; the
ordination service being held October 4th, 1837, when Messrs. Toller, of
Kettering, Hobson, of Welford, Scott, late of Rowell, and Green, of
Uppingham, were engaged in the principal services of the day. The
ministry of Mr. Gallsworthy only continued until December 24th, 1841,
when he left Rowell, and became minister to a Church at Pinchbeck, in
Lincolnshire. During his ministry 60 members were added to the Church.

Some months after Mr. Gallsworthy had left Rowell, the present minister,
the Rev. Richard Jessop, from Oldham, in Lancashire, accepted an
invitation to the pastoral office, and commenced his stated labours at
Rowell the 9th of October, 1842. Since that time more than 60 members
have been added to the Church. A new school has been erected for the
Infant Sabbath-school; and at the present time considerable alterations
are about to be made in the Meeting House--re-pewing, new roofing, and
enlarging--at an expense of from L700 to L800. The number of scholars in
the Sabbath-schools is 320. Six villages are supplied with Sabbath
evening services by the members of the Church. Present number of
communicants is 130.

In reviewing the history of a Church that has been in existence now for
nearly 200 years, what abundant reason is there for full satisfaction
with the great principles on which it was founded, as agreeable to the
word of God, and the means of sustaining, under God, the faithful
ministry of the word of life, and the administration of the ordinances
of the Gospel in their purity! Attached to the same principles, and
exhibiting their happy and holy influence, this Church of Christ we
trust will still go on and prosper--the great Head of the Church
attending it with his constant presence and blessing.




CHAPTER III.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT KETTERING.


There are some places which present no claim on public notice from
anything remarkable in their situation, their population, or their
buildings; yet attain celebrity from the character, talents, and
services of certain individuals that have been connected with them. This
is the case with the town of Kettering. It is a comparatively small
town, containing about 5,000 inhabitants, standing about the centre of
the northern division of the county of Northampton; but this place has
attained to some considerable degree of renown, on account of the
religious advantages with which it has been favoured. By some persons it
may be thought of with interest, as the birth-place of Dr. Gill and Mr.
Brine, eminent ministers of the Gospel in their day; but it is far more
extensively known, as the place where a Toller and a Fuller, though of
different denominations, laboured together in the same cause during a
space of more than thirty years. No town probably, for its size, has
been so distinguished, by having two ministers, of such a high standing,
engaged for so long a period as stated pastors of two societies. Their
talents and attainments were of a different order, but though different,
equally eminent. Fuller was most extensively known on account of his
services to the Baptist Mission, and his able and useful publications,
whilst he was highly esteemed as a minister of the Gospel--Toller, as a
preacher of original manner, and remarkable interest and power, was
greatly valued, and will be long remembered.

But for a considerable period we find the town of Kettering
distinguished by the faithful ministration of Gospel truth. The
Puritans, in 1591, are said to have held several meetings here and in
the neighbourhood. Two hundred years ago, Mr. Thomas Maidwell, an
eminent minister of Christ, preached the Gospel here, having become
rector of the parish about the year 1650. Mr. Maidwell was a native of
Geddington, a village three miles from Kettering. He was educated at
Cambridge, became a good scholar, an excellent preacher, and a man of
eminent piety. In the year 1662 he was ejected from the living, and
ranked among the devoted Nonconformists of the day. After his ejectment
he frequently preached in his own house, and in other houses in the
town; until at length he opened a Meeting House, which would hold from
300 to 400 hearers. In what year this took place is unknown. He lived
for thirty years after his separation from the Church. Like many of his
brethren in those days, he was tried by persecution. One H. Sawyer,
Esq., a large landed proprietor in the parish, was a bitter enemy to the
Nonconformists, and often tried to get Mr. Maidwell into his power. He
frequently escaped with difficulty, sometimes in disguise. It is said
that he was once cast into prison. He was also banished from his home by
the "Five Mile Act," retiring for some time from Kettering, it is
supposed to the house of H. Barwell, Esq.,[2] of Marston Trussell, near
Market Harborough. From thence he wrote to his people at Kettering three
very excellent pastoral letters, which have been preserved. An extract
from the first of these will be sufficient to show something of the
principles and spirit of this minister of Christ.

    MY DEAR FRIENDS: Grace and peace be multiplied.--Since I heard of
    the great distress you are in on several accounts, it cannot but
    much affect and afflict me; and the rather, because my present
    dangers and sufferings add to yours, which makes the burden heavier
    to us both. But if our God, who directs, helps us to cast our burden
    on him, he will sustain it, and us under it, as at present he doth,
    blessed be his name! for though "we are troubled on every side, yet
    we are not distressed; though perplexed, yet not in despair; though
    persecuted, yet not forsaken; though cast down, yet not destroyed."
    Though we bear in our outward man "the dying of the Lord Jesus," yet
    if the life, spirit, and vigour of Christ be exercised in our inward
    man, we shall live to him eternally hereafter, as spiritually here.
    But the want of that divine vigour and true Christian magnanimity
    fills most souls with despondency, bowels with sighs, and tongues
    with complaints. Yet we have no reason to murmur against or complain
    of our God, who doth all things justly, and wisely, and well, but of
    ourselves, who neither know, do, nor suffer as we ought; but "in
    many things we offend all," and therefore all suffer justly. It's
    true, you will say--what is to be done under our present suffering?


[2] Mr. Edward Barwell was lord of the manor of Marston, when Bridges
wrote his 'History of Northamptonshire.'


Then he goes on to give them most suitable and important directions;
such as, "Let every one search his and her ways." "Let not
self-examination be superficial, but special, thorough, affectionate,
heart-melting, soul afflicting, extraordinary, becoming so dark a day."
"Press after a personal, relative, thorough reformation of what is amiss
in heart, tongue, and life." "Have a daily vigorous recourse by a lively
faith unto Christ." "Let that faith, in the reality and eminence of it,
be more and more manifested in our new obedience." He gives them
directions as to the purity of their worship--their spirit towards each
other--their sitting loose to the world--giving up themselves entirely
to God--giving all diligence in their Christian course--seeking to
attain joy and peace in believing--and then closes in these words:--

    Thus, my dear hearts, I have answered your desires in your last I
    received; heartily letting you know, that though I am absent in body
    from you to my great grief, yet I am present with you in spirit,
    daily praying for you, longing to see you, which I should have done
    "once and again had not Satan hindered," which he will do till
    Christ comes and binds him in chains and removes him out of the way,
    and gives his people a quiet and full enjoyment of himself in each
    other. Which, that he may, is the earnest prayer of your unworthy
    pastor, solicitous for your souls' good.

                                            I am, Sirs, &c.,
  Communicate this to ours.                                  T. M.


It is uncertain in what year the Church was formed, as the first entry
in the oldest Church-book is without date. The following is the first
statement: "An account of the names of those who are in Church
fellowship at Kettering, and have engaged to walk together according to
the rules of the Gospel, under the ministry of Mr. Maidwell, pastor
there." Then follow the names of 95 members residing in Kettering, and
91 in other places in the vicinity: total number of members, 186.

The Church was formed on Congregational principles, with a pastor, two
elders, and two deacons.

Mr. Maidwell continued his labours almost to the last, and died January
9th, 1692, about 80 years of age. He was buried in the chancel of the
parish Church, a stone being placed over his grave, with a Latin
inscription, now scarcely legible.

We are informed that "he was abundant in labours; never weary of his
work, and seldom wearied in it: that he had the happy art of winning
souls to Christ; that such was his peculiar aptitude for religious
conversation, making a spiritual improvement of all earthly business and
concerns he was engaged about, that it was considered a question,
whether he did more good or converted more souls in the pulpit or out of
it. He had an amiable temper, and breathed much of the spirit of his
Divine Master, recommending continually the Gospel he preached by his
lovely and consistent deportment." One "of whom the world was not
worthy," but whose "memory is blessed." "He was a burning and shining
light, and there were many who rejoiced to walk in his light."

After the death of Mr. Maidwell, Mr. Thomas Milway became pastor of the
Church. The date of his settlement is not given, but it is supposed to
have taken place between January, 1692, and June, 1694. It is supposed
that he came from Bury to Kettering. His pastorate was but a short one,
not more than four or five years. At the commencement of his ministry
the Church numbered 167 members, and 61 were added while he was pastor.
In the list of members at the commencement of Mr. Milway's labours, we
find the name of John Gill, the father of the celebrated Dr. Gill, and
the name of Elijah Brine, father of Mr. William Brine, a Baptist
minister of some eminence, contemporary with Dr. Gill.

About the year 1696, Mr. William Wallis, a ruling elder in the Church,
embraced the sentiments of the Baptists, and took upon him to baptize by
immersion some of the members of the Church. This being brought forward
in a Church assembly, in which it is said "to have been proved that he
had no right or power to do so," he desired his dismission, which was
granted him; after which he began to preach in another place in the
town; and six or seven of the members, embracing the same sentiments,
left the Church with Mr. Wallis, and thus he became the first pastor of
the Baptist Church in Kettering.

From the parish register it is found that Mr. Milway was buried April
3rd, 1697.

In the 'Nonconformist Memorial,' mention is made of a Mr. Shepherd, as
succeeding Mr. Maidwell at Kettering; but the evidence presented by the
register of Mr. Shepherd's burial at Kettering shows that he must have
immediately succeeded Mr. Milway, and that his labours here only
continued for a few months, for he was buried March 21st, 1698. No
account of his services is preserved in the records of this Church. We
are informed that "he was a minister in the Established Church at
Tilbrook, in Bedfordshire. When the "Bartholomew Act" passed, at first
he conformed; continuing for some years in his living, a great blessing
to the town and neighbourhood. He had the true spirit of his office; his
preaching awful and affecting, and his life very holy. Being much
followed from places around, the clergy greatly disliked him--used to
reflect upon him at their visitations--looked upon him with an evil eye;
so that at length, finding his situation very uncomfortable, he quitted
his living, became pastor of a Dissenting congregation at Oundle, and
came from thence to Kettering, where he died."

The next pastor of the Church was Mr. William Terry, supposed to have
come from Hitchin to Kettering. He remained but a short time here, and
then removed to London. During his ministry 36 persons were added to the
Church. From the recollections of an aged intelligent woman it is
stated, that Mr. Terry was popular as a preacher--that he had travelled
in Holland and Germany, and did not seem inclined to settle long in any
place.

In the year 1709 Mr. John Wills became pastor of the Church. It is
stated concerning him, "that he was a gentlemanlike man, of popular
talents." During the first three or four years of his ministry 27
members were added to the Church; but his conduct at length gave a great
blow to the cause with which he had become connected. He acted in a
manner so contrary to the Christian character, and so injured himself as
a Christian minister, as to be discarded by the Church. Between the
dates of August, 1712, and July, 1715, he was charged with notorious
lying, and other scandalous sins, for which he was repeatedly admonished
by the Church; but not giving satisfaction by his spirit and conduct, he
was dismissed.

After this he remained in Kettering about four years; set up a separate
interest; drew up a Church covenant, July 15th, 1715, in which mention
is made of 46 members, most of whom had belonged to the other Church,
having been drawn away by him, though most of them returned during the
ministry of his successor. His bad conduct caused him to be soon
rejected by the party that went off with him.

There was another part of his conduct towards his former charge which
appears to have been very dishonourable. The people had raised a
subscription, and purchased a dwelling-house for their minister, with a
considerable garden. Mr. Wills occupied it as the minister, but wished
to make some addition to it, and to secure himself prevailed on the
people to have the house surrendered to him, which, from the regard they
then had for him, they unwisely permitted to be done. Consequently,
after the Church had dismissed him from his office, he still retained
the house, and at length sold it, keeping the whole amount of the money,
pleading as his excuse that it was but as much as he had laid out upon
it, with other disadvantages that he had in removing. He went to
Wellingham, Cambridgeshire.

Such things as these would present some serious hindrances to the
advancement of religion among the people, while a man of this character
sustained the office of pastor, and afterwards sought to draw away
disciples after him.

On the 11th of November, 1714, Mr. Thomas Milway, jun., the son of the
former pastor of this name, was settled over them. At the time when his
settlement took place, 112 persons are registered as belonging to the
Church. During his ministry, which continued only for six years and a
half, 48 members were admitted. He removed to Ipswich in March, 1721.

In reference to the removal of Mr. Milway from Kettering to Ipswich, we
have received the following extracts from the Church records of the
latter place:--

    At a Church-meeting, the 26th of October, 1720, the Church gave a
    call to Mr. Thomas Milway, at Kettering, to the pastoral office, in
    the following words, and signed as underwritten by the brethren of
    the Church:--

              "_To the Rev. Mr. Thomas Milway, at Kettering._

    "DEAR SIR,--The sovereign Lord of life and death having called to
    rest from his labours and affliction here our late dear pastor, the
    Rev. and worthy Mr. Benjamin Glandfield, the Congregational Church
    of Christ at Ipswich are thereby left as sheep without a shepherd.
    We, the members of the said Church, have humbled ourselves before
    the Lord by fasting and prayer, imploring his direction under this
    solemn dispensation, and do think our present duty is, the
    endeavouring to fill up that relation by calling one duly qualified
    for the pastoral office; and having several times had experience of
    the excellent gifts and graces God in his mercy hath bestowed on
    you, we cannot but acknowledge how generally acceptable they are to
    this Church and auditory; and having had several informations of
    your present circumstances at Kettering, and the way plain and easy
    for a removal; and considering that your settlement with us in the
    pastoral office is likely to be of great service to the interest of
    Christ in these parts, and for the uniting and settling of this
    Church, which otherwise is like to fall into great
    confusions--therefore, we, the brethren of the Church aforesaid, at
    a meeting this 26th of October, 1720, do hereby call and desire you
    to take the pastoral office in this Church, praying the Lord, the
    great Shepherd of the sheep, to direct, incline, and settle you with
    us, unto whose divine providence we commit this great affair,
    trusting the Lord will enable us to perform those duties required of
    us. We desire you at a convenient time as possible to return answer
    to our desires and call, which will greatly oblige, dear Sir, your
    most affectionate friends and servants in one Lord,

                  (Signed)             "Thos. Wyneall, }
                                       "Joseph Wyatt,  }  Deacons.

               "With many others, brethren of the Church."

In another page, in Mr. Milway's own handwriting, there are the names of
the 41 brethren and the 79 sisters who joined in the call of Thomas
Milway to the pastoral office. "All these distinctly," he observes, "and
one by one, gave their consent to my taking the pastoral office. The
10th of August, 1721, was a day set apart for solemn prayer to implore a
blessing upon my pastoral labours," when he records the names of the
ministers who engaged and were present, and adds, "We have good grounds
to hope the Lord was with us, and did assist in the work; and that a
spirit of supplication was poured out upon us. For which, his abundant
mercy, may we bless him for ever; and may a gracious God say to pastor
and people, 'From this day will I bless you.' Amen and amen."

Short was the course of his ministry here; for we are further informed,
that "the Rev. Thomas Milway died the Lord's-day, May 31st, 1724, in the
morning, aged 47. He lies buried in the aisle, immediately in front of
the pulpit, as does his wife, Mrs. Mary Milway, who died September 9th,
1751, aged 75. He appears to have been honoured and useful during his
short ministry at Ipswich.

During this period, about the year 1715, the Meeting House at Kettering
was threatened, and thought to be in danger of being pulled down by a
lawless mob. The reaction that had taken place in favour of the
Dissenters when they aided in effecting the glorious Revolution by
William the Third, had now passed by. During the reign of Anne, the
enemies of Dissent exerted themselves to abridge their liberties. The
trial of Sacheveral, a high Church bigot, under the Whig ministry, and
the triumph he obtained among the people, produced a great excitement.
Mob violence was employed against the Dissenters, and many Meeting
Houses were pulled down. The death of Anne, in 1714, was succeeded by
the peaceful accession of the first monarch of the House of Hanover, who
at once declared that "he was determined to adhere to the principles of
toleration, and endeavour to unite all his Protestant subjects by
affording them all equal protection."

But there were numbers who considered it hard not to be allowed to
persecute by law, and who therefore determined to avenge themselves and
their defeated party by setting the law at defiance, in order to enjoy
the luxury of worrying Dissenters. Hence in many towns in England,
during this year, Dissenters were insulted, and their places of worship
pulled down or burned. But the Meeting House at Kettering, though
threatened, was preserved. "The mob supposed that the building was well
guarded within by people armed for the purpose, which prevented them
from making the attempt. It is not known what defence was made, but no
mischief was done."

At the time when Mr. Milway, junior, removed from Kettering, a small
congregation of Dissenters in the noted town of Coventry had a Mr.
Thomas Saunders preaching to them. He was a descendant from Lawrence
Saunders, the martyr, who was burnt at Coventry in Queen Mary's days,
1555. The family had possessed a large estate at or near Bedworth, but
lost the greater part of it on account of religion. A Mr. Julian
Saunders, uncle of this Mr. Thomas Saunders, was a Nonconformist
minister at Bedworth; and under him the nephew was educated for the
ministry.

On Lord's-day, May 21st, 1721, Mr. Saunders preached, we suppose for the
first time, at Kettering. Such was the favourable impression produced by
his services on that day, that he was thought by the congregation to be
a proper person to become their pastor; and they immediately began to
take steps towards bringing him into this relation to them. It was
treated by both parties, the Church and the minister, as a matter of
high importance. The society to which Mr. Saunders ministered at
Coventry was very unwilling to part with him. The Church at Kettering
was equally anxious to obtain his services; and then he states, as one
great reason that influenced his decision, "he should have ten times the
number of people to preach to that he had at Coventry." After a suitable
time for further trial, for consultation, and prayer for divine
direction, he at length accepted the invitation of the Church at
Kettering, and entered on his stated engagements there September 14th,
1721. He was set apart to the pastoral office by solemn services on
November 23rd of the same year. The following is the account Mr.
Saunders gives of the services of the day:--

    Thursday, November 23rd, 1721, was appointed a day of fasting and
    prayer upon the account of our sitting down together. Mr.
    Cartwright, of Buckby, begun with prayer, and prayed well. Mr. Some
    read over the call of the Church, and asked my acceptance, and then
    prayed, and indeed prayed in prayer. Mr. Tingey, of Northampton,
    preached from 2 Chron. xv. 2. Mr. Jennings concluded with prayer,
    and Mr. Norris prayed among us in the evening. And now to thee, O
    God! must I give an account for this, and all my actions. I have
    been persuaded in my own mind, and am still, that I ought to labour
    where I can do most for God, and that thou, Lord, wilt take it well
    at the hands of thy servants that study so to do. Let us be made
    blessings to each other. Let us find thy presence and grace with us.
    Let much be done for God amongst us, that may effectually answer the
    clamour of malicious persons, and "put to silence the ignorance of
    foolish men," as well as be made confirming to thy people here.
    Propter Jesum Christum salvalorem nostrum, cui nunc et in secula
    seculorum gloria. Amen.

"In his younger days," observes Mr. Some, in giving some account of Mr.
Saunders, "he was much addicted to those amusements and diversions in
which too many in the present day lavish away their precious time,
while their best and most valuable interests are neglected. But "it
pleased God," who designed him for eminent service, "to call him by his
grace, and to reveal his Son in him," which effectually reclaimed him
from the follies of youth, and led him afterwards frequently to drop a
tear over them, praying that they might be remembered no more. As soon
as he had received the grace of God, it was his great concern to watch
against everything that might obstruct his progress in religion, and to
use all proper means to promote and strengthen the Christian temper in
all its branches. It was a strong desire to do good to the souls of men,
by "teaching transgressors the ways of God, that sinners might be
converted to him," which inclined him to devote himself to the work of
the ministry. He found so much real satisfaction in religion, that he
was willing others might taste its pleasures; and he saw so much danger
in a course of sin, that he thought he could not do a kinder office than
to warn men of it, that they might escape the pollution and condemnation
to which it would expose them. He was not so early in his preparation
for this holy employment as some others; but with the blessing of God on
his great industry and indefatigable endeavours, he soon came forth
qualified with such endowments which are of the greatest importance to
render ministers useful to the Church of Christ. He became eminently
qualified for the ministry of the Gospel, and his labours were greatly
blest to his people, by whom he was held in the highest esteem.

The congregation so increased soon after Mr. Saunders came to Kettering,
that it was found necessary to build a larger place of worship, which
the congregation did in the year 1723. This building stands to this
day, though it has undergone considerable alterations. It is 50-1/2 ft.
by 45-1/2 within the walls, with three galleries. It is calculated to
seat more than 800 hearers. At its erection some gentleman in or near
London gave a handsome chandelier, with 24 sockets.

During the ministry of Mr. Saunders, Mr. William Hextal, son of Mr.
Hextal, a farmer at Broughton, a village about three miles from
Kettering, became a member of the Church, and studied under Mr. Saunders
for a time, preparatory to his entering Doddridge's academy, with a view
to the ministry. It is recorded in the Church-book--"At a Church-meeting
held June 2nd, 1731, Mr. William Hextal was received into our communion;
and as he is now engaged in learning for the work of the ministry, I
gave him a solemn charge in relation to these things; and added several
things that I apprehended he should practise as a Christian, in order to
his being a minister." At the close of his academic course, Mr. Hextal
was settled at Creaton, afterwards removed to Sudbury, and from thence
to Northampton.

Mr. Saunders published a funeral sermon preached at Woodford, near
Kettering, from Rev. xiii. 14, entitled 'The Blessedness of Pious
Persons after Death considered.' Also, a letter was printed, which he
wrote in his last illness to his people; which was, by his direction,
publicly read to them after his funeral sermon. "Well worth the
attention," it is said, "of all destitute Churches." He died in the
midst of his life and usefulness, after an illness of some months, July
21st, 1736. In the records of the Church it is stated that "he was an
evangelical preacher, had a very happy delivery, an agreeable temper,
and graceful appearance; was much respected by the Church people, and
much endeared to his own flock, who lamented their loss many years
after." His funeral sermon was preached by Mr. Some, of Harborough, from
a passage Mr. Saunders had chosen, 1 Cor. xv. 10--"Not I, but the grace
of God that was with me." We shall quote some passages from this
discourse, relating to the character and qualifications of Mr.
Saunders:--

    He had a great gift in prayer, and could express himself very
    copiously and pertinently in that sacred exercise, especially on
    particular occasions. His preaching was plain, scriptural, and
    experimental, in the good old puritanical strain. He did not affect
    "the enticing words of man's wisdom," which please the fancy;
    neither was he nicely curious in the form of his discourses; but it
    was his endeavour to touch the conscience and impress the heart. He
    insisted largely on the peculiar doctrines of the Gospel, especially
    on the atonement of Christ and the sanctifying influences of the
    Spirit. He looked upon these as the two pillars in the New Testament
    temple, without which the whole building would soon fall to the
    ground. These were his favourite subjects, his delightful topics,
    which triumphed in his sermons, and diffused themselves through all
    his performances. He never failed to introduce them whenever the
    argument in hand led to them; and sometimes, like holy Paul, with
    whose writings he was so much delighted and edified, he did not
    scruple a digression which might exalt the name and grace of a
    Redeemer, and endear him to himself and his hearers. He was fully
    persuaded that these were the essential parts of the Gospel scheme;
    that they were clearly revealed in the holy Scriptures; that they
    could not be dropt without giving up Christianity: and what he had
    felt of the importance of them to himself was one great reason of
    his inviolable attachment to them.

    He was diligent in his work, and in labours more abundant. Besides
    the care of his own congregation, which was very large, he
    frequently visited his friends abroad; preached several lectures;
    and was ready to lay hold on every opportunity to do good: and God
    wonderfully owned and blessed his labours. There were many added to
    the Church under his immediate care, and a promising harvest
    appeared to be springing up there, even when God laid him aside and
    called him to receive his reward. May it grow up to maturity, to the
    joy of such as may enter on his labours. But his usefulness was not
    confined to his own people: there are several in other places, both
    in the great city and in the country, which have reason to bless God
    for the benefit which they received by his ministry. His course was
    short, but it was well run. He had not quite twenty years allowed
    for public service in the Church of Christ; but there are few in
    these later times that have done so much in so short a time.

    He was a person of great moderation, and behaved with much decency
    and candour towards those who differed from him. He claimed a
    liberty of judging for himself in matters of religion, and as
    readily granted the same to others; which did not proceed from a
    coldness and indifference towards that which appeared to him to be
    "the faith once delivered to the saints," but from an earnest desire
    to secure and propagate it. It was his fixed and settled judgment
    that the mind of man could not be forced; that things must be
    received in the light in which they appear to the understanding;
    that heat and passion eclipse the glory of Gospel truths; and that
    severe censures, given out by fallible and uninspired men, would
    prejudice persons against them.

    To his own people he was a tender and affectionate shepherd,
    sympathizing with them in their trials, counselling them in their
    difficulties, relieving and supporting them in their straits, and
    praying earnestly for them in all their troubles. So cordially was
    he united in affection to them, that no solicitations could prevail
    upon him to remove from them, though considerable offers were made
    him from abroad, and great importunity used to prevail on him to
    accept them. This endeared him very much to his flock, and did not a
    little contribute to the success of his labours among them.

    He met with many uncommon afflictions, under which he generally
    appeared easy and cheerful. He did not burden his friends with long
    and tedious complaints, but poured them out before that God who is
    able to "help in every time of need"; and he was supported and
    carried comfortably through several of them. They certainly gave him
    uneasiness, and might impair his health; but they contributed very
    much to the improvement of his better part: he came forth out of the
    furnace as "gold tried in the fire"; and some of the best sermons he
    ever preached were those which succeeded his severest exercises.
    These led his thoughts very far into the mysteries of providence,
    and enabled him to set many of its darkest scenes in a fair light,
    that he might comfort those that were in any trouble by the comfort
    wherewith he had been comforted of God.

The sentiments and counsels of dying Christians, especially of ministers
who have been devoted to their work, have some peculiar solemnity and
weight. On this account we shall give a few passages from a letter,
written by Mr. Saunders to his flock during his last illness, which was
by his direction publicly read to his people immediately after his
funeral sermon.

    DEARLY BELOVED IN THE LORD,--You well know that for a great while I
    have laboured under the afflicting hand of God, during a
    considerable part of which time I could not tell but I might be
    again permitted to speak to you in his name; but when at length all
    reasonable hopes of this kind were cut off, I began to think of
    writing a few lines to leave with you. My weakness increasing put me
    off those thoughts, until the importunity of a friend animated my
    former resolution and set me upon it.

    Providence favoured me with a station of service among you for
    upwards of fourteen years, during which season I was led through a
    great variety of trying afflictions; under which, as God was pleased
    to direct and support me in a very surprising way, and at last
    delivered me, so I must in justice say that you behaved to me in the
    most affectionate and Christian manner. You were sharers with me in
    my afflictions; your mouths, upon every emergency, were readily
    opened unto God for me; you rejoiced with me in the removal of my
    affliction and every favourable turn given to my affairs; and you
    bore the many interruptions of my service with unparalleled patience
    and cheerfulness. This could not fail of begetting in me the
    greatest endearedness and tenderest affection for you; so that my
    soul was knit to you. My great concern was to serve you; I never
    thought myself so happy as when I was labouring among you; and often
    begged that, if it were consistent with the will of God, I might
    live and die amongst you. And I can now look back with pleasure, to
    think that I was enabled to refuse all the solicitations I had to
    leave you. God has been seen amongst us; there has been a glory upon
    our assemblies; and the great ends of a Gospel ministry, such as the
    conversion of some, and the training up of others for a better
    world, I hope have been in some measure attained amongst us. But now
    I speak no more, nor you hear me any more. And yet, though I am gone
    from you, I persuade myself, from the cheerful attention you paid to
    my services while among you, that you will at least lend an ear to
    what in this manner I say to you. In this respect you may truly
    apply that passage--"Being dead, he yet speaketh."

In a further paragraph he states--

    I have no other foundation for my own soul than what I have
    represented unto you as the only foundation for you to build upon,
    and that you know is God's everlasting love, displayed and drawn out
    in the sending of his Son, and all that he has done, is doing, and
    will do for us; and in the complete work of the Spirit in forming us
    for, and bringing us unto, the full possession and enjoyment of all
    at last. And what a glorious work, my friends, is this! You have it
    in miniature when the soul is born again: there is then every
    essential part; but there must be a great many perfecting strokes
    before the piece will be complete, and fit to be set in the presence
    chamber above. There are some sour and knotty pieces, that require
    more hewing and polishing than others. In some, the constitutional
    evil may perhaps not be removed, until the constitution itself be
    broken; which may in some measure account for the difference of the
    dispensations that good men pass through in this world.

After other weighty remarks, he gives them advice as to the choice of a
successor:--

    (1.) Don't forsake the assembling of yourselves together, to cry
    unto the Lord of the harvest to send a labourer amongst you: a
    loiterer will do you no good. Keep up, and all of you frequent,
    prayer-meetings. "If you seek him, he will be found of you." Whilst
    God is with and amongst you, all will be well. I have never yet
    seen, but where Churches have waited upon God, and kept up their
    application to him, they have succeeded well at last, though
    sometimes it has been long first. "He has never said to the seed of
    Jacob, Seek ye me, in vain."

    (2.) Let your first views of the person you fix upon be, at what he
    himself is: I mean, endeavour above all things to have a man of
    religion, who shall be able to talk over the great things of God in
    a feeling, experimental manner. If this be not the case, whatever
    his gifts may be, and how popular soever his talents, vital religion
    will dwindle under his ministrations; or, if you should maintain the
    name, the thing will be lost. Neither the orthodoxy of his judgment
    nor the popularity of his delivery will ever compensate the want of
    this. Nor can you expect a blessing from heaven, and that success
    should attend the service of that man that is not inward with God,
    and hearty for him in what he does. "The tree is known by his
    fruits."

    (3.) When you have satisfied yourselves in the best manner you can
    as to the religious part, then have regard to prudence and temper.
    If a man have not prudence, what will he do that must necessarily be
    concerned with so many different dispositions--families under a
    great variety of circumstances, as well as those who are round about
    them? And if he is not a man of temper, you will have the less
    pleasure and advantage from his conversation. Some will neglect him;
    others will be afraid to communicate their sentiments unto him. How
    many, otherwise famous men, who seemed to be formed for considerable
    service, have miscarried here!

    (4.) Remember, you are in a state of imperfection yourselves; and
    such, after all your care, will be the person you have to labour
    among you: a man subject to like passions and infirmities with
    yourselves--one who at times may need your pity and forbearance, as
    you share in his. However, though this be a reason against being too
    curious and tedious, yet, on the other hand, do not be too hasty in
    your determination. "In the multitude of counsellors there is
    safety." You are to make the choice and determine the affair; but,
    in order to your doing this with steadiness and prudence, advise
    with some grave, solid persons, that you know are concerned for your
    welfare, and will give you the best direction they can.

    (5.) I beseech and entreat you, that you "fall not out by the way,
    seeing you are brethren." Be together as the primitive Church was,
    with one accord as well as in one place. Oh, that of you it might be
    said, as of them, that "the multitudes that believed were of one
    heart and of one soul." Bury for ever--bury all former prejudices.
    How would my soul have rejoiced to have seen that happy day! But I
    please myself to think it will soon be, and therefore shall use the
    Apostle's words (Phil. ii. 1, 2), "if there be any consolation in
    Christ."

    I had a design of saying something more; but He that has cut me
    short in all the other parts of my work, has done so in this last
    attempt of respect and labour of love: but they are the words of a
    dying man, and the real sentiments of my heart. I shall leave that
    passage with you (Acts xx. 32), "And now, brethren, I commend you to
    God and to the word of his grace," &c.

In the year 1727, Mr. Saunders being in London, Doddridge supplied the
pulpit at Kettering for a Sabbath, when he was minister of Kibworth. A
letter Mr. Saunders wrote to Doddridge immediately after this will just
serve to show that while Mr. Saunders was blessed with much comfort and
usefulness, it was not every one of the members of his Church that had
imbibed the spirit of their pastor.


                            _To Mr. Doddridge._
                                                 _June 1st, 1727._

    MY VERY DEAR AND VALUABLE FRIEND,--I am extremely obliged to you for
    your kind and consolatory epistle, and also for your kind services
    last Lord's-day; but am very sorry that my clerk should abscond. I
    suppose it was to give a specimen of his high orthodoxy, and for
    fear his tender conscience should be defiled with some of good old
    Mr. Baxter's divinity. Now this man, who is so much afraid for
    himself, has lately put a son apprentice in London, where he
    frequently hears swearing in the family, and is obliged to go to
    church, and has not liberty so much as to come and hear me now I am
    in town. But I always observed that the most highly orthodox, are
    remarkably defective in some branch or other of the Christian
    character. This is the man, too, who was so much offended because
    Mr. Brock was not excommunicated for going to church, who has now
    obliged his own child to attend it for seven years! I hope my very
    good friend Doddridge will take no notice of his conduct, nor in the
    least slight his friends at Kettering upon that account. There are
    not many such as he, though I cannot say but there is more than one;
    but were they generally of his mind, I would preach the Gospel to
    the wild Indians before I would serve them. You have a great many
    sincere friends in Kettering that love you well, and are always
    pleased with your good services; and I may without compliment say,
    when I am there, that you have one who esteems you according to your
    desert, and that, in my opinion, is beyond any man of your standing
    I ever knew.

After the death of Mr. Saunders the Church wished to have Mr. Wood,
afterwards Dr. Wood, of Norwich, to be their pastor, but he declined
acceding to their request. Mr. Benjamin Boyce, then a student at
Northampton, under Dr. Doddridge, was invited on probation; and on May
7, 1740, he was ordained. Of the ordination service Mr. Boyce gives the
following account:--

    Mr. Julius Saunders, of Denton, introduced the solemnity with a very
    serious and suitable prayer; after which Mr. Floyd more fully
    engaged in prayer, with great copiousness of expression, and I hope
    with great fervency. Mr. Simson preached a very plain and
    evangelical sermon from 2 Cor. iv. 7--"We have this treasure in
    earthen vessels," &c. Mr. Goodrich read the invitation of the
    Church, to which the deacons present expressed their consent in the
    name of the Church by lifting up their hands, with which I declared
    my determination to comply. The same person received my confession
    of faith, which I publicly read; and after asking me several
    questions usual upon such an occasion, prayed over me. Dr. Doddridge
    gave me a very affectionate and important charge, which I desire
    never to forget; and to the people, a very free and affectionate
    exhortation. The whole solemnity was concluded by Mr. Dorsley in
    prayer.

    Oh that God would make his strength perfect in my weakness, and his
    grace in my unworthiness! Oh that a double portion of his blessed
    Spirit may be poured upon me, who am so weak an instrument! and that
    such grace may be given me, who am less than the least of all
    saints, that I may "preach the unsearchable riches of Christ," and
    may be owned of him in my sincere desires and mean endeavours, if it
    is agreeable to the purpose of his grace, to fit and prepare many
    souls, that are either brought home or are yet strangers to him, by
    faith and holiness, for the complete enjoyment of "the inheritance
    of the saints in light." Thus may the Church of God be daily
    increased and edified, till all its pastors and all its members
    shall meet together to ascribe glory and grace to Him that sits on
    the throne and the Lamb for ever. Amen.

Mr. Boyce continued his ministry for 30 years over this people. During
that period 161 members were added to the Church, and at his death the
Church numbered 120 members. He died October 24th, 1770, aged 54 years.
"Mr. Boyce was a native of Coventry, educated for the ministry at
Northampton; in size rather under the middle stature. He was a close
student, a practical and experimental preacher."

The Meeting House was new roofed soon after the commencement of his
ministry, which indicates that it could not have been done well at the
first, as it had only been built about 18 years. Several new pews were
made over the stairs leading to the galleries, and where forms had
before been set; which pews were immediately filled, and continued so,
as did all the others, until his death. He was buried in the aisle
before the pulpit, where his wife also, and mother, and two children
were interred; and a handsome stone, with a suitable inscription, was
placed in the front of the desk. "He lived much beloved, and died much
lamented." Robert Hall observes, "that Mr. Boyce sustained the pastoral
office for a long series of years with the highest reputation and
success; and his death was deplored as an irreparable calamity, leaving
it very improbable that a successor could be speedily found capable of
uniting the suffrages of a people whose confidence and esteem he had so
long exclusively enjoyed. Such is the imperfection of the present state,
that the possession of a more than ordinary portion of felicity is the
usual forerunner of a correspondent degree of privation and distress;
and the removal of a pastor who has long been the object of veneration
generally places a Church in a critical situation, exposed to feuds and
dissensions arising out of the necessity of a new choice." This appeared
in the case of Mr. Boyce's immediate successor.

Mr. Addington, of Harborough, delivered the funeral oration at the
interment of Mr. Boyce, and Mr. Gregson, of Rowell, preached the
funeral sermon, from 1 Thess. iv. 13, 14. In the closing part of that
sermon we find the following statements in the account given of Mr.
Boyce:--

    It should be known that he feared the Lord, like good Obadiah,
    greatly, from his youth. He gave himself up to the Church of Christ
    under the pastoral care of Mr. Simpson, of Coventry, when he was 16
    years of age. He acquired a rich stock of useful and valuable
    knowledge from those who were admirably capable of imparting from
    their rich treasures. Thus furnished, he began the sacred work of
    the ministry before he was 21 years of age, and has told you, in the
    last letter he will ever write, "It was the determination with which
    I preached my first sermon among you, to know nothing comparatively,
    but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and I trust it has been my
    sincere concern to continue in that resolution to the last,
    testifying repentance towards God, and faith in the Lord Jesus
    Christ." You are his witnesses, my dear brethren, how well, through
    divine grace, he abode by his determination, and you well know that
    the doctrines of the rich, free, and sovereign grace of God were his
    delight to study and to preach; and you must know how wisely and
    judiciously he stated them--with what caution, guarding against
    every extreme, and every abuse of those great and glorious truths.
    You cannot but know with what discreet zeal, with what plainness and
    fidelity, he published the grace of God in the ever-blessed and
    glorious Redeemer. Was not this the chief topic he delighted to
    insist upon? and particularly to show what holy, divine, and
    heavenly influence it ought to have upon the hearts and lives of
    men? and did he not do this in a very persuasive and pathetic
    manner? Did he not preach Christ Jesus the Lord, and constantly in
    his ministrations lay no other foundation than Christ Jesus, which
    God has laid in Zion, for your faith and hope to build and rest your
    eternal concerns upon? How has he declared in that very serious and
    affectionate epistle he sent you, "I know no other foundation that
    God has laid in Zion; and the more I survey the excellence of it,
    as given us in the Scriptures, the more I can say it is tried and
    precious. Nothing else will do to support the stress of our eternal
    hope, or indeed the pressure of painful afflictions. Blessed be God,
    here is support! here is consolation! it rejoices me to think that
    there are so many that can add the testimony of their experience to
    mine." The great God had blessed him with a happy temper and amiable
    carriage and behaviour. He knew how to weep with those that weep,
    and to rejoice with those that rejoice. He abhorred the mean conduct
    of too many in this degenerate world, the speaking evil of others;
    and was he not an example to believers in word, in conversation, in
    charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, and in prudence, for almost
    thirty-three years (which was almost double the number of the years
    of his predecessor), amongst you, the people of his charge? Oh how
    comfortable and delightful was the frame of his mind in this his
    last illness, which suddenly came on him, made rapid progress in
    extinguishing such a useful and precious light in this our Israel!
    On the last Saturday se'nnight, being the 20th of October, when he
    lay down upon his dying bed, he found great comfort from those
    words, in Romans viii., former part of the 34th verse: "Who is he
    that condemneth? it is Christ that died." He spake these words with
    tears of joy. His language was, "Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
    there is none upon earth I desire beside thee." When he was asked
    how he did by one of his friends, he answered, "I am well, for the
    consolations of God are neither few nor small; God has not left me,
    nor will he leave me." When I asked him how it was with him with
    respect to a better world, his answer was, with great pleasure in
    his countenance, "I can cheerfully trust my good God." He seemed
    always, during the intervals of his wanderings, to be praying, and
    before he died was very sensible; and, as far as can be learned, he
    spent his last breath in committing you, his dear people, to God in
    prayer (in which he had an excellent gift), and then sweetly fell
    asleep in Jesus, after having finished his appointed work and
    service.

Mrs. Boyce died little more than six months after the death of her
husband, and that shortly after giving birth to an infant. From her
funeral sermon, preserved in manuscript among the records of the Church,
we present the following extract:--

    After having summoned the tender and happy husband from the amiable
    partner of his joys and cares, and left her in widowhood to mourn
    his absence for awhile, he calls her to follow him--takes her away
    from all her new-formed and pleasing connexions, and (affecting
    consideration!) takes her likewise from her new-born babe. Methinks
    I could now take the dear little forsaken stranger, and present it
    to you in my arms (in the arms of my affection I do)--hear it
    saying, in accents truly tender and striking, "Pity me, pity me, O
    my friends, all ye my late worthy father's friends, my dear mother's
    friends, for the hand of the Lord hath bereaved me; those who might
    have been the guides of my youth he has taken away." Say you
    not?--yes, I think I read the language in some of your countenances,
    and in your tears--"Though father and though mother, dear babe, have
    forsaken thee, the Lord take thee up."

Referring to the death of Mr. Boyce, the preacher observes--

    Though, as a congregation, he has taken away from you an able,
    faithful, useful shepherd, who watched for your souls as one that
    must give an account--even under a trial and loss great as that is,
    it becomes you not to censure or complain. Our good friend who is
    now taken away manifested the happy influence of the Gospel hope in
    the composure of her spirit under that great loss which she lately
    sustained, and through the afflictions by which she was removed,
    thankfully embracing and sweetly relying upon the Redeemer's
    consolation to his disciples in John xiv. 2-4, "In my Father's house
    are many mansions," &c. Referring to him who has recently been taken
    away from her and from you, she said, with apparent pleasure, in her
    last illness, "I shall soon be with the good man in glory"; speaking
    in joyful terms of being taken to sing praises with the saints in
    glory, for ever and ever.

In the month of April, 1771, an invitation was given to Mr. John Fuller
to remain amongst them twelve months on trial, with a view to his
becoming the pastor. At the expiration of that time a unanimous
invitation was given to him. Mr. Fuller was ordained August 6th, 1772,
when we find Messrs. Denny, Wright, King, Gregson, Dr. Ashworth,
Addington, Hextal, and Dowley, were engaged. Mr. Fuller had been a
member of the Church in Gravel Lane, London, under the pastoral care of
the Rev. Noah Hill.

But in little more than two years from this time, dissatisfaction arose
in the Church with the ministry of Mr. Fuller. It is stated, that
"several persons proposed an assistant to Mr. Fuller, but the proposal
was rejected by Mr. Fuller and his friends." The assistant proposed was
a Mr. Richard Fuller, cousin to the pastor.

Under date of August 14th, 1774, we are informed "that a dissatisfaction
having arisen in the minds of some of the Church members and subscribers
with Mr. Fuller's preaching, and there being no prospect of peace and
happiness, he this day declared his resigning his charge as minister and
pastor; but supplied the congregation by others until Michaelmas, always
behaving with a good temper and spirit, although his ministry was not by
several approved." In our early days we have heard from some of the
older members of the Church that the text of Mr. Fuller's farewell
sermon was (Gen. xlv. 24) Joseph's counsel to his brethren, "See that ye
fall not out by the way."

But after the removal of Mr. Fuller, great discord and confusion
prevailed in the Church and congregation. The friends of the late
pastor, who were attached to his person and ministry, were greatly
displeased with the conduct of those who had been the means of his
removal. Many things were done and said which were very painful to both
parties, created much ill feeling amongst themselves, and exposed them
to the derision of the men of the world.

After some time they sent an invitation to Mr. Saunders, of Bedworth,
who they understood was desirous to remove; but the invitation not being
unanimous, it was declined.

Their attention was soon after directed to the Rev. T. N. Toller, who
was a student in the academy at Daventry. Mr. Toller first preached to
them as a supply, October 1st, 1775, when he was not quite twenty years
of age. The first text was Acts xiii. 26: "Unto you is the word of this
salvation sent." In the following April, two of the deacons went to
Daventry to invite Mr. Toller to become their stated supply for three
months; at the expiration of this time, he was again invited for nine
months; after which he received an invitation to become their pastor,
which invitation was cheerfully signed, June 15th, 1777, by 87 persons,
as the call of the Church to the pastoral office. The ordination service
was held May 28th, 1778, when Messrs. Gregson, of Rowell, Palmer, of
Hackney, Addington, of Harborough, Robins, of Daventry (Mr. Toller's
tutor), Toller, of London (uncle to the pastor), and Bull, of Newport,
engaged in the services of the day.

Thus commenced the longest pastorate with which the Church had yet been
favoured; for Mr. Toller continued to labour amongst them until February
26th, 1821, making forty-five years and five months from the time of his
first preaching at Kettering until his death. It was a ministry of much
acceptance, extended influence, and great usefulness. It restored peace
to a divided people; it preserved them in unbroken harmony through all
its course; the congregation having often a crowded appearance, and the
Church being generally in a prosperous state; not so much perhaps by the
numbers added to the Church, as by the advancing piety, devotion,
consistency, and intelligence of its members.

There were 221 members added to the Church during the course of Mr.
Toller's ministry. These members, we have no doubt, might have been
greatly increased, had the methods adopted in some places for bringing
forward candidates for the communion of the Church prevailed under the
ministry of Mr. Toller. We should like to convey some idea to the mind
of the reader of the nature of that ministry with which the congregation
at Kettering were now favoured. It was in his stated services amongst
his own people that the peculiar excellencies of Mr. Toller were
developed. It was our privilege in early life to sit under that
ministry, but we think we shall fail to present a correct view of the
impression we have on our mind as to the distinguishing features, the
peculiar beauties, of that ministry; and if we were to do this, the
general reader would think it too highly coloured, as our first
impressions of sacred things, our deepest and most lively emotions of a
religious nature, in connexion with all that we may since have known or
attained, appear to us to have been derived, under God, from the
ministry of Mr. Toller. His person was above the middle stature; his
appearance in the pulpit venerable and commanding; his voice deep and
powerful; his manner all his own, and of such a character as to chain
the attention of the audience--always earnest, sometimes most fervent
and impressive, rising to a high degree of impassioned eloquence when
his assemblies were crowded, as on the afternoon of the Sabbath. His
language was always clear, forcible, and plain, suited to the manner of
his preaching; his sentiments most decidedly scriptural, evangelical,
and practical, with a considerable portion of experimental piety. His
ministry presented a full exhibition of the Christian temper. His
discourses were distinguished by great conciseness yet fulness of
matter, presenting often the most familiar but beautiful illustrations.
Some of his most impressive sermons were formed entirely on the
applicatory plan--some of them founded on Scripture inquiries, such as,
"What think ye of Christ?" "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" &c.
During a very large portion of his ministry he delivered expository
discourses on the morning of the Sabbath, which were distinguished by
great beauty, variety, and richness of improving remarks. The afternoon
sermon generally rose out of the morning exposition; not so frequently
from a text taken from the paragraph expounded as a passage suggested by
the main subject of exposition. But the prayers he offered in the stated
services of the sanctuary were perhaps the most remarkable of the
whole--the manner was so solemn; the tone so devotional; the adorations
so sublime; the confessions so abasing; the petitions so full, fervent,
and appropriate; the thanksgiving so expressive and exalted; the
surrender so complete and unreserved; the whole placing us so much in
the presence of God, leading us to feel what we were before him, what we
needed from him, what provision was made for us, what we were
receiving, and what services we should render; often leading us on to
the dying hour, and to the opening grandeurs of eternity. The value of
such a ministry was apparent in the many cases of eminent piety that
appeared amongst those that were trained up under it. Much of the
Christian temper, the spirit of devotion, lively faith in the Redeemer,
and the power of practical religion, were manifested in a considerable
number of cases, considering the size of the place. There were "living
epistles of Christ, known and read of all." We remember an eminently
pious female member of the Church, of whom the pastor said, when
improving her death, "He should esteem it an honour to be permitted to
hold up her train in the heavenly world." While this showed the deep
humility of the pastor, it showed the high estimate he had formed of the
devoted member.

In the year 1799 Mr. Toller received invitations from the congregations
at Carter Lane, London, and at Clapham, to become their minister, with
an offer of great pecuniary advantages; but such was the attachment felt
to him by his people at Kettering, as manifested in their great anxiety
on the subject, and in the affectionate addresses presented to him on
this occasion, that he gave a decided negative to these urgent and
repeated solicitations.

In an address he delivered from the pulpit, in answer to those which he
had received from his people, he bore a noble testimony to the kindness
with which he had ever been treated by them; observing, "Twenty-four
years ago I came to this place, under considerable and peculiar
disadvantages, arising from extreme youth, inexperience, and the then
critical and disjointed state of the congregation. I entered upon the
station with fear and trembling, and with scarce a peradventure of being
able to give any general or lasting satisfaction. During this interval,
I have gone through many trying afflictions, some of which you have
known, and others, some of the most trying, you have never known. I have
many faults to remember this day before God, much coldness of heart,
many neglects of duty, and much unfruitfulness in my office; but I will
do you the justice to say, that I have no injuries from you to
enumerate, no personal ill behaviour from a single individual in all
this time to complain of; and if you had all treated my great Master
with a regard proportioned to that I have received from you, I should
have been the happiest and most blessed minister on earth," &c.

He closed his days and his ministry together. Apoplectic seizures had
weakened his frame, and at length had rendered him incapable of
fulfilling all the duties of his office; while they indicated to him
that his end was drawing nigh. In a letter written to his people, he
intimated his wish to have an assistant. They invited the eldest son of
their pastor, then preaching at Wem, in Shropshire, to become assistant
to his father. This invitation he accepted; but before he entered on
this new sphere of duty, the earthly career of his beloved and venerated
father closed in death. "He preached on Lord's-day morning, February
25th, 1821, with much of his usual animation, from Isaiah lxiii. 7-13,
and remarked at the close of the discourse what encouragement this
passage affords the widow and the fatherless to put their trust in God,
finishing his last public discourse with these lines of Doddridge:

  "To thee an infant race we leave,
  Them may their father's God receive;
  That ages yet unborn may raise
  Successive hymns of humble praise."


He spent the evening surrounded by his family, and conversing with his
children in a strain of cheerful piety; and after a night of sound
repose arose as well as usual the next morning. About noon, leaving the
parlour, he was found a few minutes after in an apoplectic fit, or a
seizure resembling apoplexy. Several medical men repaired to the spot,
but life was extinct.

His remains were interred in the ground belonging to the Meeting House
on Thursday, the 8th of March. On that occasion Mr. Horsey, of
Northampton, read the Scriptures and prayed, and Mr. Edwards, of the
same place, delivered the funeral oration. Mr. Hall, of Leicester,
preached the funeral sermon on the same day from Heb. xiii. 7--a sermon
which presented a most impressive representation of the responsibility
attaching to a people that had been favoured with such a ministry, and
the tremendous consequences that must follow the misimprovement of such
advantages.

Mr. Toller only published during his life a sermon on the "faithful
saying," entitled "A Plain and Popular View of the Evidences of
Christianity"; a sermon occasioned by the death of the Rev. Samuel
Palmer, of Hackney, Mr. Toller's most intimate friend, from 2nd Timothy
i. 10--in which occurs this striking passage:--

    Suppose this house had been three times its present size, and had
    been filled for half the century past with a constant crowd of
    hearers; suppose the fame of the venerable man now gone had been
    shouted to the skies, and he had been held up as the pride and
    prince of preachers; but after all, this had been _all_:--suppose
    selfish motives had been supreme, under the disguise of love to
    souls; a mere notional religion had been propagated; people had been
    only amused, and amazed, and made to wonder and admire; but no minds
    really instructed, no hearts humbled, no sinners turned from the
    errors of their ways, no Christian graces implanted, no Christian
    duties promoted; in this case all these fifty years (as we have
    seen) must end; and what is the consequence? What would all this
    parade and popularity have proved to him? Only the bursting of a
    glittering bubble; the retreat of an actor from the stage amidst the
    clappings of the theatre, which he was to hear no more. There is one
    passage of Scripture which, when realized, is worth all the cases of
    this kind which could occur put together, viz., when a dying
    minister can look round on a weeping, affectionate flock, and say,
    "Ye are our epistles, written upon our hearts," &c. I say, the
    genuine application of such a passage as this to a dying minister
    would be worth infinitely more than all the applause and popularity
    in the world.

Two discourses, occasioned by the death of the Princess Charlotte of
Wales, were also published.

Since the death of Mr. Toller two volumes of sermons, and a volume of
expository discourses on the Book of Ruth, have been published, as
transcribed from the Author's shorthand manuscripts. To the first volume
of sermons was prefixed a memoir of Mr. Toller, by his friend the Rev.
R. Hall.

We will transcribe from that memoir an ever-memorable anecdote, or
rather, the ever-memorable use the preacher made of a domestic incident
to illustrate a most important subject:--

    On one occasion he preached from Isaiah xxvii. 4--"Let him take hold
    of my strength, that he may make peace with me; and he shall make
    peace with me." "I think," said he, "I can convey the meaning of
    this passage, so that every one may understand it, by what took
    place in my own family within these few days. One of my little
    children had committed a fault, for which I thought it my duty to
    chastise him. I called him to me, explained to him the evil of what
    he had done, and told him how grieved I was that I must punish him
    for it. He heard me in silence, and then rushed into my arms and
    burst into tears. I could sooner have cut off my arm than have then
    struck him for his fault; he had 'taken hold of my strength, and had
    made peace with me.'"

After the death of Mr. Toller his son was invited for six months as a
probationer for the pastoral office; at the expiration of that time he
received a unanimous call to that office, which he accepted, and was
ordained in October, 1821, when Messrs. J. Hall, Horsey, Edwards, Scott,
Bull, and Hillyard were engaged in the principal services of the day.
Thus, the eldest son of the late pastor, who had been educated for the
ministry at the academy at Wymondley, succeeded to the place of his
father in the most harmonious manner, and with the most cheering
prospects of comfort and usefulness. During the 31 years that have
elapsed since then, that harmony has been uninterrupted, that comfort
and usefulness continued--the son pursuing a similar plan to that which
the father adopted, in expounding the Word of God on one part of the
Sabbath, to give enlarged views of Scripture truth, and to present the
almost boundless variety the Book of God contains, habitually aiming to
preserve a connexion between one part of the Sabbath services and the
other. During the ministry of the present Mr. Toller 211 members have
been added to the Church.

In the year 1849 very extensive alterations were made in the Meeting
House, together with the building of a new vestry, school-rooms,
class-rooms, and a dwelling-house for the sexton; the whole cost of
which was about L1400, which was paid off within two years from the
re-opening. The place is greatly changed from what it was. The large
chandelier, with its dove and the olive leaf, is gone; the beautiful
gaslight taking the place of the candles. The old pulpit is removed
from its place, having long ago lost its noble sounding-board, it being
now understood that the voice is better heard without such an appendage.
The spacious windows on each side of the pulpit are lost, to make way
for the new school-rooms, which are open to the Chapel. But the whole,
we believe, has been greatly improved; additional room having been made
for the hearers on the Sabbath, for the week-evening lecture, and also
for the accommodation of the Sabbath-school, its Bible and its Infant
classes. The present number of Church members is nearly 200; the
scholars in the schools about 280.

Services are conducted in seven villages by members of the Church,
chiefly on Sabbath evenings.

An impartial review of the whole will, we believe, present to the pastor
and the flock the most abundant reason to "thank God and take courage."

In the history of this Church, we cannot but observe the very
interesting fact which it presents, of 75 years having been already
filled up by the ministry of the father and the son (and we trust that
there is a probability of years of useful service being added in the
case of the latter to the period that has passed), during which a
Christian society and a numerous congregation have been preserved in
peace, with the interests of vital religion advancing. While such a fact
speaks well for the spirit and continued improvement of the people, it
says much also for the Christian temper, the consummate prudence, the
able and successful labours of the pastors, while to God they would
unitedly ascribe all the glory.

At Warkton, about two miles from Kettering, occasional services are
held. In this village Mr. Thomas Stone, another of the Puritan
ministers, was rector--"a person of good learning," it is said, "and
great worth: a zealous Puritan, and a member of the classes." "He died,
an old man and full of days, in the year 1617." Bridges observes, "that
he was inducted into the living of Warkton in the year 1553." If this
statement be correct, he must have been rector of that place 64 years.
He was a learned man, of great uprightness, and uncommon plainness of
spirit, minding not the things of this world; yet, according to Wood, "a
stiff Nonconformist, and a zealous Presbyterian." At Geddington, the
birth-place of Mr. Maidwell, the first pastor of the Independent Church
at Kettering, there is a Chapel regularly supplied on the Sabbath
evenings. This place of worship was provided by Mr. Nathaniel Collis,
for many years a respectable bookseller in Kettering, and a deacon of
the Church--Geddington was his native place.

Services are also conducted on Sabbath evenings at Great Oakley, five
miles from Kettering; occasionally at Orlingbury, five miles in another
direction; also at Thorpe and Loddington.


BROUGHTON.

The Dissenters of Kettering have conducted occasional services in the
village of Broughton, about three miles distant on the road for
Northampton, for many years past. But rather more than five years ago,
there were four or five young men in this village who began to think of
the things which belonged to their everlasting peace; they formed
themselves into a little band, and resolved that they would meet weekly
and study the holy Scriptures, and encourage each other in the ways of
God. They subsequently joined a Christian Church at Kettering. Becoming
anxious for the welfare of those around them, they had a cottage
licensed for preaching; that was found too small for those who wished to
attend. In the meantime several other Christian friends came to the
village, and at length, in the year 1850, a Chapel was erected; it is a
neat structure, capable of containing about 200 hearers. In January,
1851, a Christian Church was formed, consisting of 19 persons; Mr.
Toller and Mr. Robinson, of Kettering, being present, and conducting the
services. This village Church is formed on the broad principle of
Christian union, designated simply a Christian Church, without
denominational distinction; its present number of communicants is 22.
There is preaching here on the afternoon and evening of the Sabbath, by
friends from Kettering and other places. An interesting Sabbath-school
is conducted, numbering more than 60 children. The teachers express the
earnest desire that many of them may be gathered into the fold of
Christ, and become useful in their generation.

This place was once noted as the residence of the eminent Puritan
divine, Robert Bolton, B.D. He was presented to the rectory in the year
1609, and continued until his death, in 1631. It is stated concerning
him, that "he was a most authoritative and awakening preacher, being
endowed with the most masculine and oratorical style of any in his
time;" that "he was so deeply engaged in his work, that he never
delivered a sermon to his people in public till he had preached it to
himself in private."

"His remains were interred in the chancel of Broughton Church, where
there is a half-length figure of him with his hands erected in the
attitude of prayer, resting on a book lying open before him; and
underneath is a monumental inscription in black marble, of which the
following is a translation:"--

                Here lies,
      peaceably sleeping in the Lord,
        the body of Robert Bolton,
    who died December the seventeenth,
            in the year 1631.
        He was one of the first and
        most learned of our Church.
  His other excellencies all England knoweth,
      lamenting the day of his death.

Mr. Bolton published a number of works; those most known in the present
day are his 'Directions for Walking with God,' and his 'Four Lost
Things.'




CHAPTER IV.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT MARKET HARBOROUGH.[3]


If a stranger were passing through the small but respectable town of
Market Harborough, on the road to Leicester, with the intention of
observing what was most worthy of notice, he would see on the right of
the principal street, in the upper part of the town, a handsome
structure, of considerable dimensions for the size of the place. On the
front of the building he might notice the inscription--"Independent
Chapel." If an intelligent traveller, he would think, Surely this was
not the first origin of Independency here! This must have been erected
for a body of some standing in the town. On inquiry, he would find that
there had been an old Meeting House, which had stood at the top of the
lane leading for Great Bowden for more than 150 years, during the whole
of which period a numerous and respectable body of Dissenters had
assembled in it; but that the building, with its plain walls, its high
pews, its deep galleries, its antique pillars, and irregular form, had
been entirely taken down; and this Chapel, in a more eligible position,
had been raised by the present congregation. And he might be informed
that it was nobly done; for after the most liberal subscriptions,
amounting to L1600, a moiety of which was lost by the failure of the
bank in which they were deposited: (in consequence of this, an appeal
was made to the public, the result of which about made up the loss
sustained:) the whole amount that remained to complete the cost was
raised on the day of opening; the sum expended in the erection of the
Chapel exceeding L3000.


[3] Market Harborough is in the county of Leicester; but being just on
the verge of Northamptonshire, it has always been connected with the
Association in that county, and hence has a place in these 'Memorials.'


From this introductory statement, we shall lead the reader back to the
early history of this cause.

In looking backward for 190 years, we find that by the "Act of
Uniformity," passed in the year 1662, Mr. Thomas Lowry was ejected from
the Church in this place. Though we have no record of his life or his
labours, beyond the statement "that he was a native of Scotland, and had
a living in Essex before he came to Harborough," yet by his
Nonconformity he teaches us that he had embraced principles which led
him to refuse to bow to the dictates of men in the things of God, and
which prompted him rather to sacrifice his worldly interests than what
related to truth and a good conscience.

The probability is, that some of the people to whom he had ministered
would become Nonconformists with their pastor; but whether he obtained
any opportunities of preaching to them after his ejectment is not known.
Subsequent events lead us to the conclusion that the principles of
Nonconformity must have obtained a number of adherents in Harborough and
its vicinity; because we find that, eleven years after the passing of
the "Act of Uniformity" (_i.e._, in the year 1673), Mr. Matthew Clarke
became the stated pastor of an Independent congregation here. This
brings before us the first clear and certain information relative to the
early history of this cause in Harborough.

A short distance from Leicester lies the village of Narborough, where,
at the restoration of Charles II., Mr. Matthew Clarke was the rector;
the living being worth at that time about L120 per annum. His father and
grandfather had both been ministers in the Church. He was educated,
under the best masters, with a view to the profession--first, in the
Charter House, in London; afterwards, under Dr. Busby, at Westminster;
and under Dr. Temple, at Trinity College, Cambridge. He was a diligent
student; became eminent for his scholarship: but what was still more
important, he became early devoted to God; associated himself with some
students who were remarkable for piety, and who engaged in such
exercises as tended to prepare for the work of the Christian ministry,
for which they were designed. He obtained the degree of M.A.

He was presented to the living of Narborough in 1657. After pursuing his
labours there for five years, he was ejected as a Nonconformist. He was
earnestly pressed to conformity by Mr. Stratford, the patron of the
living, but could not by any means bring his conscience to a compliance
with what the law required. For conscience' sake he was a sufferer.
Devoted to his work, he took every opportunity of preaching the Gospel
in Leicestershire and parts adjacent. He was watched narrowly by some
furious justices of the peace; and though he had the happiness often to
escape, yet he was three times a prisoner in Leicester Gaol, for the
crime of preaching the Gospel! After dwelling for a time in a lone house
in Leicester Forest, and being driven from thence by the "Five Mile
Act" to Stoke Golding, he was invited to Harborough, where he came and
settled in 1673; and had a large congregation. This appears to have been
the first and the permanent settlement of Protestant Nonconformists of
congregational principles in this place.

In connexion with Harborough, Mr. Clarke also took the charge of a
congregation meeting at Ashley, a village about five miles from the
former place; and during the whole course of his subsequent ministry he
regularly preached at Ashley in the morning, and at Harborough in the
afternoon, every Lord's-day. His ministry appears to have been highly
valued, and to have been eminently successful; at the close of it the
Church numbered 202 members, a very large proportion of them living in
the villages surrounding Harborough--some of them a number of miles
distant. In the character of Mr. Clarke were combined unbending
integrity and conscientiousness, with great kindness of spirit and
manner. Of the first we have proof in his decided Nonconformity--in his
willingness to suffer rather than to sin--in his following the path of
duty, whatever might be the dangers to which it exposed him--in his
steady pursuit of all the labours of his calling until laid aside by his
last affliction--in his firm resistance of acts of injustice and
oppression, as shown when, being convinced that the King's tax on his
salary was unjust, he firmly and successfully refused payment: of the
latter we have proof in his affectionate regard to the truly pious
wherever he beheld them--in the peaceful temper which he breathed--in
the kind and profitable intercourse he promoted between his
brethren--and in the conciliatory spirit he manifested towards those who
were the enemies of the Gospel, or of the cause he supported.

Mr. Clarke had one son, named after him, who for a time became an
assistant to his father in the work of the ministry at Harborough. The
venerable father contrived, amidst all that he suffered for conscience'
sake (and he drank largely of the bitter cup), to take peculiar care of
the education of his son, whom he early instructed in the learned
languages, together with several young persons who were studying under
his tuition for the ministry.

The parent's wish to see his son a preacher of the same Gospel for which
he was suffering was honourable to himself, but it seems to have led him
to devote that son to the work without waiting to see whether God
approved; which, but for the grace bestowed upon the youth, might have
been a fatal injury to himself and thousands more. After revolving the
question seriously in his mind, and reflecting on the sacrifices which
the ministry would require, the son was at length animated to comply
with the father's desire, by the consideration that they that "turn many
to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever."

On examining his own religious character, he said that he had endured
much distress because he could not discern that remarkable change which
many had experienced; still, however, he dreaded above all things a
hypocritical profession; and though at first he thought his abstinence
from sin, as well as his attention to secret prayer and other duties,
might have arisen from a fear of offending his parents, yet he trusted
that at last they sprang from the principle of love to God.

After he had acquired, not only Latin and Greek, but also several of the
Oriental languages, in which his father possessed uncommon skill, and
had added to them a familiar acquaintance with Italian and French, he
went to study for the ministry under Mr. Woodhouse, a celebrated teacher
in Shropshire. From thence he removed to London; and having joined a
Church there, and heard several of the most celebrated preachers, he
returned to Leicestershire, where he began his ministry as assistant to
his father, amidst the storm that raged in the year 1684. He was so
useful that very large additions were made to his father's Church while
he was with him. "When he was present," says Mr. Neal, "at the
declaration which the new converts made of the powerful impressions
received under his ministry, oh, how he would humble and abase himself
before God in prayer, and set the crown of his success upon the head of
free grace!" During the first three years of his ministry he also laid
the foundation of several congregations in that country. He was in 1687
called to preach at Sandwich, in Kent, where he was detained by the
importunity of those who derived benefit from his labours; but after two
years was recalled by the equal solicitations of his father and the
flock in Leicestershire. But though he then settled with them, they were
compelled by a sense of duty to give him up almost immediately, for,
having preached an occasional sermon in London, he was invited to assist
Mr. Ford in Miles' Lane. This was his final removal from Harborough.
After Mr. Ford's death he became the sole pastor of the Church, was the
means of changing a declining cause into one of the most prosperous
Churches in London, and attained a very high degree of popularity and
usefulness, which were maintained by the divine blessing even to the
close of his life. With the inspiration of friendship added to that of
genius, Dr. Walls composed a Latin epitaph, which was inscribed on his
tomb in Bunhill-fields; and at the request of friends he gave an English
translation, which would furnish an eloquent and spirited memoir of the
deceased. This epitaph we insert here, because Harborough was the scene
of his youthful days, his early education, his decided piety, and his
first stated engagements in the ministry, which were so excellent and
successful as to give promise of all the future eminence he attained. It
may be found in the last volume of Watts's Works, page 439.


SACRED TO MEMORY.

      In this sepulchre lies buried
              MATTHEW CLARKE,
          A son bearing the name
          Of his venerable father,
        Nor less venerable himself:
    Trained up from his youngest years
      in sacred and human learning:
      Very skilful in the languages:
        In the gift of preaching,
    excellent, laborious, and successful:
          In the pastoral office,
          faithful and vigilant:
    Among the controversies of divines,
        Moderate always, and pacific:
    Ever ready for all the duties of piety:
  Among husbands, brothers, fathers, friends,
              he had few equals:
  And his carriage toward all mankind was
            Eminently benevolent.

  But what rich stores of grace lay hid behind
  The veil of modesty, no human mind
  Can search, no friend declare, nor fame reveal,
  Nor has this mournful marble power to tell.
  Yet there's a hast'ning hour--it comes!--it comes!
  To rouse the sleeping dead, to burst the tombs,
  And set the saint in view. All eyes behold,
  While the vast records of the skies, unrolled,
  Rehearse his works, and spread his worth abroad;
  The Judge approves, and heaven and earth applaud.

      Go, traveller; and whereso'er
        Thy wandering feet may rest
      In distant lands, thy ear shall hear
        His name pronounced and blest.

  He was born in Leicestershire, in the year 1664.
      He died in London, March 27th, 1726,
                Aged 62 years,
        Much beloved and much lamented.

The elder Mr. Clarke continued his labours at Harborough and Ashley,
until he was seized with palsy on one side; after which, perceiving that
his work was done, and his end drawing nigh, he removed to his
daughter's (Mrs. Allen, of Norwich), where he died, about 1708, nearly
80 years of age.

There is preserved, in the handwriting of Mr. Some, a copy of a Church
covenant, that appears, from its early date, to have been adopted during
Mr. Clarke's ministry. Being one of the oldest of the kind, and very
concise, we think it deserves to be transcribed and inserted here.

    We do solemnly, in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, "who walks
    in the midst of the golden candlesticks; who hath his eyes like a
    flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass," declare, that by the
    grace of God we will henceforward endeavour to reform whatever is
    amiss amongst us, according to the best understanding we have of the
    holy Scriptures, which we believe to be the only rule of faith and
    worship; humbly avouching the Lord to be our God, and humbly hoping
    that he hath avouched us, though most unworthy, to be his people.
    Subscribed May 30th, 1690.

The persevering labours, the consistent character, the extended efforts,
and important influence of Mr. Clarke in this situation, appear in the
members that composed the Church, as before stated, and 172 of whom were
gathered from about 30 villages in the vicinity. The village Chapels
being few in number in those days, the Nonconformists travelled from the
places around to assemble for worship at Harborough and Ashley, as the
centres where, on the Lord's-day, they could meet together.

The next pastor of the Church is one concerning whom the language is
verified, that "the memory of the just is blessed"; for though the
modesty and deep humility of Mr. Some were such that he forbade any
memorials being published of his life and character, and before his
death destroyed all his papers that presented anything of this kind, yet
his name is mentioned with great veneration and esteem to this day. It
appears probable that he was assistant or co-pastor with Mr. Clarke a
short time before the close of his labours; that he came to Harborough
about the year 1706, as his name stands in the first trust deed of
Ashley Meeting House about that time, as the recognized minister of both
places. He took the sole pastoral charge in 1709, as he then entered the
names of all the members of the Church in a book, which he preserved. He
united the pastorate of Ashley with Harborough, and laboured at both
places in the manner of his predecessor, connecting with them also a
considerable extent of village itineracy, by which his character was
much endeared and his ministry greatly blest.

Mr. Some had one son, who was training for the ministry, but who died
before he fully entered on the work. He was for a time a fellow-student
with Doddridge, and became his most intimate friend; so that,
immediately after his death, Doddridge writes to Mr. Clarke, of St.
Albans--

    It pleased God, in the afternoon of yesterday, to take away my dear
    companion and brother, Mr. Some. There was no person in the world of
    his age whom I respected more or loved so well. At the academy we
    were partners in study; and since I came to Harborough he would,
    when his health would permit it, take frequent journeys with me to
    Kibworth on the Lord's-day. And what sweet counsel have we taken
    together when "we went to the house of God in company!" I have been
    informed of some of his expressions of respect and tenderness for
    me, which affect me exceedingly. He has ordered me to preach his
    funeral sermon from Psalm lxxiii. 26: "My flesh and my heart fail
    me, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever."
    But my mind is so shattered with grief, and mine eyes filled with
    tears, that I hardly know how to read or write.

In another letter he says: "Mr. Some, though he appears to feel it like
a parent, yet supports himself under it with a serenity and fortitude
worthy of so excellent a Christian and minister."

The eminence to which Mr. Some attained, and the success of his
ministry, is partly attested by the fact that 270 persons were added to
the Church during his pastoral labours.

Doddridge came to reside at Harborough while minister at Kibworth, to
enjoy the society and friendship of Mr. Some. In the year 1729 he became
his assistant, taking services alternately at Kibworth, Harborough, and
Ashley; and by the earnest advice of Mr. Some he commenced his academy
at Harborough.

When the Dissenting ministers in the neighbourhood agreed to meet at
Lutterworth, to spend a day in humiliation and prayer for the revival of
religion, Mr. Some preached upon that occasion a very important
appropriate discourse--from Rev. iii. 2: "Be watchful and strengthen the
things which remain, that are ready to die"--"On the methods to be taken
by ministers for the revival of religion." He also published a very
excellent funeral sermon for Mr. Saunders, of Kettering, from the text
he had chosen, 1st Cor. xv. 10: "Not I, but the grace of God which was
with me."

We have further discovered a small volume of 56 pages, entitled 'The
Assembly's Catechism Explained, and the principles of religion therein
contained confirmed by the Holy Scriptures, by David Some. Second
edition, 1727.' It has an interesting preface, a part of which we shall
copy, as illustrative of the views entertained by this eminent man, and
the methods he adopted for the improvement of the rising generation.

    The design of the following pages is to render public catechising
    easy and profitable.

    When young persons see a great deal before them, which they are
    required to commit to memory, they soon grow weary of this exercise,
    and find excuses to absent themselves from it. This difficulty is
    removed by the narrow limits of this essay.

    I fear there are many in all our assemblies "who need to be taught
    the first principles of the oracles of God," and yet their age and
    circumstances prevent their submitting to this way of instruction.
    There is a particular regard had to these in this composure. The
    questions are so framed that there is room for enlarging upon them,
    as the importance of the argument may require. The treating upon the
    heads of divinity in this way insensibly leads into a freedom and
    easiness of expression, which is hard to attain in a more set and
    continued discourse: this hath the more direct tendency to inform
    the judgment and fix the attention. I have seldom observed a drowsy
    hearer whilst I have been engaged in this part of my work; I wish I
    could say so of the other parts of it.

    I hope I need not make any apology for adding the Scriptures; this
    will be acceptable to everyone who values them. Besides, this will
    acquaint children betimes with their Bibles, and teach them that
    their religion is derived from that sacred book as the fountain of
    it. * * * * * * If any should condemn the whole of this undertaking
    as paying too great a regard to human composures, I can assure them
    that I have long since learned to call no man master upon earth. I
    have not attempted to explain the doctrines contained in this
    Catechism because it was composed by that learned body of men, the
    assembly of divines, but because I verily believe that for the
    substance of them they are agreeable to the word of God. I was early
    instructed in them, and have now reviewed them with some attention
    and care, lest the prejudices of education should have been the
    principal reason of my adherence to them; and after the most impartial
    search, I cannot discover anything so absurd and inconsistent in this
    scheme of religion as some have represented: and I hope I may be
    allowed the liberty of judging for myself.

    I am fully convinced of the usefulness of public catechising, by
    more than twenty years' experience. I have seen the good effects of
    it, and purpose to allow it a share in my public labours while God
    continues life and a capacity for service; and if any of my worthy
    brethren shall make use of this weak performance, I heartily wish
    that the divine blessing may attend their endeavours to promote real
    religion and practical godliness.

                                                             D. S.

As a specimen of the method he adopted, we present to the reader the
short section "of assurance and other blessings."

    _Q._ What are the benefits which in this life do either accompany or
    flow from justification, adoption, and sanctification?

    _A._ The benefits which do either accompany or flow from
    justification, adoption, and sanctification, are assurance of God's
    love, peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, increase of grace,
    and perseverance therein to the end.

    May true believers be assured of God's love? Yes. (Rom. v. 5.) "The
    love of God is shed abroad in our hearts." May they have peace of
    conscience? Yes. (Rom. xv. 13.) "The God of hope fill you with all
    peace in believing." May they have joy? Yes. (Rom. v. 11.) "We also
    joy in God." Is the Holy Ghost the author of it? Yes. (Gal. v. 22.)
    "The fruit of the Spirit is joy." Shall true Christians grow in
    grace? Yes. (Prov. iv. 18.) "The path of the just shineth more and
    more unto the perfect day." Is perseverance the Christian's duty?
    Yes. (Phil. iii. 14.) "I press towards the mark." And their
    privilege? Yes. (1st Peter i. 5.) "Who are kept by the power of God,
    through faith unto salvation." What may we infer from hence? I. That
    religion is not a melancholy thing. (Prov. iii. 17.) "Her ways are
    ways of pleasantness." II. Growth in grace is an evidence of the
    truth of it. (Mark iv. 8.) "Others fell on good ground, and did
    yield fruit that sprang up and increased." III. That weak Christians
    should not be discouraged.

When his death occurred, Doddridge wrote--"It is to my unutterable grief
that I hear this day that our dear friend, Mr. Some, is dead. I hardly
know how to bear it." Again: "We know in whose hands our lives are, and
those of our friends who remain--a soul-quieting thought, which I would
apply to the unspeakable loss I have sustained in the death of that
great and good man, that invaluable friend, Mr. Some, whom I honoured
and loved as a parent."

Mr. Barker, of Hackney, wrote--"The death of the excellent person you
have lately lost afflicts me greatly. There are few such ministers
anywhere, and few such men in any age. I know that his modesty was
excessive, but am sorry to find that it has deprived us of those
memoirs, which, touched over by your hand, would have been very
instructive and entertaining; but if we must not read his life and
character, let us remember and imitate his exemplary piety, prudence,
and diligence. This truly revered and excellent man died May 27th, 1737.
God was pleased to favour him with a serene and cheerful exit, suited to
the eminent piety and usefulness of his life. "I am well satisfied,"
remarks Doddridge, "that considering how very generally he was known, he
has left a most honourable testimony, in the hearts of thousands, that
he was one of the brightest ornaments of the Gospel and the ministry
which the age has produced; and that all who have had any intimacy with
him must have esteemed his friendship amongst the greatest blessings of
life, and the loss of him amongst its greatest calamities."

An interesting memorial exists, written by Mr. Some, which shows the
method he adopted in admitting candidates to the Church; clearly
indicating what he considered their qualifications should be; what was
the nature of the connexion they were about to form; and with what
spirit and purpose they should unite themselves to the society to which
they desired to be admitted.

        _Questions to be addressed to Candidates for Communion._

    1. Wherefore do you desire communion with this Church?

    2. Will you endeavour to walk circumspectly and peaceably amongst
    us, as it becomes a disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ?

    3. Will you attend upon the ministry and ordinances of this Church
    as often as you can?

    4. Do you purpose to stand by us, and steadfastly to adhere to us,
    if times of difficulty and trial should come?

    5. Do you therefore, in the presence of God and his people here
    assembled, give up yourself to the watch and care of this Church,
    promising to submit to the discipline that is exercised therein, so
    far as it is agreeable to the mind of Christ revealed in his word?
    If these be your designs, then in the name of our blessed Redeemer,
    and with the consent and approbation of this Church, I open the
    doors thereof for your admittance into it, and declare you a member
    of it, earnestly desiring that God would bless you in it.

Towards the close of Mr. Some's ministry the Chapel House was purchased
of Walter Renals, and bought by Knightley Holland, for the use of the
minister for the time being.

In the year 1844 this house was taken down, and the new Chapel erected
near to the spot where it had stood; for some years before it having
ceased to be occupied by the minister of the place.

After Doddridge removed to Northampton, as Mr. Some, through the failure
of his strength, was incompetent to undertake the whole of the services
devolving on him, he was provided with another assistant in 1730, in Mr.
J. Halford, a native of Northampton, who, though he never enjoyed the
advantages of an academical education, possessed good natural talents.
He remained until 1734, when he removed to Horselydown. After the
removal of Mr. Halford, Mr. Some had no other assistant to the day of
his death, but most probably restricted his labours. He died in the 57th
year of his age; "and," said this holy man of God with his dying breath,
"If any ask how David Some died, let it be answered, that he sought and
found mercy." Dr. Doddridge preached his funeral sermon, after his
remains had been interred in the chancel of the parish church of Great
Bowden. The knowledge of the spot is only preserved by tradition, which
must be attributed to that fatal modesty which induced him in his last
moments to commit his writings to the flames. His best earthly memorial
is in the affection and reverence with which his name has been so long
cherished.

After the death of Mr. Some we find an unsettled interval of fifteen
years, during which many changes took place; and no records were
preserved by the Church of the events that occurred, or of the state of
things amongst them.

We learn from the correspondence of Doddridge, that the year after the
death of Mr. Some, Mr. Toaker received an invitation of such a pressing
nature to become the pastor of the Church at Harborough, that he was
constrained to accept the call; but two years after this he speaks of
the ordination of one of his students, Mr. Isaac Wilkinson, over the
Church at Harborough, being fixed to take place May 9th, 1740. Then
again, in a letter written to Dr. Clarke, of St. Albans, February 27th,
1741, he speaks of Ashley and Harborough as being vacant.

In the list of Doddridge's students, given at the close of the last
volume of his 'Correspondence,' we have the names of Samuel Smalley, as
settled at Harborough, who entered the academy in 1737; and of Jabez
Hirons, as minister at Harborough, who entered the academy in 1745. All
that we can gather from these statements is, that the congregation was
during this period in a very unsettled state, not having become united
for any length of time under any pastor, or having anyone to settle
peacefully and usefully over them until the year 1752, when a pleasing
change took place in the choice of Mr. Stephen Addington.

It appears that Mr. Addington was a native of Northampton, and a student
under Dr. Doddridge, by whom he was treated with all the kindness of a
father. He commenced his labours at Spaldwick, Huntingdonshire. He had
not, however, been there more than two years before this situation was
offered to his acceptance, which had been chosen and marked out for him
in the wishes, at least, of his foster parent. The following
circumstance led to the appointment: Upon the resignation of a pastor
who had never felt himself at home among the people, their choice was
divided between two persons, who had been proposed by their respective
friends. At length it was wisely agreed by both parties to withdraw
their suffrages from each in favour of a third candidate, if one could
be found who should be agreeable to the whole congregation. At this
juncture Mr. Addington was recommended to them by the Rev. Mr. Gilbert,
of Oakhampton, and in 1752 received a unanimous invitation to settle
amongst them. Accordingly, in the month of July he removed to
Harborough, and established himself in the very house where his good
friend had lived. He was ordained in September, 1753, on which occasion
the service was conducted by the Rev. Mr. Gilbert, of Northampton, Mr.
Goodrich, of Oundle, Mr. Boyce, of Kettering, Mr. Gregson, of Rowell,
and Dr. Ashworth, of Daventry.

The first five years of Mr. Addington's residence were devoted
exclusively to the duties of his pastoral office. His congregation was
considerable, and some of them came from a distance of several miles;
but the Church at Ashley had now a pastor of its own, so as no longer
to require the stated engagements of the minister at Harborough.

So entirely did Mr. Addington appear to possess the confidence and
affections of his people, that he became scarcely less their friend and
counsellor in their various secular concerns than their spiritual guide
and instructor. The leading object of all his plans was their moral and
religious improvement. In pursuance of this great design, it was Mr.
Addington's custom to distribute and associate as many of his people as
he could into classes, according to their age, sex, and situation. In
these societies they were in the habit of meeting at stated times for
prayer and religious converse, often attended by their minister; the
societies were always under his superintendence, and once in every year
(about Christmas) each of them spent a comfortable evening together at
his house. Even the female servants had their annual day, on which,
after assembling in the Meeting House, and spending a part of the
afternoon in cleaning it, they partook of a social and friendly
entertainment provided for them.

Mr. Addington's labours among his people were both acceptable, and
beneficial to the great purposes of the Christian ministry. His strain
of preaching was chiefly practical and experimental, and his delivery
animated and affectionate. But beside his many ministerial and pastoral
engagements, Mr. Addington at length added the arduous undertaking of a
boarding-school, in which he succeeded the Rev. Mr. Token, of Kibworth,
whose school was removed to Harborough. During a part also of this
period he extended his pastoral charge to the congregation at Kibworth.
At this time he was by no means a strong and healthy man; and after
continuing his exertions of one kind or another for nearly thirty
years, he began to find some failure in his energy and activity; and
under this impression it seemed prudent to contract the sphere of his
duties. Whilst preparing to carry his design into effect, circumstances
occurred which eventually issued in his removal; the active part which
he took in the politics of the day somewhat affecting both his
usefulness and his comfort towards the close of his residence at
Harborough. While he was thus circumstanced, he received an invitation
to a charge in Miles Lane, London, which determined his removal in
October, 1781. It was not, however, without the severest struggle that
he resigned a connexion that had long been endeared to him by almost
everything calculated to produce and to cherish reciprocally in the
parties the most cordial esteem and the liveliest affection. The
connexion might indeed not be said to have been broken up, but exchanged
for an intimacy differing only in the mode and in the degree of its
friendship, and which continued to the end of his days.

After Mr. Addington's removal from Harborough, he became tutor of an
academy first established at Mile End, which afterwards existed at
Hoxton, and then at Highbury.

"The friends of evangelical truth, lamenting the heterodoxy or coldness
of another seminary, associated to provide for the Churches pastors of a
different spirit. At first they engaged some ministers of established
reputation for piety and orthodox sentiments, to give lectures at their
own houses to such young men as were selected from the Churches in
London and its vicinity. This mode, however, soon proved so inconvenient
that they were compelled to provide in 1783 a building at Mile End, to
which they invited Stephen Addington, minister of Market Harborough, as
tutor of what was now called 'the Evangelical Academy.' The friends of
the institution procured him a diploma of Doctor of Divinity; but as he
had lately relinquished a similar charge under the impression of
declining vigour, he had scarcely begun to 'gird up the loins of his
mind' to the duties of his new office with the hope of extensive
usefulness, before he was attacked by a severe indisposition, which laid
him aside for some time. Though he recovered beyond expectation, and
resumed his labours with new ardour, he was again disabled by
affliction, and at length compelled to resign his office as tutor in
1789.

"As he had been chosen pastor of the congregation in Miles Lane, he
continued to labour there under the pressure of infirmities, but
encouraged by the generous attachment of his flock, for years after he
resigned his academical charge."

In February, 1796, he was called away from his labours and trials by
death, in his sixty-seventh year. "He was an amiable man, of correct
deportment, ardent piety, and zeal for usefulness. His learning was
extensive rather than profound; he projected more works than he found
time to execute; and his dread of living in vain induced him to grasp at
objects to which his strength was inadequate. As a preacher, he was more
esteemed than admired, for his elocution was defective, though earnest;
and his thoughts, always good, were seldom great. His 'Treatise in
Defence of Infant Baptism,' and his 'Life of the Apostle Paul,' are the
best known among his publications, of which our limits will not allow us
to give the full list."--So write the authors of the 'History of
Dissenters,' Vol. IV., p. 264.

Of the 'Treatise on Baptism,' Job Orton says--"Addington hath lately
published a small piece upon it, which I think comprehends everything
valuable that hath been written."

A dedication to his congregation at Harborough is prefixed to this
Treatise, from which we make the following extract:--

    MY DEAR FRIENDS,--You have, in the following pages, the result of a
    free and serious inquiry into the Scripture doctrine of Christian
    baptism. After reading many controversial tracts on the mode and
    subjects of this ordinance, I found myself obliged to examine the
    sacred pages before I could be thoroughly satisfied either as to the
    manner or time of life in which it ought to be administered.
    Previous to this inquiry, I endeavoured to divest myself of every
    prejudice, and determined to follow the truth whithersoever it might
    lead me. Far be it from me to assert that I have nowhere mistaken
    the language of the Holy Spirit in the several passages that either
    give an account of the administration of Christian baptism or tend
    to explain the nature and design of the institution; but this I hope
    I can say, that I have endeavoured to enter into the true meaning of
    them, and have explained them in a sense that appears to me (upon
    the maturest consideration) most consistent and scriptural. I think
    myself obliged to tell you, that the inquiry has afforded me
    abundant satisfaction. The reasons for our practice of baptising
    children, and that by sprinkling or pouring of water, appear to me
    now in a much stronger light than before; and I am more fully
    convinced than ever that the specious objections that are thrown out
    against it have no solid foundation in reason or the word of God.

This is dated, Harborough, September 6th, 1770.

The interval was not very long from the resignation of Mr. Addington to
the settlement of Mr. Gill, as Mr. Addington's resignation is dated
August 12, 1781, and Mr. Gill commenced his labours in the early part of
1782. During the interval the pulpit was supplied by neighbouring
ministers, and the students from the academy at Daventry; among the
latter of whom was Mr. Belsham, afterwards recognized as the champion of
Socinianism. The principal candidates were Mr. Bennett, who afterwards
settled at Kiderminster; Mr. Cooke, who finally settled at Halifax; and
a Mr. Severn. During this state of indecision, Mr. Garner, in his
travels into Yorkshire, heard of Mr. Gill, who, being highly recommended
as an excellent man, was introduced to the Church at Harborough.

Mr. Gill was a native of Netherthong, a small village near Holesfirth,
in Yorkshire. He was educated at the academy at Heckmondwicke, and
commenced his labours at Swanland, not far from Hull. After a residence
of about eight or nine years in that place, he was invited to the
pastoral office over this Church and congregation. Mr. Gill's acceptance
of the invitation is dated March 22nd, 1782. Mr. Gill continued his
labours after this union for a long period, with honour to himself and
benefit to others. He was permitted to preach the Gospel to them for
more than six-and-thirty years, while he lived among them for at least
half a century. A paralytic affection rendered it necessary that he
should retire from his labours and resign his charge, in the year 1818.
In the interval between this period and his death, he was, with the
exception of the time he spent at Coventry with a son, regular in his
attendance at the Meeting where he had ministered; and though all the
powers of his mind were much impaired, his relish for the word was
undiminished, and his habits of devotion never left him to his dying
hour.

This holy and venerable servant of God breathed his last at the house of
his son-in-law, Mr. French, of Great Bowden, on the evening of February
2nd, 1832, at the age of 79. He was buried in the ground connected with
the Meeting, when Mr. Wild delivered the funeral oration; Mr. Bicknell,
of Crick, and Mr. Robertson, of Wellingborough, engaged in prayer; Mr.
Chater, of Kibworth, giving out the hymns. His funeral sermon was
preached on the Sabbath following, by Mr. Scott, of Rowell, from Acts
xi. 24: "He was a good man," &c. (the character of Barnabas). During the
ministry of Mr. Gill 248 members were added to the Church.

Having some recollections of Mr. Gill's person and ministry, from having
heard him a few times in the latter part of his labours, in his own
place of worship and in neighbouring places, we should describe him as
rather above the middle stature; very grave in his aspect; his manners
gentle and kind; his spirit devotional and fervent; always serious in
his work; his matter plain, pious, experimental, decidedly evangelical
in sentiment: his voice was not of great compass. Mr. Gill was not
distinguished by grasp of mind, power of reasoning, depth of thought, or
extent of information. His powers, whether natural or acquired, were not
of a high order. His case shows us what may be done by the weight of
character, fervent consistent piety, without superior mental endowments,
in filling a respectable station with credit and usefulness. Mr. Gill
was considered to be exemplary in visiting his flock, and to this was
added the care of a considerable boarding-school, which he had for a
number of years; and our impression is, that more time was spent in such
engagements than could comport with the efficient discharge of the
duties of the pulpit. Hence we fear, from what was manifested in the
state of the Church and congregation after his retirement, that the
result of his labours was not of the most satisfactory kind.

On the resignation of Mr. Gill, Mr. Jukes, now of Bedford, supplied
Harborough for many months with great acceptance. Mr. Francis, of
Lancaster, also came as a candidate for a short time.

Mr. Gear, now of Bradford, Wiltshire, then a student at Hoxton Academy,
succeeded as a probationer, and was invited by a large majority to take
the oversight of the Church. The want of entire unanimity led Mr. Gear
at first to decline accepting the invitation; but, upon its being
renewed, he ultimately complied with the call, and was ordained to the
pastoral office in October, 1822. The ministers engaged were Messrs.
Notcutt, of Wilbarston, now of Ipswich; Robertson, of Stretton,
afterwards of Wellingborough; Maslem, of Hertford, Mr. Gear's pastor;
Dr. Harris, of Hoxton, Mr. Gear's tutor; Scott, of Rowell, now tutor of
Airedale Academy; Green, of Uppingham; and Roberts, of Melton.

Mr. Gear continued his labours at Harborough until the year 1830, when,
not finding that concord and good feeling between him and the people
necessary for each other's mutual advantage and happiness, he complied
with an invitation he received from Bradford, in Wiltshire. Letters were
addressed to him signed by 375 persons, urging his stay at Harborough,
but he declined to do so. After his departure, a handsome gift of plate
was presented to him, as a memorial of esteem and affection from his
numerous friends.

Mr. Gear's removal, and a difference of opinion concerning the
candidates which were recommended and heard, led to considerable
altercation and painful division of feeling. The following ministers
supplied the pulpit as probationers: Mr. Johnson, from Highbury; Mr.
Wooldridge, from Gideon Chapel, Bristol; Mr. Hewlett, late of Newberry.
Mr. Slye, of Potterspury, was unanimously invited to visit Harborough as
a probationer; but, having no desire to remove from his people, refused.

Mr. Wild, late of Gainsborough, and educated under Mr. Joseph Fletcher,
of Blackburn, was recommended to the friends at Harborough by Dr.
Raffles, of Liverpool. In May, 1831, Mr. Wild was invited to spend three
or four Sabbaths, at the expiration of which time he received an
invitation to the pastoral office; but conceiving the time he had spent
among them too limited to form a just opinion of the people and the
suitabilities of the place, he engaged to spend a month or five weeks
more before he gave his final answer to the wishes of the people. Mr.
Wild accepted the invitation, and his recognition as the pastor took
place November 9th of the same year. Dr. Raffles, of Liverpool; Scott,
of Rowell; Toller, of Kettering; Roberts, of Melton; Chater, of
Kibworth; Hewlett, of Lutterworth, engaged in the services of the day.

Mr. Wild's ministry here was of short duration, and attended with the
want of unanimity and peace; so that in the year 1835, perceiving the
continuance of dissatisfaction, with no prospect as he thought of party
feeling abating, and consequently little hope of future comfort and
usefulness, he sent a notice of his intention to resign, which was read
by Mr. Hobson, of Welford, on Lord's-day, January 11th, 1835, his
ministry having continued about three years and a half.

The present pastor (Mr. H. Toller) is the fifth surviving son of the
late Rev. T. N. Toller, of Kettering. He pursued a course of preparatory
study under Mr. Walter Scott, late of Rowell; and afterwards was a
student at Coward College, London. At the expiration of his studies, he
was invited as a probationer to Harborough, and ultimately to take the
pastoral charge, which he accepted, and was ordained October 27th, 1836.
His brother, Mr. Thomas Toller, of Kettering, delivered the charge--Mr.
Edward Mial, then of Leicester, the introductory discourse; and Mr.
Mursell, of the same place, preached to the people.

Though the Church and congregation could not be considered in a happy,
prosperous state, when this settlement took place, yet they gradually
attained to a condition of peace and prosperity to which they had for
some years been strangers.

In the ninth year of Mr. Toller's ministry the present Chapel was built,
to which we have referred at the commencement of this account. On the
day of opening, large assemblies were collected together, and a noble
spirit of liberality was manifested. Dr. Reed, of London, preached in
the morning, from Num. x. 29; Dr. Leifchild, in the evening, from Rom.
v. 9. Mr. Alexander, of Norwich, preached on the next Sabbath. The whole
amount collected at these opening services was L199. 1s., and donations
were presented of sufficient amount at once to set the Chapel entirely
free from debt. All this made it a season of gladness and of lively
interest to the people.

Since this effort they have gone forward with renewed vigour and united
energy. The number of members added to the Church during the present
pastorate is 179. The present number of communicants is 163. The general
Sabbath-school connected with the place contains 150 children. In the
Infant-school, conducted on the Sabbath, there are 80 children. For the
use of the latter, a room has been recently erected over the general
school-room, with class-rooms for the elder children, at a cost of L230,
the whole of which has been paid. Occasionally services are conducted,
chiefly on Sabbath evenings, by several members of the Church, in five
villages in the vicinity of Harborough.

The whole aspect of things in this Christian society now presents a
happy illustration of the sentiment, that a united people, under a
faithful pastor, will go on and prosper.




CHAPTER V.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT ASHLEY AND WILBARSTON.


It might appear to be difficult to some of the Nonconformists of the
present day to decide, why their forefathers should fix on this village
as a place where they should carry on the stated ministrations of the
Gospel, and form a Church on Congregational principles. The population
of the village is too small to present a suitable sphere in itself for a
Dissenting congregation, while the Episcopal Church has the patronage of
the State and receives her emoluments. It was probably regarded by those
engaged in its formation as presenting a central spot, where the
Nonconformists who resided in surrounding villages might conveniently
assemble. Hence, during its early history the hearers travelled from a
number of places in the vicinity. One of the stated hearers, who died at
an advanced age a few years ago, and who had been connected with the
place from his earliest days, informed the writer that he remembered
hearers coming from thirteen villages to attend under the ministry of
the Gospel at Ashley. Since that period Chapels have been erected in
several of those villages, in which stated services are conducted; and
this, as a matter of course, diminishes the number of travellers to the
old places.

The history of the Independent Church at Ashley is connected, during the
first 60 or 70 years of its existence, with that of Market Harborough.
It was formed under the labours of the same minister, about the same
time (1673), and continued under the charge of the same pastors until
some time after the death of Mr. David Some. For the character and
labours of its first pastors (Mr. Matthew Clark and his son, succeeded
by Mr. Some, who had Doddridge as an assistant for a time), the reader
is referred to the preceding memorials of the Church at Harborough. The
record of members of the Church, preserved in the handwriting of Mr.
Some, shows that Church-meetings were held at Ashley, members admitted
there, the Lord's Supper administered; proving that it was regarded as a
distinct Christian society, under the pastoral charge of the minister of
the Church at Harborough. After Doddridge came to reside at Harborough,
and became assistant to Mr. Some, he took his turn in preaching at
Ashley. Tradition says, that on one occasion he baptized nine children
at the house of a respectable farmer at Weston, about a mile from
Ashley, whose family were long connected with the place, and at whose
house the minister frequently, in those days, dined on the Sabbath. From
Doddridge's own pen we learn that some of his published sermons to young
people were preached at Ashley, for he dedicates them to the young
people in the congregations at Northampton, Harborough, Kibworth,
Hinchley, and Ashley, as the places where they had been preached. The
following note is appended to the sermon entitled 'The Orphan's Hope,'
from Psalm xxvii. 10: "When my father and mother forsake me, then the
Lord will take me up":--"This sermon was preached at Ashley, in
Northamptonshire, March 6th, 1725, to some young persons whose father,
mother, and sister had all died of the small-pox a few days before." In
the introduction to the discourse he observes--

    There are few precepts of the Gospel which will appear more easy to
    a humane and generous mind than those in which we are required to
    weep with them that weep; and surely there are few circumstances of
    private life which will more readily command our mournful sympathy
    than those of that afflicted family, to the poor remains of which
    you will naturally, on the first hearing of these words, direct your
    thoughts, and perhaps your eyes too--the circumstances of a family
    which God hath broken with breach upon breach--of those distressed
    children whose father and mother have forsaken them almost at once,
    and who have since been visited with another stroke, which if alone
    had been very grievous, and when added to such a weight of former
    sorrows is, I fear, almost insupportable. I believe all of you who
    are acquainted with the case sincerely pity them, and wish their
    relief; but I am under some peculiar obligations to desire and
    attempt it, not only on account of my public character, but as I
    know the heart of an orphan, having myself been deprived of both my
    parents at an age at which it might reasonably be supposed a child
    should be most sensible of such a loss. I cannot recollect any
    Scripture which was then more comfortable, as I think none could
    have been more suitable, to me, than that which is now before us.

He touchingly and beautifully addresses the orphan family towards the
close of the discourse.

It must have been eight or ten years after the death of Mr. Some, which
took place in 1737, before the Church at Ashley had a pastor placed over
it separate from the Church at Harborough, for the first pastor here
appears to have been a Mr. John West, who had been a student at
Northampton in Doddridge's academy; for though we have no account
preserved of the period when he commenced or when he closed his
ministry, yet we find that he entered the academy at Northampton in the
year 1740. If immediately on the close of his studies he became the
pastor of the Church at Ashley, according to the usual term this would
not take place until 1745 or 1746; and as we find another pastor chosen
within eleven or twelve years from this time, and have no further
account of Mr. West, it is probable that he closed his life and his
ministry at a comparatively early age.

In the year 1757, Mr. Samuel Bacon was chosen pastor of the Church at
Ashley, in which office he continued for 32 years. The residence of Mr.
Bacon's family was Sutton-in-Ashfield; he studied for the ministry at
the academy at Mile End, when Dr. Conder and Mr., afterward Dr., Gibbons
were the tutors.

It is supposed that Ashley was Mr. Bacon's only charge; during his
ministry here his residence was at Wilbarston. No particulars have been
preserved of his character or ministry, the success of his labours, or
the state of the Church while he was pastor. He appears to have been
highly esteemed, and was spoken of by his friends as one of the most
lovely, amiable men they ever knew. Mr. Bacon was one of the first
trustees for the Meeting House at Weldon and the property connected with
it, and one of the monthly lecturers there for a number of years,
frequently conducting also the extra service they obtained on a Sabbath
evening in addition to the monthly lecture. At Corby also Mr. Bacon had
some engagements of a similar nature. We find his name inserted in the
account of the ordination of Mr. J. Fuller, at Kettering, in 1772. He
died rather suddenly, February 6th, 1789, and was buried in the Meeting
House, beneath the pulpit, where Mrs. Bacon was also interred, and Mrs.
Talbot, one of his three daughters.

In the same year that Mr. Bacon died, Mr. George Bullock was invited to
become the pastor, and entered on his stated ministry; residing, like
his predecessor, at Wilbarston. He was a student at Mile End when Dr.
Addington was tutor, and we have heard that he was a favourite student
of the Doctor's; one memorial of this we have seen. There is in the
hands of a daughter of Mr. Bullock a neat pocket Bible, in two volumes,
published in 1640, that evidently was used by Dr. Addington when he
preached in the villages in the vicinity of Market Harborough, having on
the fly-leaves the texts of the sermons noted down very neatly, with the
places where they were preached, and the time of the service; also four
hymns selected from the Olney Hymns by Newton and Cowper, suitable to
sing at the services, written in shorthand, according to the system of
Jeremiah Rich, improved by Doddridge. This Bible was given by his tutor
to Mr. Bullock, as the following memorandum, written in each volume by
Mr. Bullock, testifies:--

                         GEORGE BULLOCK.

    The gift of my very dear, highly honoured, much esteemed friend and
    tutor, the Rev. S. Addington, D.D., No 5, Grove House, Mile End,
    London, November 6th, 1788.

About four years after Mr. Bullock commenced his ministry at Ashley, a
building was purchased and fitted up at Wilbarston for a Meeting House.
Occasional services in a licensed room had for some time been held; and
the attendance increasing, it was thought desirable to have a larger
place and more regular services. This Meeting House was opened in the
year 1793, and from that time it was connected with Ashley, to have one
service by the pastor every Sabbath morning or afternoon alternately,
and occasionally a Sabbath evening lecture; so that he became the
minister of both congregations, regularly travelling from one place to
the other to conduct these services.

In the early part of Mr. Bullock's ministry at Ashley there was some
considerable increase in the congregation and the Church; but this did
not continue to the close of his course. After labouring for about
twenty years, in the month of January, 1809, he was seized with a
paralytic affection, which laid him aside entirely from all public
service. He resigned his charge, seeing no prospect of restoration, in
March, 1810; and in the year 1811 he died, at the age of 48 years, and
was interred in the Meeting House at Wilbarston, where a tablet is
erected to his memory.

After this Mr. William Notcutt was invited to the pastoral office, and
was ordained June 6th, 1811.

Mr. Notcutt preached at both places in the manner of his predecessor,
and during some part of his ministry took monthly services at Slawston
and Hallaton; but now there is a stated pastor, who preaches regularly
at both these places. During the ministry of Mr. Notcutt a vestry was
added to the Meeting House at Wilbarston for week-evening services and
for the Sabbath-school. In the year 1820 the Meeting House was enlarged,
at an expense of about L200. The ministry of Mr. Notcutt continued here
about 15 years, and in that time about 50 members were added to the
Church. In March, 1826, he resigned his charge, and removed to Ipswich,
where he is still labouring as pastor of the Independent Church in
Tacket Street.

After this removal, there was an unsettled interval of about five
years. For a short time the two congregations separated, and tried to
have a minister for each, when a Mr. Bromiley was at Ashley and Mr. Hill
at Wilbarston. While Mr. Bromiley was at Ashley the Meeting House
underwent some alterations--was new pewed, and the inside considerably
improved; but it still remains, as to the appearance of the building, in
the state of one of the oldest Nonconformist village Meeting Houses,
with its thatched roof without, and its uncovered beams within; and it
may stand for years to come as a venerable relic of the olden times. The
first trust deed of the present Meeting House is dated 1706.

After a short trial of separation, it was thought to be best to re-unite
the two places; and in the year 1831 the present minister, Mr. Thomas
Coleman, who had previously been pastor of the Independent Church at
Wollaston, was unanimously invited to take the charge of both
congregations, and he has conducted the services at both places for 21
years.

At this time it was thought desirable that the residence of the minister
should be at Ashley, as most in the centre of the connexion; a
dwelling-house was therefore prepared, adjoining the Meeting House, as
the residence of the minister for the time being; ground was purchased
for the building, a garden, and a small burying place behind the
Meeting. The alteration of the Meeting, the purchase of the ground, the
building, &c., must have cost more than L400, which has been entirely
paid off. There are about 17 acres of land that have been purchased with
moneys left to the interest by different persons, which are put in trust
for the benefit of the minister for the time being. There are now
standing, as members of the Church, about 56 persons; the
Sabbath-schools contain about 60 children. There are occasional services
conducted in three villages in the vicinity, where there are rooms
licensed for public worship.

If we took pleasure in dwelling on opposition encountered, we could
record instances which would reflect dishonour on the opposers, while in
the result the goodness of God and the power of the Gospel were
manifested. Nor might it be thought unsuitable to place amidst these
'Memorials' a statement of the following facts, while names are
concealed:--That a new rector, appointed to one of these villages,
seemed determined to distinguish himself by opposing the occasional
services that had been held in a licensed house for twenty years. He
summoned his parishioners to meet in the Church; told them his design to
put a stop to the preaching in the house; announced it as a very
improper thing to have preaching in a house, and in a room where people
lived; and when reminded of the Saviour's promise, that "_wherever_ two
or three are gathered together in his name," replied, "Ah, that might be
all very true in those days, when there were no churches built nor
clergymen appointed; but it did not apply now." Having gained the great
man of the village on his side, nothing would do but they must have a
notice drawn up and served on the occupiers of the cottage where the
service was held, that they must leave it, if they did not give up the
preaching; and this was persisted in; though a noble Earl who had
property in the village, to whom the pastor sent a statement of the
case, expressed his decided wish that the service should be continued in
its usual course,--and when after considerable effort another room, more
commodious, was obtained, gave a handsome donation towards fitting it
up for the service, and expressed his fervent wish that the Lord would
give his gracious blessing to the services that might be held there. In
the varied circumstances connected with this case, there was a striking
display--on the one side of the narrowness and oppression engendered by
the spirit of bigotry, and on the other of the liberality and kindness
of enlightened Christianity. A few years have passed since then, and the
occasional services are still continued.

A voluntary Christian society, situated like this at Ashley, in the
course of such a long period, having now existed for 175 years, must
have undergone many changes. The erection of new places of worship in
localities where its hearers and members in the early period of its
history used to reside, has at length confined its connexions to four or
five villages in its immediate vicinity, and they are of small
population, and several of the old Dissenting families have been removed
from them. Being simply an agricultural district, without trade or
manufactures, there is no prospect of much increase. As young persons
rise into life they remove to other places for employment, and some of
the most active and useful have been thus lost to the place that gave
them birth: but still a small Church remains to bear its testimony to
the great principles of the Gospel, and to the truth and faithfulness of
God; and it may yet extend and prosper, by united believing prayer and
earnest effort, under the blessing of the great God of Zion.




CHAPTER VI.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT WELFORD.


In the extra-parochial district of Sulby, about a mile from the village
of Welford, was founded in the twelfth century a monastery for a certain
order of monks. It was handsomely endowed, and dedicated to the Virgin
Mary. The site is now occupied by farm buildings. But as another
illustration of the changes which occur in this mutable world, there
resided, 180 years ago, in some part of that abbey, a man who would not
conform to the dictates of his fellow men in the things of God--"a man
of worth, a man of letters too;" one eminent for learning, talent,
piety, usefulness; who laid the foundation of two Dissenting interests
in the county of Northampton, and kept a Dissenting academy at Sulby, or
a seminary for the education of young men, several of whom became
eminent Dissenting ministers. This person was the Rev. John Shuttlewood,
A.B. He was born at Wymeswold, in the county of Leicester, January 3rd,
1632, of respectable parents, who sent him to the Grammar-school at
Leicester, and afterwards to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he
obtained the degree of A.B. He was ordained to the ministry in 1654, not
by episcopal ordination it would appear, but in the method more
generally adopted in the days of the Commonwealth, in the congregation
of Raunston, with an honourable testimonial from the classical
presbytery of Wirksworth, in the province of Derby.

The deep humility, piety, and devotedness of his spirit were manifest by
a solemn dedication of himself to God, drawn up about this time in
Latin, of which the following is a translation:--

    O my God, on account of my sins thou hast afflicted me with thy
    judgments! Thou art just, O Lord! in all thy dispensations towards
    me, because I have grievously offended against thee. I have followed
    the world; I have too much indulged the flesh; and I have been very
    often overcome by Satan. To thee I give up myself, to live to thee.
    And now, before God, the searcher of hearts, I promise and engage to
    leave my worldly concerns to the companion of my life; to renounce
    the flesh with its affections; and to study the good of the souls
    which thou art committing to my care. Now, O Lord! do thou so
    strengthen and fortify me by the Spirit of grace against all these
    my enemies, that I may obtain the victory over them. And that I may
    seriously perform these my good resolutions, let this paper, signed
    by my name, be a witness against me, if I lie before thee.

                                                 JOHN SHUTTLEWOOD.

A man of such a spirit we should expect to find among those who refused
to conform to the terms prescribed to the ministers of the Church, soon
after the restoration of the second Charles. On this account he was
ejected from the living of Raunston and Hoose, and afterward exposed to
great suffering for his Nonconformity, and his attempts to conduct the
worship of God and preach his word in a way his conscience approved. In
the year 1668, when he was uniting with some others in singing a Psalm,
one Mr. B., with thirty or forty horsemen, with swords drawn and pistols
loaded, came and seized him with many that were worshipping with him.
Several of both sexes were beaten and driven into the field, and there
dismissed upon promising to appear the next day before a justice of the
peace. Mr. Shuttlewood was conveyed to Leicester Gaol, where he was a
prisoner for some months. After the "Conventicle Act" passed, he was
again seized by one Charles Gibbons, a notorious persecutor and profane
swearer--taken by him from one justice of the peace to another; and
warrants were issued to distrain upon him for L20, upon the owner of the
house where he preached for L20, and 5_s._ apiece on others.

In 1674 Mr. Shuttlewood was living at Lubenham, a village about two
miles from Market Harborough. There his house was entered when he was
conducting divine service; a warrant was obtained to distrain upon him
for L40, when seven of his milch cows were taken and sold.

A short letter is preserved which was written to his wife from Leicester
gaol, which shows the exemplary resignation, meekness, and faith with
which he passed through his trials. It was written February 20th, 1668.

    MY DEAR WIFE,--Myself and fellow prisoners are in good health. I
    bless God, I am very well satisfied with his dispensations towards
    me in reference to my landlady's proceedings; so that I am no longer
    disquieted with them, nor solicitous about them, but patiently wait
    God's gracious disposal of me. Perhaps infinite wisdom foresees some
    inconveniency which we are not aware of, and therefore is about to
    remove us. I am loath to leave the society of my dear brethren, Mr.
    Clarke and Mr. Southal; but I hope in the end God will so dispose of
    us, that we shall have cause to say, it is best for us to be where
    God shall carry us. I know not which way to look; but our "God is a
    very present help in a time of trouble," and will let us see that it
    is not our forecast, but his providence, which shall provide an
    habitation for us. Let us rather beg an improvement than a removal
    of his dispensations. Remember me to my father, children, &c. Thus,
    in haste, I remain, &c.

The Mr. Clarke, mentioned in this letter, we suppose to have been
Matthew Clarke, the first pastor of the Independent Church at Harborough
and Ashley, as he was cast three times into the same prison, and was
connected with Mr. Shuttlewood in sufferings, and also in services and
enjoyments.

He was obliged frequently to change his abode--sometimes in
Leicestershire, sometimes in Northamptonshire, to escape from his foes;
acting on the directions given by his Lord, "If they persecute you in
one city, flee unto another." After a time he went to reside at Sulby, a
place remarkable for its picturesque and secluded situation. The family
of the Paynes, at Sulby Hall, then favoured the Nonconformists. Here he
appears sometimes to have had a flourishing seminary. A memorandum of
his in a pocket almanack states "that six students were added to his
academy in one year." The following persons, amongst others, studied
under him, and rose to eminence: Mr. Julius Saunders, afterwards
minister at Bedworth; Mr. John Sheffield; Mr. Matthew Clarke, son, we
suppose, of Mr. Clarke of Harborough, afterwards minister in London; Dr.
Joseph Oldfield; Mr. Wilson, the father of Mr. Samuel Wilson, of London;
and Mr. Thomas Emlyn. In the memoirs of the last of these it is said,
"that his parents chose to bring up their son to the ministry among the
Nonconformists; and that for this purpose he was sent, in the year 1678,
for academical education to Mr. Shuttle_worth_ (should have been
Shuttle_wood_), at Sulby, near Welford, in Northamptonshire." Here he
stayed four years. In the year 1679 he took a journey to Cambridge, and
was admitted to Emanuel College, but returned again to Mr. Shuttlewood.
These circumstances indicate that Mr. Shuttlewood resided at Sulby a
considerable time. It was during this period that he gathered a
congregation at Welford and at Creaton. But such was the spirit of the
times, and such the dangers to which the Nonconformists were exposed,
that at Welford, in the year 1674, they met in a secluded part of the
town, on the premises of Mr. Edmund Miles, where they fitted up a place
of worship, which was the first Dissenting Meeting House there; but such
were the activity and zeal of their enemies, that they thought it
prudent to vary their places of meeting, and to set a guard against the
inroads of their foes. They might have adopted the language of Nehemiah
as their own: "We made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch day and
night because of them." There was a house occupied by Mr. Charles
Hanscomb, secluded in a narrow yard from the main street, and open to a
field in the direction of Mr. Shuttlewood's house. Here the persecuted
minister and his people often met, one of the number being appointed to
watch, while the rest were engaged in worship; so that when the
informers were seen to approach notice might be given to Mr. Shuttlewood
and his hearers, who escaped by the window into the fields. Sometimes
they met in the pastures which surrounded the house at Sulby, amidst the
darkness and the damps of night. These were days of trial, when the
reality of religious principle was tested and its power appeared.

Mr. Shuttlewood was blest with a robust, vigorous constitution, yet was
of a very tender spirit; and the death of one of his children so deeply
pierced him as to bring on many bodily complaints, which he carried with
him to his grave. His constitution was greatly injured by the
sufferings he endured, and also by his preaching at unseasonable hours,
and in unsuitable places; so that his health at length rapidly declined,
and he died when on a visit to the Church at Creaton, March 17th, 1688,
in the 58th year of his age. A humble stone was erected to his memory in
the Churchyard, with this brief but honourable inscription:--"Multum
dilectus, multum deflendus"--"Much beloved, much lamented".

Now the flock at Welford were as sheep without a shepherd. They had not
been formed into a regular Christian Church under the ministry of Mr.
Shuttlewood; and for about ten years they were destitute of a pastor, or
any stated ministrations of divine truth amongst them. Some of them,
during this period, travelled as far as Bedworth, in Warwickshire,
upwards of twenty miles, to hear Mr. Julius Saunders. Such was the love
these servants of Christ had for the Gospel, that in the dark mornings
of the winter season they travelled by the light of a lantern as far as
Lutterworth, where they left it till their return in the evening, when
it was again lighted to conduct them home. It appears that there were
many in those days that would travel as far as their feet would carry
them, rather than be entirely deprived of the ministry of the Gospel.

Some extracts from the records of the Church at Bedworth, kindly sent to
the writer by the present pastor of the Church, show that there were, in
the year 1687, five persons from Welford added to that Church. This was
the second year in the history of that Church; and at the close of it
the pastor wrote, "thus has God increased us and doubled our numbers,
and many of them stars of the first magnitude." William Powers, from
Welford, who joined the Church at Bedworth, appears to have been a man
of eminent piety. On one occasion Mr. Saunders writes, "It was while
brother Powers was earnestly praying the Lord to thrust forth labourers
into his harvest, that I was set at liberty from the bond that was on my
spirit." In 1688, a female servant in one of the Welford families
attending at Bedworth was added to the Church. In the fourth month of
that year a Church-meeting is held at Welford, when several persons from
Elkington and Cottesbrook are added to the Church. In the last month of
this year we find two more from Welford joined to the Church at
Bedworth; but the pastor records, that in the third month of the next
year "there was great dissatisfaction expressed at a Church-meeting, on
account of my going to Welford and preaching there the last Lord's-day,
where there seems to be a mighty work of God upon the hearts of many
carrying on."

Mr. Saunders wished to devote one Sabbath in the month to the people
that met at Welford; but this was strongly opposed by some of the Church
at Bedworth, who probably desired to have the pastor always with them on
the Sabbath.

One Valentine Drake showed great opposition to the pastor going to
preach at Welford; "but the Church," adds Mr. Saunders, "gave me
liberty; they declared that it was meet that, as a ruling elder, I
should appoint my own meetings to preach." "The trouble was great that I
met with, all about going to Welford one Lord's-day in the month." The
opponents ultimately prevailed, so that the minister was obliged to give
up the services there. "In the 9th month, 1689, a solemn assembly of the
Church. The Church refused to cast out Valentine Drake for all that he
had done; and he had done much evil. He drew many after him; made a
schism in the Church; manifested fiery passions in our Church-meetings;
and so far prevailed, that I was necessitated to break off from going to
Welford, whereby that great and blessed work that was going on was made
to cease. Many that had a hand in breaking it never flourished in their
souls after. In those days my hands were weak."

"In 1691, brother William Powers, from Welford, was chosen to be a
ruling elder. On the twelfth day of the twelfth month, at Welford, the
brethren being assembled together--Mr. Davis, brother Tebbirt, and
brother Taylor, from Rowell--I gave brother Powers a charge to fulfil
his office; he declared his willing mind to do so, and that he did
accept of the office." "Elizabeth Ridgly, of Haslebeech,
Northamptonshire, joined this Church, 1687. She was a diligent saint,
who came to our Church-meetings seventeen long miles, twelve times in a
year, and that on foot." It is supposed the distance was not far short
of twenty-seven miles.

Some of the Welford hearers attended at Kettering and at Harborough
until the year 1698, when the Rev. John Norris came to Welford. He had
been educated to Sheriffhales, in Shropshire. When Mr. Norris came to
Welford, the days of liberty and peace had so far dawned upon the
Nonconformists that they could no longer be persecuted according to law;
and his ministry proving very acceptable to the people, a new Meeting
House was built capable of seating 500 hearers, which was opened in the
year 1700; and in the same year Mr. Norris formed them into a Christian
Church. The first time he administered the Lord's Supper, there were
twenty-six members united in celebrating the Saviour's death; but after
a few months the number increased to sixty members. The ground on which
the Meeting House was built was given by the Paynes, of Sulby Hall; and
five of the members of this family united with the twenty-six who first
formed themselves into a Church under Mr. Norris.

Mr. Norris was very popular as a preacher, much beloved as a Christian
minister, especially by his brethren in the ministry. He was engaged at
the ordination of Doddridge, at Northampton, in asking the questions,
and offering the ordination prayer. Doddridge regarded him with
affection and veneration, as a father. He died very suddenly, February
8, 1738, in the sixty-third year of his age: he was buried in the
Churchyard. The following lines on his tombstone were written by
Doddridge:--

  Decked with each manly and each Christian grace,
  The friend of God, and all the human race--
  While earth and heaven beheld him with delight,
  From earth to heaven he winged a sudden flight.
  Lo! angels pressed to bear their charge above,
  To kindred realms of piety and love.

Doddridge preached his funeral sermon, from Genesis v. 24: "And Enoch
walked with God, and he was not, for God took him."

We present a few passages from this discourse, descriptive of the
character and ministry of Mr. Norris.

    I may be permitted publicly to acknowledge (says Doddridge) the
    sense I have of the favour of divine providence, in leading me so
    early into the acquaintance of this excellent person, and blessing
    me with so great a share of his friendship, with which I was
    honoured from my first entrance into the ministry, and which his
    singular humility and condescension, wisdom and piety, have rendered
    exceedingly delightful and improving to me in all the succeeding
    years of life.

    And surely I should be greatly deficient in the duty of this day, if
    I did not solemnly charge it upon you frequently to recollect your
    obligations to the divine goodness in giving you so able and so
    tender a shepherd, and in continuing him amongst you for so long a
    time with such cordial love, that repeated, unanimous, and earnest
    solicitations from the most considerable congregations in the
    neighbouring counties could not prevail upon him to remove from you.
    So evident was it that "he took the oversight of you, not by
    constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
    mind."

    It may eminently be said of you, my friends, in a spiritual sense,
    that you have been "fed with the finest of the wheat," as the pure
    and uncorrupted truths of the Gospel have been preached amongst you
    with plainness and seriousness, and in the spirit of love. Your
    minds have not been amused with useless subtilties and barren
    speculations; you have not been vexed with strifes of words,
    unprofitable and vain; nor grieved with passionate invectives
    against your brethren of any denomination--invectives, which are
    never more criminal than when delivered in the name of the Lord, and
    which too often turn the food of souls into poison, and that which
    should have been for their welfare, into a trap. This "good man
    brought out of the good treasure of his heart good things"; his
    generous and benevolent soul overflowed with sentiments of candour
    and love; and he was never more in his own element, than when he was
    telling you that "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
    righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost": and I firmly
    believe, that in the thirty-eight years of his ministry among you he
    never delivered a sermon or a sentence inconsistent with that great
    principle.

    I join with you in lamenting that none of those elaborate and
    judicious discourses which he delivered among you, from Sabbath to
    Sabbath, are, or can be, published to the world: for though it is
    certain that his graceful and venerable aspect, and his easy yet
    lively manner, gave a peculiar beauty to them as delivered by
    himself; yet, when I consider how judiciously his thoughts were
    selected, how methodically they were disposed, and with what
    propriety, elegance, and spirit they were expressed, I am well
    assured they would generally have been esteemed a rich addition to
    that great number of practical writings with which our age and
    country is already blest, and with which I hope it will still
    abound. * * * * * * * And, for what he was in the domestic relations
    of life, I had almost said, I wish it may not be too long, but I
    will rather say too tenderly, remembered. The loss of a husband so
    constantly obliging, so affectionately sympathizing, so well
    furnished as a prudent guide and a pleasant companion, and so well
    disposed for the offices of both, will, I fear, be too deeply felt.
    May the sense of it be tempered with those divine consolations which
    he was so eminently fit to administer, but which have not surely
    lost their value, and will not, I trust, lose their relish, though
    no longer administered by him. May the children which were dear to
    him as his own, never forget with how much diligence he instructed
    them; with how much importunity and constancy he prayed for them;
    and with what tenderness he watched over all their interests.

    I may add, even in the decline of life this light was growing
    brighter and brighter; and though his removal, while his capacities
    of usefulness were to the last so great, must be very affecting to
    you, yet I cannot forbear saying that you have some peculiar reason
    to be thankful for the manner and circumstances of his death.

    Nature was not racked with tormenting pains, nor worn out by a
    tedious, consuming illness; but the good man grew a little drowsy
    towards the evening of his long day, and, having "served his
    generation according to the will of God," gently "fell asleep" as he
    was going from one apartment of the house to another, and all the
    business and struggle of dying was over in less time than could have
    served him to get up the stairs, as he was attempting to do. It is a
    delightful thought, that God dismissed his servant in so peaceful a
    manner that his death so much resembled a translation, and "he was
    not, for God took him."

Mr. Norris preached the last Sabbath he lived, and concluded the public
service with a copious, lively, and affectionate prayer for his people,
which could not have been more suitable if he had known he was then
taking his last farewell.

After the death of Mr. Norris, Job Orton preached his first sermon at
Welford, and received an invitation from the people to become their
pastor; but this he declined, as he did several other invitations, on
account of his engagements as assistant to Dr. Doddridge in the academy.

Another of the Doctor's pupils, a Mr. Charles Bulkley, was settled over
the Church at Welford; but early in the next year after his ordination
he changed his sentiments on the doctrines of the Gospel, and on the
ordinance of baptism; consequently, he was requested by the Church to
resign his office as pastor over them, which he did, and retired to
London, where he joined the General Baptists.

At this juncture, Mr. Bottrill, a gentleman of considerable property,
connected with the Church at Welford, was at Weldon, a village about
eight miles from Oundle; and there he happened to hear a young minister
preach, who was a native of Oundle, and was on a visit to his widowed
mother, who resided there. This apparently incidental circumstance was
the means of bringing about a connexion that was long continued, and of
a very happy and useful character. This young minister was Mr. King, son
of a late pastor of the Independent Church at Oundle.

When Mr. Bottrill returned home, he induced the Church at Welford to
invite Mr. King to preach to them, which he did for two Sabbaths, much
to their satisfaction. After some further probation, he received a
unanimous invitation to become their pastor, which he accepted, and was
ordained in the spring of the year 1743; the Rev. Mr. Hill, of London,
and Dr. Doddridge, preached on the occasion. When Mr. King became
pastor, the number of members in the Church was 87.

There are some interesting circumstances connected with Mr. King's early
history, worthy of notice. If he was, like Samuel, early devoted to God,
it was in connexion with his mother having the spirit of Hannah in
pleading for him, and giving him up to God. His father was the Rev.
Joseph King, highly respected as the Independent minister at Oundle. His
mother, Mrs. Hannah King, was a lady distinguished for her piety and
intelligence; and she earnestly desired to have a son, that she might
devote him to the service of the sanctuary.

Her desire being granted in the birth of a son, she, like Hannah, called
his name Samuel, as a constant memorial of her prayers and her purpose.
She fondly hoped to see him trained by paternal instruction for the
Christian ministry, when, by a mysterious providence, with a sudden
stroke she was bereft of her beloved partner, in the midst of his
usefulness and in the vigour of his life, being but 46 years of age.
Still, amidst the sorrows, the trials, and difficulties of widowhood,
her boy not four years of age, and a family dependent upon slender means
for support, this mother cherished her fond impression concerning this
son. At an early age he was placed in the Grammar-school at Oundle, and
made great proficiency; from thence he was removed to the classical
School for Dissenters at Mount Sorrell, Leicestershire, then under the
direction of Mr. Thomas Watson and Mr. Abel Ragg--the same Mr. Ragg who
had been Doddridge's fellow pupil and intimate friend, and who died in
the same year with his other beloved friend and fellow pupil, Mr. David
Some, junior.

From his earliest days, Mrs. King endeavoured to impress her son's mind
with the important truths of the Gospel; and the Lord blessed her
efforts and heard and answered her prayers, in the conversion of her
son. When he had left home his religious impressions were deepened by
the epistolary admonitions of his mother, and by the religious
instructions of his tutors. When he removed from this school he lived
for a time with an uncle at Long Thorpe, who was an extensive farmer,
and steward to Sir Francis St. John, who lived there. In this situation
he improved the leisure afforded by agriculture in a diligent attention
to mental and devout exercises. Thus occupied, he came to a settled
determination to enter the ministry; which purpose, after due
consideration, he disclosed to his mother. This was joyful intelligence
to her; and she lost no time in communicating it to a friend and patron,
Mrs. Cooke, of Newington, a lady greatly esteemed for her piety and
liberality. With characteristic promptitude and kindness, she
immediately engaged to support him while prosecuting his studies at the
academy. He was placed under the tuition of Dr. Abraham Taylor, at
Deptford, in 1735; he continued there till 1740, when the institution
was removed to Stepney.

Mr. King attended the ministry of Mr. Thomas Bradbury, at New Court,
with whose Church he became connected.

While he was at Deptford, a party of the students went one evening to
bathe, when Mr., afterwards Dr. Thomas Gibbons, going beyond his depth,
was in danger of drowning. No one present could swim except Mr. King,
who at the moment was standing at the water side at a short distance. On
hearing the cries of the other students he hurried to the spot, plunged
into the water, caught Mr. Gibbons by the hair when in the act of
sinking, and thus rescued him from a watery grave, as animation was
suspended, and was with considerable difficulty restored. Dr. Gibbons
ever after retained a most affectionate attachment to Mr. King, and
after he was settled at Welford paid him several visits and preached for
him, and always recurred to this providential deliverance with grateful
recollections.

The congregation at Welford, when Mr. King became its pastor, was
considered to be large and respectable, hearers attending on the Sabbath
from fourteen villages around. In connexion with this circumstance it
may be mentioned, that in some of those villages there are now stated
congregations, either of the Independent or Baptist denomination, with
pastors placed over them, while the congregation at Welford is as large
as ever; which shows a considerable increase in the number of Dissenters
in those parts in the course of the last century. Mr. King was very
diligent and laborious in the work to which he had become devoted,
preaching several nights in the week in the villages around, beside the
constant services of the Sabbath. His ministry was rendered eminently
useful, so that the Church doubled its numbers in the early years of his
pastorate.

He married Miss Elizabeth Norris, the only child of his predecessor, by
whom he had a family of ten children. It was a circumstance not
honourable to his people, considering their numbers and the wealth of
some individuals among them, that Mr. King had to struggle with
pecuniary difficulties, which almost led to his removal from them. A
pressing invitation was sent to him from the congregation at Castle
Gate, Nottingham, to be co-pastor with the venerable James Ross, M.A.,
with an offer of more than double the salary that he was receiving at
Welford. The difficulties attending him here, with his numerous family,
inclined him to attend to this call; but when it became known to his
people, they waited upon him, expressed their great regret that he
should think of leaving them, their firm attachment to him, reminded him
of the providential way in which he was brought amongst them, and
referred to the happy effects of his labours; which, after some
deliberation, prevailed, so that he determined to continue with them and
to maintain the struggle with the difficulties that attended him. But
the providence of God at length appeared for him. A Miss Cooke, an aged
maiden lady, the only survivor of a wealthy family, bequeathed to him
some property, which, with some other legacies he received, enabled him
to give his children a liberal education, and to place his sons in
respectable situations; and also, in some degree, to gratify his
benevolent feelings in the exercise of liberality to those who were in
distress.

During the ministry of Mr. King, Mr. John Wood, a native of Welford,
became a member of the Church, and was called to the work of the
ministry. He passed with great credit through his academical course at
Daventry, and became first minister at Sudbury, in Suffolk, and
afterwards at Creaton, in Northamptonshire, where, after twenty years'
labour, he died. The young people of Mr. King's flock engaged a large
portion of his solicitude; his public and private instructions were
eminently blessed to many of them.

It was a great gratification to this excellent minister to be able to
sustain his aged mother in the decline of her days--to promote her
comfort by receiving her into his house, where she died, in 1763, at the
advanced age of 81 years. With what delight would such a mother behold
the answer to her prayers in the devoted labours and usefulness of this
son, whom she had asked of the Lord, and consecrated to him; and with
what peculiar interest must such a son look on that aged mother as she
was ripening for heaven, to whom, under God, he owed all that he had
attained!

He lost his beloved partner, who was of great value in such a sphere,
after a lingering illness, in the 60th year of her age. When his own
infirmities increased and strength failed, so as to render him incapable
of fulfilling the duties of his office, after about 40 years' labour
amongst them he resigned his charge in 1782, and went to reside at the
house of the Rev. James Horsey, of Northampton, who had married one of
his daughters. There, enjoying the affectionate attentions of his
daughter, he peacefully ended his days, November 6th, 1788, in the 74th
year of his age. His remains were conveyed to Welford for interment; a
funeral sermon was preached by his son-in-law, Mr. Horsey, to a crowded
audience, from words chosen by the deceased (Jude, verse 21): "Looking
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life." The sermon
was printed at the request of the Church and congregation. Mr. Horsey
observes--

    About forty years ago God placed his servant in this part of his
    vineyard, and enabled him to labour, both in season and out of
    season, to defend his cause in this town and neighbourhood. That his
    talents were generally acceptable, most who hear me know. The
    plainness of his style (for he always aimed to be understood by the
    lowest of his hearers), the evangelical complexion of his doctrine,
    and the seriousness of his address, endeared him peculiarly to other
    congregations as well as his own; and numbers in this and in
    neighbouring counties ascribe to his instrumentality their first
    serious thoughts of God and eternity. With many present he has
    laboured even from your infancy, endeavouring, by an attention to
    catechising, suggesting the most simple and easy remarks, to bring
    you to an early acquaintance with the holy Scriptures. And no
    greater pleasure could he feel than to see the children of his
    charge "walking in the truth." As you have risen into life, he has
    regularly addressed you by his annual instructions to the youth of
    the assembly, cautioning against the paths of the destroyer, and
    directing your feet in the way of peace. Oh, how often have I seen
    him, with marks of inward reverence and undissembled piety, sit like
    good old Simeon "waiting for the consolation of Israel"! And when a
    word has been dropped, to bring his former charge to his
    remembrance, with the tenderest tokens of friendship, and the
    falling tears of affection, would he waft up a prayer to heaven for
    your prosperity.

Mr. King only published two sermons, one preached to his own people on
the murrain among the cattle, and another delivered at the ordination of
Mr. Joshua Symonds, at Bedford, 1767.

After Mr. King's resignation there were three pastors, each of whom
continued for a very short time over the people at Welford. Mr. William
Severn was ordained May 22nd, 1782. It is stated that he was a very
popular preacher, possessed of uncommon talents; that his Sabbath
evening and week-day lectures were anticipated with great pleasure by
his hearers, who were strongly attached to him: but he resigned his
charge in less than two years, went to Hinckley, in Leicestershire, and
at length, we regret to state, departed from the faith he once preached,
and died some years after in connexion with a Socinian congregation in
Hull. A Mr. Northend was the next who was invited to Welford; but the
invitation was far from unanimous, so that, though he accepted it, his
services continued for a very short time. In the spring of 1789 Mr. Evan
Johns was settled as their pastor; but this gentleman, we are informed,
much injured his usefulness, and lessened the esteem of his friends for
him, by practising the absurd theory of animal magnetism, which induced
him to tender his resignation, and he left, in 1790, for Bury St.
Edmund's.

In 1792, Mr. John Clement Bicknell, a student at Newport Pagnell, was
invited on probation; and in February, 1793, he was ordained pastor. The
following ministers were engaged on that occasion, viz.:--Messrs.
Hillyard, of Bedford; Greathead, of Newport; Grundy, of Lutterworth;
Carver, of Wellingborough; Summers, of Wellingborough; Gill, of Market
Harborough; Davis, of Wigston; Gardner, of Kilsby.

Soon after this settlement, the old Meeting House being much out of
repair, it was determined to erect a new one in a more eligible part of
the town, near the residence of the pastor. This was opened for worship
in 1793; and a few years after, in 1799, a more respectable house was
built for the minister on the site of the old one, which together cost
the people about L1500; and, to their honour, the whole was in a short
time discharged.

The Church appears to have decreased in number during the changes that
had taken place, as there are only 41 names given as members when Mr.
Bicknell was settled. In the course of his ministry 56 members were
added. He filled the pastoral office at Welford for about 18 years and 9
months, as he resigned his charge in 1811. In the latter years of his
life Mr. Bicknell was minister at Crick, where he died at an advanced
age, in the year 1849.

In October, 1812, Mr. Benjamin Hobson, of Driffield, Yorkshire, visited
Welford as a probationer, on the recommendation of Mr. Gill, of Market
Harborough. After supplying four Sabbaths, he received a unanimous
invitation from the Church and congregation to the pastoral office,
which he accepted, and entered on his stated labours February 21st,
1813. The number of members in the Church at this time is stated as 43.

Mr. Hobson was born at Sheffield, in the year 1780. In the account given
of his early life, we have another case presented, amongst the thousands
that have been known in the Church of God and in the ministry of the
Gospel, of one who had to trace his early impressions of religion to the
efforts of a pious mother. From early youth he was the "subject of pious
emotions," which he always attributed with grateful and filial affection
to the piety and prayers of his mother. "Her earnest importunity at
family prayer for the salvation of her children," he said, "often
affected me, and I believe was the means of leading me to see the value
of my soul and the necessity of dependence on Jesus Christ." He derived
benefit from some of the last sermons of the Rev. Jehoiada Brewer, and
at length joined the Church under the care of Rev. James Boden. He
commenced his studies for the ministry at Homerton; but during the first
year his health was so affected that he was obliged to return home. This
led to a change in the place where his studies were to be pursued. At
the urgent request of his mother, that he might not be placed so far
from home, in case sickness should return, he obtained admission into
the college at Rotherham in 1802, having for his tutors Dr. Edward
Williams and Mr. Maurice Phillips. He pursued his studies with
commendable diligence, and obtained general esteem by his consistent
piety. His first pastoral charge was at Driffield, in Yorkshire, where
he was ordained on the 8th July, 1806. Here his labours were useful and
his ministry prized; but in the year 1813, influenced in a great degree
by the advice of his friend and relative, Mr. G. Collison, of Hackney,
and Mr. G. Gill, of Market Harborough, he removed to Welford: and here
he continued until within four months of the close of his life, serving
this people as their faithful and affectionate pastor for about
thirty-five years; and he did this with general acceptance and
prevailing usefulness. During his ministry 115 members were added to the
Church. His devoted piety was always manifest. With an earnest concern
to promote the highest welfare of his charge, with an ardent attachment
to the cause of God, with strong desire to advance the kingdom of the
Redeemer, and to be a blessing to those around him, he steadfastly
pursued his labours. He had much of the spirit of devotion--was a man of
prayer, a man of God. His preaching was earnest and affectionate, plain
and faithful. He was the attentive village pastor, that took some
delight in visiting his flock. If his talents were not of a high order,
they were of a useful character. If his mind was not powerful, his
spirit was affectionate and fervent, and his views of evangelical truth
clear and decided. If a sanguine temperament rendered him at times too
susceptible, religious principle triumphed, and Christian prudence
prevailed. He had a large share of domestic happiness, earnestly
seeking the spiritual welfare of his children, their early acquaintance
with God, and decision for the Saviour. He had the happiness of seeing
all of them, in the morning of life, "choosing the good part which shall
not be taken away from them."

He greatly loved the Missionary cause, and endeavoured to promote a
missionary spirit amongst his people. He had one son. That son was
engaged in the medical profession, but he was at length anxious to go as
a medical missionary to China. The father's love to the Missionary cause
was now put to the test; and its sincerity was fully proved. Though for
a time conflicting feelings agitated his mind, and parental affection
prompted him to say, "Anything but _this_," yet in the strength of the
Lord God he was enabled to present this sacrifice with a willing mind,
and could but rejoice that he was counted worthy to be so closely
identified with the Missionary cause. He was Secretary for about ten
years to the Northamptonshire Independent Association, and was generally
held in high esteem by his brethren. The last meeting of this
Association, before Mr. Hobson removed, was held at Welford, when he
resigned his office, and the ministers present testified in a gratifying
manner their esteem and affection.

In the year 1847 his declining health rendered it necessary that there
should be some change in his ministerial duties. An attempt was made to
obtain an assistant; but increasing indisposition, arising from chronic
bronchitis, together with some things appearing which were painful to
his feelings, decided him at length to relinquish the work, and try the
effect of a change of air. He left Welford on the 18th of May, 1848, and
numbers of his people felt and said that not their faithful minister
only, but their father and their friend, they were about to lose.

He went to the island of Guernsey, with the hope that a milder climate
might benefit his health and recruit his strength. But he continued to
decline; and just four months after bidding farewell to his people at
the sacramental table, he was called from the scenes of time to join the
Church triumphant above.

In the closing scene, looking at life in the light of eternity, what he
had been enabled to do in the service of God seemed to be nothing in
comparison with what he had failed to accomplish. His feelings for some
weeks were not only checkered, but very painful. The state of his mind
was dark and distressing, arising, no doubt, from physical weakness, and
the completely relaxed state of the nervous system. But the last week
was one of great mercy. The enemy was not suffered to distress, nor
fears to agitate: his mind was kept "in perfect peace, being stayed on
God." He often spake of Christ as the _rock_. He died on the evening of
the Sabbath, September 3rd. His remains are deposited in the new
cemetery at Saint Peter's Port, Guernsey. The event of his death was
suitably improved there by the Rev. W. Wild, from Phil. iii. 9; and at
Welford by his successor, from Hebrews xi. 4: "He being dead, yet
speaketh."

Mr. Hobson was succeeded in his labours at Welford almost immediately by
Mr. Walter Gill, who had pursued his studies for the ministry at the
seminary at Hackney. He entered on his probationary services in May,
1848, and was ordained in the month of April in the following year. Mr.
Ransom, Mr. Gill's classical tutor, delivered the introductory
discourse; Mr. Toller, of Kettering, offered the ordination prayer; Mr.
Toller, of Harborough, asked the usual questions; Mr. Keynes, of
Blandford, delivered the charge; and Mr. James, of Birmingham, preached
to the people in the evening.

The present number of members in the Church is about 80. There are 130
children in the Sabbath-schools connected with the congregation,
viz.--boys, 72; girls, 58: there are 23 teachers.

There are occasional services conducted on Sabbath evenings in the
village of South Kibworth, where there is a small Chapel held in trust
by some of the Welford friends.




CHAPTER VII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT CREATON.


In the accounts of the Nonconformist ministers who in the year 1662
sacrificed their livings in the Established Church, in obedience to what
they regarded as the claims of truth and of conscience, we find the name
of Mr. Richard Hook, ejected from the rectory of Creaton,
Northamptonshire. After his separation from the Church he preached for
some time in his own house; but he afterwards removed from Creaton, and
went to reside at Northampton. Though we have no certain information as
to the results of Mr. Hook's ministry, yet there is some reason to
conclude that a number of the people left the Church with their pastor,
and sought for spiritual instruction, as they had opportunity, under the
ministry of the Nonconformists. It was probably after the removal of Mr.
Hook from Creaton that Mr. Shuttlewood, another of the Nonconformist
ministers, began to preach the Gospel in this place. At that time his
residence was at Sulby Abbey, near Welford, and his labours appear to
have been then divided chiefly between Welford and Creaton. For a more
particular account of Mr. Shuttlewood, his labours and his sufferings in
the cause of God, we must refer the reader to the memorials of the
Church at Welford. But it was when on a visit to his friends at Creaton
that he was seized with an affliction that quickly terminated his useful
life, and raised his spirit to that "rest that remaineth for the people
of God." Here he ended his days, and here his remains were interred in
the Churchyard, where a plain stone was erected to his memory.

Mr. Ironmonger is said to have been the next Nonconformist minister
here, after Mr. Shuttlewood. In an account of the ordination of Mr.
Tingey, a predecessor of Doddridge at Northampton, we find a Mr. John
Ironmonger, of Buckingham, engaged. We think it probable that this was
the person that for a time ministered at Creaton. A Mr. Dale, minister
at Creaton, was present at the ordination of Mr. Tingey, in 1709. The
pastor immediately succeeding was Mr. Barker; then Mr. Chambers is
recorded as the next minister here, and he died in 1735. After this came
Mr. Hextal, who was a native of Broughton, in Northamptonshire; a member
of the Church at Kettering; for some time studied under Mr. Saunders,
his pastor, preparatory to his admittance into the academy at
Northampton under Dr. Doddridge, which he entered in the year 1732.

On the completion of his studies, it is stated that he settled at
Creaton in 1736; but his ordination did not take place until 1738, for
there is still preserved in the handwriting of Doddridge the testimonial
that was given on the day of ordination, of which the following is a
copy:--

                                      _Creaton_, _April_ 26, 1738.

    This is to certify, that the Rev. Mr. Wm. Hextal, having given full
    satisfaction as to his abilities and qualifications for the work of
    the ministry, was this day set apart to the pastoral office by
    prayer, fasting, and the imposition of our hands, at the desire of
    the Church of Christ in this place, who unanimously invited him to
    the exercise of the said office amongst them.

    Witness our hands--P. DODDRIDGE, D.D.; JAS. WATSON, Leicester; THOS.
    CARTWRIGHT; J. DRAKE, Yardley; J. HUNT, Newport; SAML. TAILOR.

We find a list of members of the Church, containing forty-seven names of
persons that were communicants at the time of Mr. Hextal's settlement;
then follow the names of twenty-one members, over which the pastor has
written, "Taken in since I came." These members were resident in ten
different villages.

In the handwriting of Mr. Hextal we find a copy of the following
recommendation. Though it is without date or any full direction, yet it
appears to have been an application to the manager of some fund for
assistance.

    The congregation at Creaton, lately under the care of Mr. Chambers,
    have unanimously made choice of Mr. Hextal to succeed him, after
    finishing a regular course of academical learning at Northampton
    acceptably, and where his temper and conduct secured him very
    respectful regard from the people. As his abilities, principles, and
    character are very satisfactory to us, and, according to our view of
    things, worthy of the esteem of others, we take the liberty to
    recommend him to your favour and encouragement, as one that promises
    usefulness, and we think, by the divine blessing, may be
    instrumental in supporting the interests of Christianity in that
    society. Your favourable view of this our recommendation will lay an
    additional obligation on ------.

    _To the Rev. the Ministers, and the other Gentlemen, Managers, &c._

It was a short time after the settlement of Mr. Hextal, that a
minister's meeting being held at Creaton, Dr. Doddridge preached his
interesting sermon, entitled 'Christian Candour and Unanimity stated,
illustrated, and urged,' from Phil. ii. 1, 2, which was afterwards
published, with a Dedication to the Countess of Huntingdon. The ministry
of Mr. Hextal at Creaton continued until the year 1752, when he removed
to Sudbury.

The next pastor was Mr. Warburton. For some time he assisted Mr.
Gilbert, the successor of Doddridge at Northampton, and preached at
Creaton in the afternoon of the Sabbath. Mr. Gilbert dying in 1760, Mr.
Warburton confined his labours to Creaton, where he was minister for
about twenty years. After his removal, Mr. John Wood, from Sudbury, was
unanimously chosen his successor the same year. Mr. Wood was a native of
Welford, sent out by the Church there, during the ministry of Mr. King,
to preach the Gospel: he was educated at the academy at Daventry. He
laboured here for about twenty years, and closed his life and his
services in the Church on earth in this place. He died April 7th, 1790,
"leaving the Church," it is observed, "in a declining state."

The next pastor was Mr. Joseph Whitehead, who came to Creaton in 1793,
and continued his labours here for twenty-three years. When Mr.
Whitehead entered on his ministry here there were twenty-two members of
the Church, and seventy-one were added during the years of his
pastorate. In the second year of Mr. Whitehead's labours the present
Meeting House was erected. The old building, which held about 400
persons, was occupied on a lease of ninety-nine years, supposed to have
commenced about the date of 1694, as it was at the expiration of that
lease that the new place of worship was reared.

The fidelity and zeal with which Mr. Whitehead discharged his
ministerial office was crowned with such success as greatly to increase
the Church and congregation. The medical assistance which he was always
ready to afford to those who needed it, rendered him extensively useful
to the afflicted poor in his neighbourhood. His candid and friendly
disposition endeared him to his brethren in the ministry. His exemplary
patience, under painful bodily affliction, displayed the excellence of
his Christian principles. As he advanced in life, he evidently appeared
to grow in grace; acting habitually under the eye of his Master, he was
prepared for his change. "Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he
cometh shall find so doing." He died at the house of his friend, the
Rev. H. Knight, of Yelvertoft, after a few hours' illness. His remains
were interred, with every token of respect, at the foot of the pulpit
where he so often urged upon his people the great doctrines and precepts
of the Gospel. Six of his brethren bore the pall. The Rev. Mr. Jones,
minister of the parish Church, attended, as a token of his high esteem
for the deceased. The Rev. G. Gill, of Harborough, began the funeral
service with prayer; the Rev. B. L. Edwards, of Northampton, delivered a
very affecting and appropriate address; the Rev. J. Gronow, of Weedon,
concluded the solemn service. A large congregation of people assembled
on the occasion, whose undissembled grief showed how much he was
beloved. On the following Lord's-day the Rev. H. Knight, in whose house
he died, improved the affecting providence, from Heb. xiii. 7-9. The
place of worship was thronged before the service commenced, and many
hundreds could not gain admittance.

Mr. T. Aston succeeded Mr. Whitehead. He had pursued his studies for the
ministry at Hackney, and was ordained over this Church and congregation
September 23rd, 1817. On that occasion Mr. Hobson, of Welford, commenced
the service with reading and prayer; Mr. Gill, of Harborough, stated the
nature of a Gospel Church; Mr. Knight, of Yelvertoft, offered the
ordination prayer; Mr. D. W. Aston, of Buckingham, brother to the
ordained minister, delivered the charge, from Col. iv. 17; Mr. Toller,
of Kettering, preached from Luke x. 11; Mr. Griffiths, of Long Buckby,
concluded.

Mr. Aston admitted thirty-two members to the Church during his ministry,
which continued until about the year 1826, when Mr. Williams became the
pastor of the Church, who gives the following account of his ordination
to that office:--

    Having received a unanimous invitation from the Church and
    congregation at Creaton to become their pastor, I was ordained
    October 7th, 1828. Mr. Edwards, of Northampton, delivered the
    introductory discourse; Mr. Griffiths, of Long Buckby, offered the
    ordination prayer; Mr. Scott, of Rowell, gave the charge; and Mr.
    Hobson, of Welford, preached to the people. Mr. Aston left Creaton
    about two years before. The first year of the interval was supplied
    by Mr. Robertson, afterwards of Wellingborough; and the second, by
    an interesting young man of the name of Jocelyne, who was on
    probation, and had received a call from the Church to remain, but
    was prevented entering on the pastoral office by death. He ruptured
    a blood-vessel by digging one day in the garden; went to the west of
    England for the benefit of his health; but was soon called, as we
    hope, to the country where none of the inhabitants shall say any
    more, I am sick. J. WILLIAMS.

We find a record of forty-seven members as belonging to the Church when
Mr. Williams commenced his labours, and fifty-one were admitted during
his ministry, which continued until March, 1840. Of the removal of Mr.
Williams it is stated, "that it was owing to the secession of some
individuals from the Church and congregation, who, being Baptists,
succeeded in raising a Baptist interest in Spratton, about a mile from
Creaton. Mr. Williams very handsomely left 150 volumes for the use of
his successors."

Mr. Martin succeeded Mr. Williams as pastor. His first visit was in May,
1840, when he preached two Sabbaths. Mr. Fletcher, from Highbury,
preached five Sabbaths as a probationer, but retired on discovering that
the congregation was not unanimous. Mr. Martin preached four Sabbaths in
August and September, when he received an invitation to become a
probationer for three months, at the close of which he was unanimously
called to the pastoral office, and was ordained April 28th, 1841; when
Messrs. Bull, of Newport, Prust, of Northampton, Griffiths, of Buckby,
Harry, of London, and Toller, of Kettering, were engaged in the
principal services of the day. The ministry of Mr. Martin continued here
for little more than seven years; for it is recorded that he preached
his farewell sermon at Creaton on Sabbath-day afternoon, May 21st, 1848,
having accepted an invitation to the pastorate of Whitefield Chapel,
Wilson Street, Long Acre, London. During his ministry forty-five members
were added to the Church.

Mr. Mandeno, from Newport, Salop, the present pastor of the Church,
entered on his stated engagements at Creaton on the first Sabbath in
October, 1848. The present number of communicants is 60. There are 80
children in the Sabbath-school.

Occasional services are conducted in two villages in the vicinity of
Creaton.




CHAPTER VIII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT DAVENTRY.


Circumstances of rather common and incidental occurrence are sometimes
the immediate precursors of events which are followed by important
results to future generations, while they may have a bearing on the
eternal interests of a number of undying spirits. Something of this
nature appears in the origin of the Christian Church, of the Independent
denomination, in the town of Daventry.

Nonconformity took early root in this place. After the Bartholomew Act,
secret meetings for worship were frequently held late at night, and
conducted occasionally by ministers, at a house in the hamlet of
Drayton, where considerable numbers from the town and neighbourhood
often assembled, in which was a backdoor opening into the fields, to
facilitate retreat in case of detection--no unnecessary precaution, in
those days of persecution. A Mr. Worth, ejected from the living of
Kilsby, preached at Daventry for some time after his ejectment.

The following account was given to Dr. Ashworth, about the year 1747, by
Mr. Thomas Porter, a member of the Church, then 80 years of age, or
upwards--a man of a very respectable character and remarkably sensible.

    An aged minister, who lived some considerable distance beyond
    Daventry, in his way to London lay at the Swan Inn (formerly the
    principal inn) in this town, where he was taken ill, and confined
    for a week or longer. Mr. Lindsey, who kept the house, and all his
    family, behaved to him with much kindness, and it appears to have
    been a very regular house. The minister, on the evening before he
    departed, desired the family to come into his room, when he
    particularly thanked Mr. Lindsey and each of his family for their
    civility to him, and expressed much satisfaction in the good order
    of the house; "but," said he, "something leads me to fear there is
    not the fear of God in this house. It grieves me to see such
    honesty, civility, economy, and decency, and yet religion is
    wanting, which is 'the one thing needful.'" On this, he entered into
    a close conversation on the nature and importance of real and inward
    religion, which he closed with telling them he had with him a little
    book, lately printed, which he would give them, and wished them to
    read it carefully; then gave them 'Baxter's Poor Man's Family Book.'
    This fixes the date to 1672, or later--the year in which that book
    was printed.

    It is not certain who the minister was, or that Mr. Lindsey ever saw
    him again or knew his name; but it is suspected that it was Baxter
    himself. Mr. Lindsey read the book with pleasure, sent for other of
    Mr. Baxter's works, and he, and some of his children, became
    excellent characters.

    Upon this he grew weary of the inn, and, being in plentiful
    circumstances, retired to a house in the middle of High Street,
    which had a small close behind it, at the extremity of which, upon
    the Back Lane, there stood some out-buildings, which he converted
    into a Meeting House. The people enjoyed it during his life, having
    now got a settled minister, and formed into a Church. This was
    probably after the Revolution. He always intended, and often
    promised, to settle it in form; but dying suddenly, it never was
    done. The heir-at-law was well inclined to it, but melancholy, so
    that the people dare not trust to a settlement from him. At length
    they purchased it of those in whom it was vested, repaired it, and
    continued to use it until 1722, when Mr. Mattock, then the minister
    at Daventry, built the present place, the old one being by this time
    much too small.

"The original license granted to Mr. Lindsey, or, as he is there called,
Linzey, in pursuance of the royal Declaration of Indulgence, with the
signatures of the King and Lord Arlington, the Secretary of State," says
the late George Baker, Esq., in his 'History of the County of
Northampton,' "is now in my possession; and being the only document of
the kind known to be extant in this country, a copy of it is subjoined."

    CHARLES R.

    Charles, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
    Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c., to all the mayors, bailiffs,
    constables, and others our officers and ministers civil and
    military, whom it may concern, greeting.

    In pursuance of our Declaration of the 15th of March 167-1/2, we
    have allowed, and we do hereby allow, of a roome or roomes in the
    house of Allen Linzey, of Daventry in Northamptonshire, to be a
    place for the use of such as do not conform to the Church of
    England, who are of the persuasion commonly called Presbyterian, to
    meet and assemble in order to their public worship and devotion. And
    all and singular our officers and ministers, ecclesiastical, civil,
    and military, whom it may concern, are to take due notice hereof;
    and they, and every one of them, are hereby strictly charged and
    required to hinder any tumult or disturbance, and to protect them in
    their said meetings and assemblies.

    Given at our Court, at Whitehall, the 8th day of November, in the
    24th year, of our reign, 1672.

                                     By his Majesty's command,

                                                        ARLINGTON.


This society ranks with the Independent or Congregational, and not the
Presbyterian denomination, as named in this license.

At what time a settled ministry was first enjoyed here is not exactly
known; but the first pastor of the Church was Mr. Andrew Barnett, born
at Uppington, in Shropshire, the youngest of ten children. His father,
Mr. Humfrey Barnett, appears to have been celebrated as a preacher, and
as a man of devoted consistent character. People in the country around
would flock to hear him twice on the Lord's-day, which was a very
unusual thing in those times. He refused to read the 'Book of Sports,'
and preached against it; but was cited by the Bishop, and obliged to
retire out of that diocese. He was accounted one of the first Puritans
in Shropshire, principally on account of his serious preaching and his
devoted life. This son, who became pastor of the Church at Daventry, was
educated at Trinity College, Cambridge--was ejected from the rectory of
Roddington, in Shropshire, in 1662. He did not suffer so much for his
Nonconformity as many of his brethren; having some knowledge of
medicine, his skill in diseases obtained him favour among the
neighbouring gentry. But on one occasion, being invited privately to
preach on the Lord's-day, a neighbouring justice came in while he was
praying, and fined him for preaching. Mr. Barnett appealed to the
quarter sessions, and pleaded that he had not preached, for he was only
engaged in prayer; but his plea was overruled, for the King's Attorney
declared that the defendant's praying was preaching; so that on this
judgment he was cast, and his fine doubled. He had to pay L40. He was a
man of considerable solidity of judgment, a useful preacher, and highly
valued by those who best knew him. He published a funeral sermon for
Queen Mary, from Psalm ii. 3, 4, dated Daventry, May 21, 1694; and
entitled, 'The Helmet of Hope, Christ in us the hope of glory.'

Thomas Flavell, the eldest son of John Flavell, the eminent
Nonconformist divine, was the next pastor; but of his life and ministry
we have no account.

John Mason appears to have succeeded Mr. Flavell for a short time. The
father of Mr. Mason was rector of Water Stratford, in Buckinghamshire,
where he died in 1724, having ministered there for 20 years. He was the
author of the 'Select Remains' which form the golden little volume that
Dr. Watts so highly recommended to the public. Mr. Mason did not remain
at Daventry more than a year or two, when he removed to Spaldwich, in
Huntingdonshire, where he died. He was the father of John Mason, author
of the well-known treatise on 'Self-knowledge,' who was first minister
at Dorking, in Surrey, and subsequently at Cheshunt, in Hertfordshire,
where he preached to a considerable congregation. His diligence was
attested by his labours as a pastor, tutor, and author. Several of his
works are of a very useful character, though not rising to the highest
order of excellence.

Mr. John Cambden was the next pastor. His ministry was only for a short
time; but whether he died here, or removed, is not known. He published a
'Funeral Sermon upon the Death of Madam Mary Thornton, the pious relict
of the late truly virtuous and honourable John Thornton, Esq., of Brock
Hall, in Northamptonshire, who departed this life June 19, 1713.
Preached at Daventry; with some account of her life.'

Mr. Jolly, their next minister, continued with them a rather longer
time; but before the year 1720, he gave place to a successor in Mr.
Daniel Mattock, who ministered for about 14 years. His preaching appears
to have been so attractive and successful that it considerably raised
the interest, and rendered it necessary to erect a larger Meeting House,
which was done in the year 1722, and is the building which is now
standing. In a letter of Dr. Doddridge's, dated December 22, 1726, he
says--"Mr. Mattock goes on most triumphantly at Daventry, and makes the
most illustrious figure of all Mr. Jenning's pupils in these parts." Mr.
Mattock exerted himself to preach the Gospel in the neighbouring
villages, as well as to the stated congregation at Daventry.

There are two anecdotes related in reference to these village services,
which illustrate the spirit in which they were regarded by different
clergymen in the vicinity.

While Mr. Mattock was minister of Daventry, having several persons
belonging to his congregation who came from villages in the vicinity,
and being desirous of extending the knowledge of the Gospel as far as
his time and strength would admit, he proposed to some of his country
friends to get their houses registered for places of religious worship.
This being done, Mr. Mattock went on a Lord's-day evening, for the first
time, to one of the villages, and preached a lecture. The clergyman of
the parish, hearing of this "rude intrusion," as he termed it, felt much
exasperated, and determined to go and remonstrate against it. As he was
going to the house where the service was held, he met, much to his
annoyance, several of his parishioners coming from the lecture. In the
height of his resentment he addressed first one, and then another,
"What, have you been to the conventicle?" "What! have you been to hear
the fanatic?" "Are you not ashamed of your conduct?" &c. Soon, however,
he arrived at the house; and Mr. Mattock, being apprized of his coming,
very politely accosted him, and offered him his chair, begging him to be
seated--which genteel request he, with apparent reluctance, condescended
to comply with. Being seated, the Rector begins by saying, "So, I find
that you have been preaching here." "Yes, sir." "And pray, sir, what
right have you to come into my parish, to invade my province? This
parish is _mine_, and I am their _lawful_ pastor. I wish therefore to
know, by what authority you take this liberty." "Sir," replied Mr.
Mattock, "I beg leave to inform you, if you do not already know, that I
am qualified according to law as a Dissenting minister, and am therefore
authorized to do as I have done." "Aye! who authorized you, sir, to
invade my province?" "The legislature, sir, by the Act of Toleration. I
do nothing by preaching here, but what is strictly legal." "Well, it is
strange to me that the legislature should allow you this liberty." "I
hope, sir," said Mr. Mattock, "that you do not find fault with the
legislature of your country." "No, no, God forbid that I should; but I
still wonder that it should grant you such an indulgence. But, sir, I
have another question to ask you; pray what is your object in coming
here? what do you propose to yourself in doing it?" "Sir, my only motive
is the hope of doing good to my fellow creatures." "Good!" replied the
Rector, with a contemptuous sneer: "I don't know what good _you_ can
expect to do, for _I_ can do no good upon them. They are a parcel of
fools. I can make _a fool_ of the wisest of them, in a quarter of an
hour." "Sir," says Mr. Mattock, "you give your neighbours a very bad
character; but however, if they are bad as you represent them, they have
the more need of instruction, that they may be convinced of their folly,
and be made wise unto salvation; and if it pleases God to bless the
instructions of his word, it will be so, and my desire will be
accomplished." To this he made no reply, but casting his eyes round the
house, says, "but can you imagine that God Almighty will condescend to
notice any worship which is performed in such a place as this? Solomon
thought that he could not make the holy Temple, which he dedicated to
the worship of the Deity, fine enough for the purpose; therefore to
suppose such condescension as you seem to expect in the Deity is to
affront him." Mr. Mattock replied, "Sir, we know no holiness of places
in Gospel times, but all places are alike holy where 'God is worshipped
in spirit and in truth'; and we have every reason to hope for and expect
the presence and blessing of Christ, who has said, 'Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.'"
"But," asks the clergyman, "is this place secured for this purpose by
law?" "Yes, sir, it is registered in the Bishop's court." "And do you
intend to make a practice of coming here?" "I shall come, sir, when it
is convenient to myself, and as long as the people give me encouragement
by their attendance to do so."

Upon this the Rector rose hastily and departed; but he sent his clerk
the next morning to inquire of Mr. Mattock three things--

1. Whether he was qualified as a Dissenting minister to preach?

2. Whether the place he occupied as a place of worship was legally
secured?

3. Whether he intended to continue coming there?

To this Mr. Mattock replied, "I answered these three questions in the
affirmative last night; but if your master was not satisfied, why did he
not come himself, or send for me?" The honest clerk said "that his
master could not do either, because _he was going out with the hounds_."
Admirable apology!

But there was another instance, which presented a pleasing contrast to
this. Mr. Mattock, having preached in another village on the Lord's-day
evening, was returning home the next morning, and the clergyman of the
parish, having been to take a short ride, met Mr. Mattock; so, after the
usual compliments were exchanged, the clergyman said, "So I perceive,
sir, that you have been sowing some seed in my parish." "Yes, sir."
"Well," replied the worthy Vicar, "I am glad of it; and may God grant
that the seed which you sow, and that which I sow, may both spring up
together, and do good to the souls of men."

At length, to the deep regret of the congregation, Mr. Mattock accepted
an invitation to remove to Birmingham. This we suppose to have taken
place about 1734.

In some extracts from the diary of Mrs. Savage, daughter of Philip
Henry, we find the following notices of Mr. Mattock. Under date of
December 8th, 1740:--"This morning good Mr. Mattock, of Birmingham,
entertained us awhile with his good company. He said, my father was in
many things like Abraham, which made me look over a small collection I
made long ago from annotations on John 9th, that they that would prove
themselves the children of Abraham must endeavour to follow his example,
come at God's call, follow wherever he leads, and resign their dearest
interests; be strangers and sojourners in the world; keep up the worship
of God in their families; and above all, must always walk before God in
uprightness."

Again:--"_March 12th, 1744_ (_Monday_).--Sad tidings of the sudden
illness and death of good Mr. Mattock, minister of the Old Meeting at
Birmingham. A very useful person. Such good ministers the world can ill
spare. A stroke of the palsy. Lord, what is man--the wisest, the best,
the most healthful? What shall we say? what shall we do? Thou hast the
ordering of all events. 'The righteous perish; we should lay it to
heart.' It is affecting to see such taken away, and such left--poor
worthless creatures as I yet left."

During two years, the congregation at Daventry was supplied by
neighbouring ministers and probationary candidates.

The next pastor, Mr. James Floyd, was ordained May 6th, 1736. About ten
years after this, at Midsummer, 1746, Mr., afterwards Dr., Caleb
Ashworth was chosen his assistant, and in September of the same year
co-pastor. In a few years after, Mr. Floyd wholly resigned in favour of
his colleague; but continued to reside in the town till his death, which
took place July 24th, 1759, in his 55th year. His successor preached his
funeral sermon, and at the desire of the family and congregation
published it, under the title of 'Hope, the Christian mourner's relief.'

Dr. Ashworth was born in Lancashire in 1719, educated for the ministry
at Northampton under Dr. Doddridge, who recommended him in his will for
his successor in the following terms:--"And I do hereby declare, that
so far as I can judge no man living will be more fit for the office,
since the removal of my dear friend and associate, Mr. Job Orton, than
the Rev. Mr. Caleb Ashworth, of Daventry; and if it should so happen, as
I think it very probably may, that the congregation should desire to put
themselves under his ministerial care, I do hereby make my dying request
to him that he would accept the united charge, and thereby perpetuate
those schemes which he knows I am forming for the public service, the
success of which is far dearer to me than my own life." Coward's
trustees approved of the nomination, and Mr. Ashworth refusing to quit
his pastoral charge at Daventry, the academy was removed thither in
1752. He was presented with an unsolicited diploma of D.D. from a Scotch
University in 1759.

On the 18th of July, 1775, he died of dropsy in the chest, and was
buried in the Churchyard, where an altar stone is placed to his memory,
on which is the following inscription:--

                     Here rest in hope,
          the remains of the Rev. CALEB ASHWORTH, D.D.;
        pastor of a congregation of Protestant Dissenters,
            and director of the academy in this town.
                          He died
                    July 18, 1775, aged 54.
                With indefatigable application,
                with genuine well-regulated zeal,
            and with growing reputation and success,
                he exerted his eminent abilities
  and extensive acquaintance with sacred and human literature
              in the service of his great Master,
            and in promoting the important interests
              of learning, religion, and charity.

           "Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when
                he cometh shall find so doing."

Mr. Samuel Palmer, who had been a pupil of the Doctor's, published 'The
Want of Labourers in the Gospel Harvest considered and improved'--a
sermon preached at Hackney on occasion of the death of Dr. Ashworth.
Several others, in different publications, have eulogized their tutor in
the highest terms; one of them, in a memoir of a fellow student,
observes--"Dr. Ashworth was a man who, though not distinguished by that
acumen of genius and vigour of imagination which some have possessed,
yet by strong sense, inflexible resolution, and indefatigable labour,
acquired a store of theological learning not often exceeded, and through
a long train of years discharged the office of divinity tutor with a
respectability and success which have seldom been equalled."

Some of the Doctor's students becoming Unitarians, suspicion has been
expressed as to the evangelical soundness of the views entertained by
the tutor; but the evil appears to have been, that there was a sub-tutor
who took the heretical side on disputed points, while the principal
tutor, with all his love for truth, indulged his candour and kindness to
excess. Dr. Priestley says "that Dr. Ashworth took the orthodox side of
every question," and "that Dr. Ashworth was earnestly desirous to make
me as orthodox as possible."

The Doctor was author of 'Reflections on the Fall of a Great Man--a
Funeral Sermon on 2nd Sam. iii. 38, on the Death of Dr. Watts, 1749'; a
funeral sermon for Mr. Floyd; also, a funeral sermon for Mr. Clark, of
Birmingham, entitled 'The Regard Christian Congregations owe to their
Deceased Ministers represented and urged, from Heb. xiii. 7'; 'A
Collection of Psalm Tunes, with an Introduction to the Art of Singing;'
also, 'A Hebrew Grammar, with complete Paradigms of the Verbs'; 'An Easy
Introduction to Plane Trigonometry,' &c.

Mr. Robins was the next pastor and tutor. After the death of Dr.
Ashworth, it became a matter of great anxiety amongst the friends of the
academy who should be appointed his successor. There was one to whom
many eyes were turned; but great fears were entertained, lest the
extreme diffidence and modesty of his spirit should prevent him from
acceding to the earnest requests that were presented to him. This was
the Rev. Thomas Robins, who was at this time minister at West Bromwich,
in Staffordshire. He was born at Keysoe, near Bedford; studied for the
ministry under Dr. Doddridge, at Northampton; first settled at Stretton,
in Warwickshire, 1755. The present minister's house at Stretton was
built for him. He came to West Bromwich in 1761, where he continued
until his removal to Daventry, in 1775.

At this period Job Orton wrote--"The death of Dr. Ashworth, though it
has been long expected, has been a very painful event to me. Mr. Robins
preached his funeral sermon last Lord's-day to a great auditory, from
these words: 'Where is the Lord God of Elijah?' Coward's trustees, all
the neighbouring ministers, and many in this and other neighbourhoods,
think that no person is more proper to fill up this vacancy than Mr.
Robins, especially as he is exceedingly acceptable to the congregation
at Daventry. He hath been strongly urged to take up the prophet's
mantle, but he has an unconquerable diffidence of his own abilities; I
wish the many applications he hath received from ministers of all
sentiments and denominations may overcome it. If he absolutely refuse, I
know not who will be thought of. I pray God to direct in this very
important concern." In another letter he writes--"You have heard by this
time, August 31st, 1775, that Mr. Robins has accepted the invitation to
Daventry. I had a great deal of trouble in writing to him, and engaging
all my friends and correspondents to apply to him, who all concurred in
thinking him the most proper person. I do not know a single objection,
and I cannot hear of anyone else that makes one. The divines and the
laity, of all principles and persuasions in these parts, are agreed in
their opinion of him, and everybody is well pleased that he has accepted
the office. I look back with pleasure and thankfulness on the pains I
have taken in this affair, and firmly believe I shall never have reason
to repent it."

Mr. Robins printed 'An Abridgement of Matthew Henry's Work on the Lord's
Supper,' which was the only work he could be prevailed on to print,
excepting some memoirs of Mr. Thomas Strange, of Kilsby, "one of the
wisest and best of men." Mr. Palmer, of Hackney, says, "This was done on
my earnest solicitation; and those who are the best judges on such a
subject, and who best knew Mr. Strange, will concur with me in
pronouncing this so excellent a performance, as to render it a matter of
deep regret that the same pen should have been employed in no other
original composition."

Robert Hall has written, in his 'Memoir of the Rev. T. N. Toller'--

    Among many other mental endowments, Mr. Robins was remarkable for
    delicacy of taste and elegance of diction; and perhaps my readers
    will excuse my observing, that the first perceptions of these
    qualities which the writer of these lines remembers to have
    possessed, arose from hearing him preach at Northampton, on a
    public occasion. It is to be lamented that he has left none of those
    productions behind him, which a correct and beautiful imagination,
    embodied in language of the most classic purity, rendered so
    impressive and delightful. The qualities of his heart corresponded
    to those of his genius; and though long before his death his bodily
    infirmities obliged him to relinquish a commanding station and
    retire into obscurity, he retained to the last such an ascendancy
    over the minds of his former pupils, and such an interest in their
    affections, as nothing but worth of the highest order can command.

We may here correct an error into which Mr. Hall has fallen, in stating
that Mr. Robins _was first assistant_ to Dr. Ashworth. He did not come
to reside at Daventry until the death of Dr. Ashworth, as his successor.
But while the friends of Mr. Robins were delighting themselves in his
ability and success, lo! in the midst of his days and his usefulness, he
is compelled to resign all public services and retire into private life.
After discharging his offices with increasing reputation and success for
six years, his ministerial usefulness was suddenly destroyed, by
imprudently preaching three times to a large congregation at Kettering
one Sabbath whilst labouring under a severe cold, by which exertion he
irrecoverably lost his voice; and being thus incapacitated for
fulfilling the duties of the pulpit or the lecture-room, he relinquished
his public engagements, and with great humility and contentment passed
the remainder of his life in the secular employment of a bookseller and
druggist. He died May 20th, 1810, and was buried in the Churchyard,
where, on an upright stone, is inscribed a high eulogium, from the pen
of his pupil and successor.

The Rev. T. N. Toller, of Kettering, who studied in the academy at
Daventry, and spent the last year of his course under Mr. Robins,
improved the death of his former tutor in a discourse delivered to his
own people the next Sabbath morning, from 2 Kings ii. 12: "And Elisha
saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel and
the horsemen thereof! And he saw him no more."

It is a high gratification to the writer, and he trusts it will prove
such to the reader, that he has the opportunity of enriching these
'Memorials' with Mr. Toller's description of the character of Mr.
Robins, as given in the closing part of this sermon, having transcribed
it from the author's manuscript,[4] never before published.


[4] The manuscript was kindly lent to the author for this purpose by the
family of the late Mr. Toller.


    I have been this last week to assist in depositing in the dust one
    of the most amiable and excellent of men. There was not one friend
    present, I believe, but felt the weight of his worth, when his
    remains were let down into the silent grave, not excepting the
    clergyman who buried him--who, in a room full of Dissenting
    ministers, bore the most explicit and honourable testimony to his
    name. But there was a sense in which the person who now addresses
    you might, perhaps, with more propriety than any individual there,
    adopt and apply the peculiar language of the distressed prophet, "My
    father, my father!" I felt, when I stood by his grave, that I had
    lost a father--that I was interring a father; for I always looked up
    to him, and venerated and loved him, as a parent; for truly he had
    been a father to me. I was his senior student: the last and most
    important year of my academical course I spent under his roof and
    tuition: he taught and treated me as a son. It was owing to his
    advice, under God, that I am this day standing in this pulpit; his
    decided opinion had more weight with me than that of everybody else.
    I did always implicitly confide in his judgment. I was sure of his
    prudence; could entirely trust his fidelity. On a hundred occasions
    have I experienced his tenderness and his kindness, and, blessed be
    God! never did I receive in all my intercourse a frown from him;
    while a hint, by way of reproof, from him, would have had more
    weight and gone further into my heart than a hundred stripes from
    another hand. And during all the thirty-four years which have
    elapsed since I left his roof, I have always secretly considered him
    as my principal, standing, stable friend, to whose judgment and
    kindness I could with most confidence look under any particular
    difficulty, exigency, or perplexity; so that you may suppose, under
    these circumstances, in connexion with the thought of having buried
    the greater part of the friends of my youth--you must suppose that,
    in attending such a funeral, I must have felt very peculiar
    sensations; that I was burying a friend indeed: I will not say the
    nearest and dearest by the ties of nature, for that is not true; but
    my most valuable, confidential, intellectual, religious, particular
    friend.

    But not only were these sentiments excited by my own personal
    feeling; they were strengthened by the unanimous testimony of all
    who had any thorough intimacy with him--any comprehensive knowledge
    of his qualifications and character. I believe, never did any man go
    down to the grave followed by more genuine sentiments of respect
    from those that knew him, and were capable of appreciating his real
    worth.

    There have been more brilliant, shining, striking, nay, useful
    characters than he (for during the last thirty years of his life
    Providence mysteriously laid him aside from a sphere of usefulness
    for which he was peculiarly adapted, and in which he gave universal
    satisfaction); but taking him altogether, considered as a whole, he
    was the most consistent, accurate character I ever knew in my life.

    As a man, as a friend, a literary character, a person of general
    knowledge, an amiable, honourable, upright, uniform, devotional
    Christian, I never knew his equal. I can truly say, with an eminent
    London minister, "his was the completest character I ever knew."
    Nor, in this sense, do I think he has left his equal behind him;
    there was such a coincidence, such a collection, such an assemblage
    of excellences, which were always very striking to his friends.
    Some people have great excellences of one kind, and great
    corresponding faults of another; but there was such a balance of
    qualities of everything in him, as I have often been charmed with
    and admired. Oh, that I could say more! And many and many a time
    have I left his company with this reflection: "Surely this is the
    disciple that Jesus loves; for where can I look round and find a man
    in so many respects so much like himself?" And that mixture of
    reverence and love which I have always experienced in his company
    has put me in mind of what I could not but suppose I must feel, only
    in a far greater degree, if I were admitted into the presence and to
    the conversation of the blessed Redeemer.

    His fine sense, clearness of understanding, skill and dexterity in
    stating a subject or conducting an argument; the extent of his
    knowledge upon most subjects that could be called important or
    useful ones; and all this connected with the sweetness of his
    temper, the humility of his manner and deportment, the liveliness
    and affability of his address, what I may call the ingenuity as well
    as Christianity of his character;--for I have often heard it
    remarked, and often observed it myself, that were an absent person
    censured or slandered, if there was anything to be said in his
    favour Mr. Robins would find out what was to be said, and would make
    you see that it was not a blind and suppositious notion that
    dictated it, but that there was reason in what he said.
    Nevertheless, he could be angry at sin, and yet sin not. He could
    reprove folly with a frown that a man must _be all a fool_ if he did
    not feel. It has been said, that some of his more distant relations,
    that were rather wild in their conduct, though they could not but
    love him, were more afraid of him than of any other man upon earth:
    such is the force of the frown of goodness. I this week heard a
    person say, that a frown from him would have gone deeper than from
    any man in the world.

    Realizing, my friends, such traits as these, which I am sure nobody
    that knew him could or would contradict, in connexion with the
    richness and fulness of his piety, the evangelical and scriptural
    consistency of his sentiments, the depth of his love to the Saviour,
    his deep conviction of the truth of the Gospel and dependence upon
    it (for he died as a poor sinner, wholly resting there; and again,
    and again, and again said, What a poor miserable creature I should
    be without the Gospel!)--if he had been literally the very chief of
    sinners, he could not have seemed to depend less upon anything he
    was or had done in a meritorious sense; he would not even bear to
    hear any hints about his former qualifications as a minister, or his
    honourable conduct as a Christian, which all that knew him, knew his
    great Master would include under the final "Well done, good and
    faithful servant," and place among the "works of faith and labours
    of love," and never forget them:--if, I say, you realize all this,
    in connexion with his respectability, integrity, and punctuality as
    a tradesman since he became one, and his universal influence and
    weight in the town where he resided (a situation by no means
    advantageous to him in this respect as a Dissenter), can you wonder
    that one is charmed with such a character? Would it have been right
    that I should have passed it by in silent contemplation for my own
    edification only?

    When he was capable of exercising his ministerial function, there
    was a peculiar sweetness and gracefulness in his attitude and
    delivery in the pulpit; great seriousness of air and manner, and a
    wonderful copiousness and variety and readiness, in his prayers; a
    vein of the most humble yet elevated piety running through the
    whole--an evangelical savour, clothed always with the utmost
    propriety and sometimes unaffected elegance of expression. Since he
    was laid aside from pulpit labours, if we could prevail upon him to
    pray at our ministers' meetings in private, it was the richest feast
    of the day; and in connexion with his disabled circumstances as to
    public work, he would sometimes dissolve all into tears. I remember,
    at the close of these occasions, a very respectable minister, with
    his eyes bathed in tears, whispered to me, "This man prays like an
    angel."

    In his sermons, which were well finished compositions of their kind,
    there was this peculiarity--that they were highly acceptable and
    edifying to all descriptions of serious sensible people, among the
    poor and the rich, the learned and the unlearned--poor people that
    had good sense as well as piety, and learned people that had piety
    as well as good sense: all, in a word, who had good sense to
    understand him, and piety to relish what he said, used to love to
    hear Mr. Robins. The last time he ever preached within these walls
    (on which occasion he attempted to exert himself more than usual,
    owing to the largeness of the place compared with his own), he
    appears to have got his bane. He strained the organs of speech so as
    to bring on the disease that laid him aside. He preached on that
    passage, "The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth
    more and more unto the perfect day." I have often thought since, as
    redounding to the credit of this congregation, of the universal
    satisfaction which that sermon gave to all descriptions of
    well-disposed hearers--the plainest and most illiterate Christian,
    as well as those best informed. The case was this: though he was one
    of the finest of composers, yet he spake from the heart; and what he
    said went to the heart.

    Since he was laid aside, though his usefulness was greatly
    curtailed, yet he was far from being useless. Modesty prevented his
    ever publishing any of his own compositions; yet as a friend, as an
    adviser, as a companion, he has been eminently useful. A respectable
    minister at his funeral said, "he never, with one exception only,
    gained so much instruction from any man in private conversation as
    from Mr. Robins."

    Though laid aside from the service of the sanctuary, he lived
    respected and beloved to his seventy-seventh year; and when attended
    to his grave, not only was he accompanied by a number of as sincere
    mourners as ever followed a corpse, but the nearest earthly relation
    he had, and whom he had patronized from infancy, was utterly
    incapable of joining the train--sat weeping over her Bible, and
    almost stupified with grief, saying, "he was all the world to her:
    and him she had lost." Here is the cutting thought suggested in the
    text, that went nearer to the surviving prophet than any other--"his
    master was taken from his head," "and he saw him no more." This
    thought I felt when I stood close by his grave: "I shall see him no
    more. Here I take my final leave. I have received my last
    instruction. I shall hear his voice and behold his countenance no
    more." But while I was weeping over this clause, those words in the
    burial service went down with an emphasis to my heart, never felt by
    any grave before--words too promiscuously applied, too often; but
    their special appropriateness to him struck us all--"As much as it
    hath pleased Almighty God of his great goodness to take to himself
    the soul of our dear brother here departed, we commit his body to
    the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, in sure
    and certain hope of the resurrection to eternal life." "Ah!" thought
    I, "you may say it in all its emphasis over this grave. I will not
    go away saying, with the prophet, 'I shall see him no more'; blessed
    be God for the hope that I shall see him again! Yea, thy brother,
    thy father, thy minister, thy tutor, thy friend, shall rise again.
    May I but be honoured, O my Judge! with a place at thy right hand,
    and with such an addition to my happiness as to be joined in
    everlasting bonds of friendship with him I so much loved and
    honoured on earth, to improve and enjoy together to all eternity.
    Amen."

Mr. Thomas Belsham, who had been assistant tutor here in metaphysics,
mathematics, and natural history, till 1778, when he settled at
Worcester, succeeded Mr. Robins in 1781, and returned to Daventry, at
the solicitation of the congregation and the trustees, in the double
capacity of pastor and principal or theological tutor. He continued here
until 1789, when, having fully embraced Unitarian sentiments, his
continuance in the office of tutor being directly contrary to the will
of the founder of the academy, he apprized the trustees of the change,
and resigned the situation. After this the academy returned again to
Northampton.

Mr. Thomas Willis Paterson was the next pastor. He had recently
completed his course of study here; but in 1796 he accepted an
invitation from the congregations at Bardon Park and Ashby-de-la-Zouch,
in Leicestershire, when he went to reside at Donnington-on-the-Heath,
where he died in August, 1812.

Mr. John Morrell, afterwards LL.D., was chosen to succeed him, but
removed in about two years, and became minister of a Unitarian Chapel at
Brighton, in Sussex.

Mr. George Watson was invited to the pastoral office in October, 1799.
He was a native of Kettering; and, becoming early decided for the
Saviour, he devoted himself to the work of the ministry. He became a
member of the Church at Kettering, under the ministry of Mr. Boyce. In
the records of that Church we find this statement:--

    _Sept. 3rd, 1772._--At our Church-meeting, George Watson, son of Mr.
    Wm. Watson, our clerk, who had before dedicated himself to the work
    of the ministry and entered upon a course of preparatory studies for
    it, having in writing given an account of the dealings of God with
    his soul, was admitted to full communion with us.

He pursued his studies in the academy at Daventry; was first settled at
Howick, in Lancashire; afterwards became assistant preacher to the Rev.
Thomas Taylor, of Carter Lane, London, from whence he was invited to
this congregation, over which he presided until 1816, when he resigned
and went to reside at Birmingham, where he died, August 1st, 1817, in
the 66th year of his age. He published 'Liberality to the Poor and Sick
recommended, in a Sermon preached at Harwich for the benefit of the
Manchester Infirmary, 1792'; 'A brief Memoir of the Rev. Thomas Robins,
late of Daventry; with a Sketch of the Sermon preached May 26th, 1810,
on occasion of his Death; and some Biographical additions.' The
congregation was unsettled after this for two years, when Mr. John
Whittenbury succeeded Mr. Watson in the pastoral office, and was
ordained here February 8th, 1818. During his ministry two new galleries
were added to the Meeting House.

Mr. Whittenbury, we learn, entered the academy at Rotherham in the year
1808, then under the able tuition of the late Dr. Williams. Having
passed through the usual course of study, he was first ordained at
Darlington, July 28th, 1814, where he laboured with great assiduity,
and, although amidst many discouragements, not without some tokens of
the divine blessing. He at length accepted an invitation to become the
pastor of the Church at Daventry, and continued his labours here for
eight years. He subsequently removed to a destitute congregation at
Newport, Salop; from thence he went to Liverpool, in 1838, to endeavour
to revive an interest that had fallen into decay. Failing in the
accomplishment of this object, he then devoted his time and energies to
promote the interests of the various religious societies connected with
the town, particularly "the Town Mission," "the Seaman's Friend
Society," and "Bethel Union," by the committees of which he was held in
great esteem. He died January 3rd, 1845, aged 55 years.

Mr. J. Davis, the present minister, succeeded Mr. Whittenbury, becoming
the pastor of this Church in the year 1826.

"In 1728, the congregation purchased a house in Sheaf Street for the
residence of the minister, which was rebuilt by subscription at the time
Dr. Ashworth erected the adjoining house for the academy. The Meeting
House, which stands in the minister's yard, is approached from the
street through a gateway, and is a substantial stone building, 42 feet
long by 42 feet wide." It has now three galleries.

During the ministry of the present pastor, new school-rooms have been
erected.

The present number of communicants is 94. There are 190 children in the
Sabbath-schools.

There are some endowments connected with this place; one, of L12 per
annum, towards the support of a Charity-school for boys and girls.




CHAPTER IX.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCHES IN WELLINGBOROUGH.


SECTION 1.--THE CHURCH AT CHEESE LANE.

Where the events relating to the early history of a community have not
been put upon record about the time they occurred, or where the records,
when made, have been subsequently neglected and lost, it becomes
scarcely possible to discover its origin, or to obtain any correct
information relating to its progress.

This is the case, we regret to state, with the Independent Church,
Cheese Lane, Wellingborough; it appears to be scarcely possible now to
discover the date of its origin, or the circumstances under which it was
formed.

In Wellingborough and its vicinity there were ministers of Christ, 190
years ago, who belonged to that noble band of worthies who renounced
their worldly prospects in connexion with the Church by law established,
rather than violate the dictates of conscience, on the passing of the
Act of Uniformity in the year 1662.

Before the days of the ejected ministers, there resided at the village
of Wilby, little more than two miles from Wellingborough, Mr. Andrew
Perne, A.M., a worthy Puritan minister. He was born in 1596; was chosen
Fellow of Katherine Hall, Cambridge, where he probably received his
education. Having finished his studies at the University, he became
rector of Wilby, in Northamptonshire, where he continued a laborious,
faithful, and successful preacher, 27 years. He often preached before
the Parliament, and several of his sermons were published, one of which
is entitled, 'Gospel Courage; or, a Christian Resolution for God and his
Truth. In a Sermon preached before the Honourable House of Commons, at
Margerett's, Westminster, at a public Fast, the 21st of May, 1643.'
Being called up to London, he gained a high reputation, and was offered
considerable preferments; but he refused them all, resolving to return
to his charge at Wilby. He appears to have been a man of considerable
eminence and great usefulness. His awakening sermons, and exemplary life
and conversation, produced a signal and happy reformation; his people
revered and loved him as a father. "He was full of spiritual warmth,"
says Mr. Ainsworth, one of the ejected ministers, who preached and
published his funeral sermon, "filled with a holy indignation against
sin, active in his work, and never more in his element than when he was
in the pulpit." "As his life was holy, so his death was happy." He
blessed God that he was not afraid to die; nay, he earnestly desired to
be gone, and often cried out, during his last sickness, "When will that
hour come? One assault more, and this earthen vessel will be broken, and
I shall be with God."

His remains were interred in the chancel of Wilby Church, where at the
foot of the altar is the following monumental inscription to his
memory:--

         Here lieth interred MR. ANDREW PERNE,
          a faithful servant of Jesus Christ;
  a zealous owner ever of God's cause in perilous times;
    a powerful and successful preacher of the Gospel;
        a great blessing to this town and country,
            where he lived twenty-seven years.
            He departed, December 13, 1654.

The influence of the ministry and character of Mr. Perne would no doubt
extend to the town of Wellingborough, and might be one means of
producing that regard for the principles of the Gospel and the purity of
the Church that actuated the early Nonconformists, who had many of them
to suffer much for the principles which they maintained, and the course
they conscientiously pursued.

A Mr. Thomas Andrews, of the University of Cambridge, was ejected from
the vicarage of Wellingborough. The living was given to him by the Lord
or Lady Brooke. While he continued in it, he was generally respected by
the ministers of his neighbourhood, twelve of whom took their turn at
his weekly lecture on a Wednesday.

His frugality, while he continued the incumbent, saved him some hundreds
of pounds, so that he was better provided for after his ejectment than
many of his brethren. When cast out of his living, he repaired to Meers
Ashby, where he preached at a Mr. Preston's, in the night. He often
preached also at Lady Tyrrell's. He was a man of great courage,
agreeable behaviour, and much beloved by his neighbours.

There was also a Mr. Alsop, ejected from the living of Wilby, near
Wellingborough, who came and resided here after his ejectment, and
exercised his ministry as the times would permit. It is recorded that he
was bound over to the sessions for preaching at Oakham, and that he lay
six months in Northampton Gaol for praying with a sick person.

Mr. Rowlet, ejected from Sudbury, in this county, appears to have united
with Mr. Alsop in his labours. In the time of King Charles's Indulgence,
there was a meeting every Lord's-day at Wellingborough, upheld by Mr.
Alsop and Mr. Rowlet, and the latter continued preaching here until
removed by death. His constitution was feeble, for Mr. Alsop said of
him, "If this man had but a body to his soul, he would be incomparable."
He is represented by such as attended on his ministry and knew him well,
as a most agreeable preacher, who used to charm his hearers. He died of
consumption.

Mr. Henry Wills, who had been rector of Loddington, in this county, is
said to have preached privately (probably in some retired place, or in
the silent hours of the night) to the people of Wellingborough, where
his memory was exceedingly precious for a long time, especially for two
things--the extraordinary suitableness of his compositions to the minds
of the weakest, notwithstanding the fulness and depth of his matter, and
the great piety and refreshing savour which seasoned his common
conversation. It is related concerning him, that "he was an able
scholar, a considerable mathematician, of great skill in the law, an
eminent preacher, and of a most agreeable carriage."

How early an Independent Church was first formed here, from which this
in Cheese Lane descended, or when a stated pastor was first settled over
it, we have not discovered.

It is stated, that this Church first met for divine worship in a Meeting
House situated in a yard at the back of some premises in Silver Street.
In 1746, it was such an old building, and in such a dilapidated state,
that it was found to be necessary to erect a new place of worship; when
the present Meeting House was raised at the bottom of the lane where the
cheese fair was kept, and hence called Cheese Lane Meeting. At that
time, Mr. King, who was a friend and correspondent of Dr. Doddridge's,
had been for many years pastor of the Church.

The earliest notice we find of Mr. King as minister at Wellingborough is
in the controversy with Mr. Davis, of Rowell, in 1692, in which Mr. King
took a part. We find his name also as minister at Wellingborough, among
those who were present at the ordination of Mr. Tingey, at Northampton,
in the year 1709.

The next notice we have found of Mr. King as minister here is in a
letter from Doddridge addressed to him, dated December 29th, 1723, in
which the writer engages to visit Mr. King and to preach for him on a
week evening, observing, "It is with the utmost readiness and pleasure I
embrace the opportunity of serving you which you propose in your
obliging letter, especially as it gives me an opportunity of cultivating
that friendship with which you are pleased to honour me, and which I
look upon as a very particular happiness."

When the dreadful fire that took place in 1738 had laid waste a
considerable part of the town, destroying 205 dwelling-houses besides
806 out-buildings, a fast-day was kept and some special public religious
services were observed, and Dr. Doddridge was invited to preach on the
occasion. He improved the event in a very serious, suitable, faithful
sermon, from Amos iv. 11, which was published at the request of the
people, with a dedication to those inhabitants of Wellingborough at
whose request the sermon was published. We expect this sermon was
preached in the Old Meeting House, in which the congregation at Cheese
Lane formerly worshipped. In the dedication the Doctor observes--

    I have laboured as much as possible to write from the life. The
    ruins of your town, the distress of your families, and the mixture
    of hope and fear attending the present situation of your affairs,
    have been as it were before my eyes and on my heart in almost every
    sentence; and I have frequently mingled these meditations with
    earnest prayers to God that he would so lead me into the secret
    recesses of your souls, that what you before heard and will now read
    may be like a nail fastened in a sure place.

Mr. King, it is stated, was succeeded by Mr. David Bradbury, who left
Wellingborough about the year 1764, and was succeeded by Mr. French, who
kept a very respectable boarding-school while residing here. He had
studied under Dr. Doddridge, at Northampton. He afterwards removed to
London. Mr. Orton was the next minister; but in early life he died of
consumption, about the year 1776. Then succeeded to Mr. Orton Mr.
Thomas, who had been a student at the academy at Daventry, first under
Dr. Ashworth and then under Mr. Robins. He was ordained about the same
time as the late Mr. Toller was settled at Kettering, they having closed
their academical course nearly together. Mr. Thomas resigned his charge
about 1786, after having been pastor about eight years, and went to
Enfield. He was succeeded by Mr. Robert Jacomb. He had been in a very
unsettled state of health in London, where he was assistant to the Rev.
Hugh Worthington, at Salter's Hall; and being called to experience here
a very heavy domestic trial, in the almost sudden death of his wife,
when they had been married but a short time, his depression of spirits
became so great that he left, though very reluctantly, and went to Bath.

The successor to Mr. Jacomb was Mr. Henry Summers. In reference to this
change we find the following statement:--

    In consequence of the removal of the Rev. R. Jacomb from
    Wellingborough in 1791, the Church and congregation usually meeting
    for divine worship in Cheese Lane became destitute of a pastor and
    teacher. In this situation it became necessary for the society to
    look out for a successor; and in March, 1792, Mr. Henry Summers, who
    was assistant to the Rev. Robert Winter, of Hammersmith, after
    sufficient trial was made, received a unanimous invitation to the
    pastoral office, of which he soon after declared his acceptance. But
    short was his time of service: soon was he called to close his
    labours on earth. He died of fever, when he had sustained the
    pastoral office scarcely four years in this place.

In the early part of the year 1796 we find it recorded "that it pleased
divine providence to bereave this Church and congregation of their
pastor, the Rev. Henry Summers, who, after a short illness, departed
this life January 27th, 1796." His funeral sermon was preached by the
Rev. John Wood, of Rowell. From the time of his death until Midsummer,
the congregation was supplied partly by the neighbouring ministers, who
voluntarily offered their services for the benefit of his widow, and
partly by the students at the academy at Northampton. By the general
consent of the whole society, at length an application was made to Mr.
Daniel Washbourn, then a student at Northampton, to supply them during
the academical vacation, with which he complied. After ministering to
them for several weeks with increasing acceptance and satisfaction, the
Church and congregation determined to invite him to become their
pastor, and accordingly sent him a pressing and affectionate invitation,
signed by 131 persons, which, after fervent prayer and mature
deliberation, he accepted.

On Thursday, November 3rd, of the same year, the ordination service took
place. The following is the account preserved of that interesting
occasion:--

    A very numerous auditory assembled; and from the testimony of
    ministers and people, it may be asserted with the strictest truth,
    the services of the day were particularly solemn, suitable, and
    instructive. Mr. Richard Winter, of Hanover Street, London,
    commenced with a short prayer and reading some suitable portions of
    Scripture (Ps. xcvi., and the two first chapters of Paul's Epistle
    to Titus); Mr. Edwards engaged in the general prayer; Mr.
    Worthington, of Salter's Hall, London, delivered an introductory
    discourse, in which he stated with ability and conciseness the
    grounds and advantages of such a service among Protestant
    Dissenters. He then proposed four questions to Mr. Washbourn, which
    were answered by him, and engaged in the ordination prayer--a prayer
    peculiarly solemn and pathetic. The charge, from Gal. i. 10, last
    clause, was delivered by Mr. Horsey, of Northampton; and Mr. Toller,
    of Kettering, preached the sermon to the people, from 1 Thess. v.
    12, 13: both these discourses were admirably adapted to the
    occasion. Mr. Chadwick, of Oundle, concluded with an excellent
    prayer. Hymns were read by Mr. Luccock.

    After the dinner, it was unanimously proposed and requested that the
    ordination service be published; which was agreed to by the
    gentlemen concerned.[5]

    There was a service in the evening, which Mr. Wood, of Rowell,
    introduced with prayer; Mr. Winter preached a very suitable sermon,
    from 2 Cor. iii. 5; and at the request of several of the ministers,
    Mr. Washbourn concluded the solemnities of the day with prayer. The
    kind providence of God appears to smile on this connexion, formed
    and ratified between minister and people; both rejoice in the
    pleasing prospect of usefulness, harmony, and love. May the great
    Head of the Church continue the special tokens of his presence and
    regard amongst us! Amen.


[5] A note to this statement observes, that the services, nearly all
printed, were never completed nor published, owing to the neglect and
indolence of Mr. Worthington, who undertook to superintend the
publishing, and unaccountably failed in discharging the trust committed
to him.


Thus wrote the pastor, under the first impressions of a happy settlement
over this people; and for nearly sixteen years he continued his labours
among them. During the far larger portion of that time they appear to
have been years of comfort and usefulness; but, as another instance
added to the vast numbers which show the uncertainty attending the most
pleasing connexions and prospects in this fallen state, at length such
circumstances arose as separated the pastor from his flock. Some
disagreements arising between the influential members of the Church and
congregation, they went on to such a length as to issue in a
separation--the building of Salem Chapel, and the formation of the
Church assembling there. This was so painful to Mr. Washbourn, that he
sent in his resignation, in which he expressed himself in the following
words:--"While I desire to entertain no sentiments of hostility towards
those who have thought proper to desert my ministry and to form
themselves into a separate community, I cannot but consider that they
are responsible for my being removed from this part of the Lord's
vineyard, where my labours were honoured with the divine blessing." Mr.
Washbourn removed to Hammersmith, and never came to Wellingborough
again. While filling this situation it is observed, "that he enjoyed to
a high degree the respect of the surrounding ministers, particularly
that of the late Mr. Toller, of Kettering, whose friendship and
popularity he frequently referred to with peculiar delight."

Mr. Washbourn was minister at Hammersmith for twenty-two years; and here
we find it remarked, "that his preaching--solid, judicious, and deeply
spiritual--was very soon highly estimated by his new charge, the greater
part of whom at that time were families of considerable standing in
society, as well as of high respectability and influence in the Church.
Not a few were brought to Christ who had seen the meridian of life
unvisited by mercy, and who survived to bless his memory and to render
it blessed." But we find that "it pleased the great Head of the Church,
who retains the prerogative of determining the trials of his servants,
greatly to obstruct the usefulness of the latter part of his life, and
to render it the scene of peculiar affliction, by the rapid progress of
a constitutional malady--overwhelming depression. The most remarkable
feature in this visitation was its periodical character. Six weeks of
unutterable gloom, during which he was bereft of every ray of spiritual
consolation, and an equal term of unusual enjoyment in religion and in
social intercourse, maintained an almost unvarying succession throughout
the two or three last years of his earthly pilgrimage. But he has
frequently said to his colleague, 'I know, my dear sir, it is all
physical. I know it--I have proved it; and I know God sees it needful
for me, or he would not permit it.'"

He died on Monday, the 10th day of November, 1834, in the 64th year of
his age; and it is said "that few public men, moving in a comparatively
quiet and unobtrusive sphere, have gone down to the grave accompanied by
such deep expressions of unequivocal regard, from all classes in the
circle where they lived and laboured, as did this devoted minister of
Christ."

Soon after Mr. Washbourn had left Wellingborough, Mr. Robert Jacomb, the
former pastor of the Church, came on a visit; and seeing the
uncomfortable state in which the people were, he kindly consented to
prolong his stay, and preached to them with his former acceptance. An
invitation was given him to resume his labours, which he accepted; and
after an interval of twenty years he again became the pastor of the
Church. His services were continued until repeated attacks of disease,
and the increasing infirmities of age, obliged him to resign his charge
in the year 1826. He continued to reside in Wellingborough until his
death, which took place in the year 1832.

Mr. Jacomb, we have heard, was a descendant from the early Nonconformist
ministers of that name. He always appeared to conduct himself with the
ease, affability, and politeness of the gentleman, and with the spirit
of the Christian. His temper was amiable, and it was his constant aim to
promote the spirit of piety and of peace among his people. In the spirit
of devotion, and with a sincere concern for the highest welfare of his
flock, he conducted the services of the sanctuary. He was highly
esteemed to the close of his days.

Mr. James Robertson was the next pastor, commencing his ministry
here in October, 1826. He continued his services until a distressing
mental malady, from which he never recovered, laid him aside from his
public work and cut him off from the society of his friends. Mr. Robertson
was a native of Newcastle-upon-Tyne; became a student of Wymondley
College; was pastor for some years of the Independent Church at
Stretton-under-Fosse, commencing his ministry there July 29th, 1809,
and was ordained in August, 1810. The ministers officiating were Messrs.
H. Knight, R. Hall, and T. N. Toller. "For upwards of four years before
his death he was the subject of intense mental and physical suffering,
which much beclouded his fine intellect; and the deep waters of
tribulation went over his soul." "In him," it is justly said, "were
united the elegant accomplishments of the classical scholar, and the
graver acumen of the profound theologian; which, added to the unaffected
fervour of his piety, the benevolence of his disposition, and the
sterling integrity of his general character, embalmed his memory in the
hearts of a large circle of friends, who deplore his loss." He died at
Wellingborough June 23rd, 1842, and was interred in the burying ground
belonging to the Meeting. His most intimate friend, Mr. Walford, of
Uxbridge, who was classical tutor for some years at Homerton College,
officiated at the funeral; and Mr. Toller, of Kettering, preached the
funeral sermon the next Sabbath evening, from Zech. i. 5: "Your fathers,
where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?"

A tablet was erected by his widow to his memory, and placed at the right
side of the pulpit.

Mr. Robertson was secretary to the Northamptonshire Association, from
the death of Mr. Edwards, of Northampton, until he was laid aside from
active service. He was a frequent contributor to the _Eclectic Review_,
and wrote many valuable articles of biblical criticism, besides others
of a more general character. His attainments in learning were eminent;
his intellectual power was considerable--his general information
extensive; his skill in criticism was great; while he was a man of
inflexible integrity, pre-eminently "without guile"--a sincere and
steadfast friend, with much kindness of heart. His stern and unbending
regard to principle sometimes occasioned a roughness of exterior, and
occasionally appeared to assume an austere and unkind aspect. Some of
his sermons discovered talent of a high order for composition,
containing superior thoughts, clothed in powerful language.

The following record we find respecting Mr. Robertson's affliction, and
the views entertained by the people under it:--

    In the month of January, 1838, it pleased God to visit with a
    painful mental affliction the Rev. James Robertson, the pastor of
    the Church, so as totally to disqualify him for conducting the
    services of the sanctuary, or holding any intercourse with the
    people of his charge. Several months after the commencement of his
    illness, the pulpit was generously supplied on Sabbath-day by
    neighbouring ministers. The friends, however, at length deeply
    feeling their destitute condition, and perceiving the congregation
    on the decline, were led anxiously to deliberate on the course which
    a due concern for their own spiritual improvement and the welfare of
    Zion required them to take; at the same time keeping in view their
    obligations to their honoured and afflicted pastor. After frequent
    consultations among themselves and with various ministers in the
    county, and much prayer, it was suggested, that as no symptoms of
    returning health appeared, the connexion ought to be dissolved. It
    was with great regret that the friends perceived that such a
    proposal must come from them, rather than from their pastor himself;
    but the state of his mind being such as to unfit him for the
    transaction of business, it became, on their part, a matter of
    necessity and painful duty. Accordingly, in the month of September,
    1838, a letter to this effect, approved by the Church and
    congregation, was addressed to Mrs. Robertson, after which other
    correspondence took place, which it is unnecessary to detail, and
    the relation terminated.

In the beginning of the year 1839 the Rev. E. T. Prust, of Northampton,
introduced to the notice of the friends the Rev. G. Taylor, who, in
consequence of severe indisposition, had been obliged to resign a
previous charge in the vicinity of Manchester, but whose health was so
far restored as to enable him to resume his ministerial labours. He was
accordingly invited to preach for a few Sabbaths in the month of April.
At the expiration of this time, he was invited to the pastoral office;
which, after proper consideration and advice, he accepted. A recognition
service was held on Thursday, October 24th, the order of which was as
follows:--"Reading and prayer, Rev. J. Renals; questions, Rev. E. T.
Prust; designation prayer, Rev. T. Toller; address to Mr. Taylor, Rev.
T. East, founded on John xii. 26, last clause; address to the people,
Rev. J. Blackburn; concluding prayer, Rev. R. Davis.

"In connexion with the above service, special united meetings were held
at the three Chapels in the town: those for prayer, on Monday evening,
Wednesday and Thursday morning. On Tuesday evening, Rev. Thos. Milner
preached; on Wednesday evening, Rev. T. East; and on Thursday evening
there was a united communion service. The whole of the services were
well attended, and great interest was excited."

After a short but active, affectionate, and faithful ministerial course
here, Mr. Taylor's health again began to decline, which soon brought his
labours in the ministry to a final close. He was under the necessity of
resigning his office. His letter of resignation was dated June 24th,
1845, having scarcely completed six years of pastoral labour in this
place. He died at Birmingham in 1846, at forty-two years of age, in the
faith and hope of the Gospel, leaving a widow and rising family
especially to mourn his loss.

Mr. Taylor was born in Birmingham, February 10th, 1804. His parents were
eminent for their piety, and his father was for many years a deacon of
the Church assembling in Ebenezer Chapel, under the pastoral care of Mr.
Timothy East. He received an excellent classical education at the school
of Mr. J. Hammond, Independent minister, at Handsworth, of whom he
always spake with much respect. He was called in early life to the
knowledge of the truth, under the powerful ministry of Mr. East. The
grace which he had received soon made him a decided Christian, and
pointed him out as one likely to be useful in public service. His
thoughts were soon directed to the work of the ministry; he pursued a
course of study at Highbury College, where his attainments were
respectable, and where he gained the affectionate attachment of his
fellow students. His first situation as a pastor was at New Windsor,
near Manchester. Here he continued until, after eight years' service, he
was obliged by the state of his health to resign his charge, and
preached his farewell sermon from the words of the Apostle, "I would
that ye knew what great conflict I have for you," &c., which was
listened to with the deepest interest; and many sorrowed, "that they
should see his face no more" as their beloved pastor. After an interval
of two years, his health appeared to be sufficiently recovered for him
to resume his stated labours, and he then accepted the invitation to
become the pastor of this Church. Here he ministered with considerable
success for a short period, the Church and congregation increasing; but
the interest at first excited was not sustained until the close of his
ministry, which might partly arise from the weakness of his
constitution rendering him incapable of the continued mental and
physical effort which the stated engagements of the pastor for a series
of years demand. After about six years spent in this situation, symptoms
of decline appeared. He sought relief by spending six months on the
southern coast, but it proved in vain; his disorder increased. It become
necessary for him to resign his second charge; and he retired to end his
days amongst his friends in his native town, where he closed his course,
in the possession of the peace and hope of the Gospel. Mr. Taylor was
amiable, honourable, and affectionate; he had a strong principle of
piety towards God, a deep vein of devotional feeling, a firm reliance on
the merits of the Saviour. His great aim was to be useful in the
conversion of sinners and advancing the kingdom of the Redeemer.

Some months after the death of Mr. Taylor, the Rev. J. Watson, then
tutor of Newport Pagnell Academy, introduced to the notice of the Church
the Rev. J. F. Poulter, of Queen's College, Cambridge. When Mr. Poulter
had supplied the pulpit for some weeks with acceptance, he was invited
to take the pastoral charge, which invitation he accepted, and was
ordained Thursday, December 17th, 1846, when the Rev. J. Watson, of
Newport, delivered the introductory discourse; Rev. T. Toller proposed
the questions; Rev. E. T. Prust offered the ordination prayer; Rev. W.
Forster, of Kentish Town, delivered the charge.

Mr. Poulter is the present minister of this Church and congregation. In
the year 1850 new school-rooms were erected, at the cost of rather more
than L300. The site was presented by Mr. W. Warren, and the design given
by Mr. E. Sharman. At the opening services the Rev. H. Allom, of Union
Chapel, Islington, preached; Rev. Samuel Martin, of Westminster, in the
evening, from Proverbs xx. 11.

Mr. John Gibbs, of Wellingborough, who died May 19th, 1813, left by will
the sum of L100 in the hands of his executors, to be by them invested in
the funds or other good security, the interest of which is to be paid
annually on St. Thomas's-day, December 21st, to the minister of this
place, independent of the salary paid him by the congregation.


SECTION 2.--THE CHURCH AT WEST END.

To be able to discover very distinctly the origin of a Christian society
of 160 years' standing, and from thence to trace the varied events of
its history, is especially interesting to those minds that love to
observe how the great Head of the Church carries on the affairs of his
kingdom by the varied operations of providence and of grace, employing
the agency of his servants, and showing the influence of Christian
principle in promoting his great designs.

If the reader will look back to the memorials of the Church at Rowell,
and will notice the itinerating labours of Mr. Davis, the third pastor,
with the success that attended them, in connexion with the efforts of
some of the brethren in that Church, he will there see how this Church
at Wellingborough originated. There were a considerable number of
persons who had derived benefit from the labours of Mr. Davis, residing
in Wellingborough and its vicinity, who had become members of the Church
at Rowell. After some time, it was thought that their number was
sufficient to form a distinct Christian community, _i.e._, an
Independent Church, with its officers. They received a regular
dismission from the Church at Rowell for this purpose. The copy of that
dismission we have given in the account of that Church (page 57), from
which they were dismissed; and we find the same preserved in the records
of this Church--the one account furnishing a complete corroboration of
the other. The first statement after this is--

    The 22nd day of the eighth month, 1691, was kept solemnly in fasting
    and prayer at Wellingborough by us whose names are hereafter
    written, for our embodying and enchurching together; when, after
    that the former part of the day was spent in prayer, direction, and
    exhortation, our dismission from the Church of Christ at Rowell was
    then read by their messengers.

After this it is recorded--

    Having covenanted each apart, and then in the name of Christ, in
    these words--"We do, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ our
    crowned King, his holy angels, his people, and all the people here
    present, give ourselves up to the Lord and to one another by the
    will of God, joyfully promising and engaging to walk with the Lord
    Jesus Christ and with his people in the observation of all Gospel
    ordinances, and in the discharge of all relative duties in the house
    of God, and as the presence of the Lord shall enable us"--We lifted
    up our hands thereunto, and afterwards subscribed our names.

    We, having been dismissed from the Church of Christ which we did
    belong to, and having given up ourselves to the Lord and to one
    another by the will of God, and to this subscribed, in the presence
    of many witnesses, as becomes a Church of the Lord Jesus Christ,
    having all the power amongst ourselves to manage all matters
    belonging to us as a Church of the Lord Jesus.

After this they proceed to choose two ruling elders, who covenanted with
the people in the presence of the Lord to be faithful to the charges
committed to them; the Church also covenanted to carry it towards them
as a people to their officers. Then they chose Mr. Bettson, who had been
approved by the Church at Rowell for the ministry of the word, to become
their pastor; and on an appointed day they proceed to ordain him to this
office, in a manner similar to that which had been adopted by the Church
of which they had formerly made a part. They state--

    We proceeded to ordain our brother Bettson, in which our elders
    brother Henseman and brother Osborn laid their hands on brother
    Bettson and prayed, setting him before the Lord, testifying to the
    Lord that that was the man they had chosen to the office of a
    pastor; and after prayer, laid their hands on him again, and
    declared to the people that he was their pastor; and the ruling
    elders gave him authority, entering into covenant with him as to
    right them in their transactions. There were several pastors of
    other Churches present, as Mr. Bear, Mr. Greenwood, Mr. Davis,
    besides brethren of other Churches.

On the 14th day of the same month they say--

    We then agreed, and solemnly passed this as a Church act, that we
    would not bear with any that were with us that whispered against any
    of the brethren, or backbited any, looking upon it as abusing that
    rule in the 18th chapter of Matthew; also very dishonourable to the
    Lord Jesus, and injurious to the Church; separating between chief
    friends, and giving occasion to the enemies to blaspheme.

The ministry of Mr. Bettson appears to have been evangelical, earnest,
and successful, so that 174 members were added to the Church during his
ministry, which continued for 33 years. During the early years of that
ministry much comfort and usefulness is indicated; but the latter part
of it appears to have been attended with some heavy trials.

In the earliest part of their history they held numerous
Church-meetings; had members belonging to the Church from many different
places. Occasionally they held Church-meetings at Olney, 12 miles from
Wellingborough, in which place and neighbourhood a number of the members
resided, until at length they were formed into a Church in that place.

"Mr. Bettson," it is observed, "was a man possessed of much prudence,
piety, and perseverance. His trials were many; for preceding the choice
of an assistant, another minister came to the town to preach in
opposition to Mr. Bettson. Many hearers left, and the interest was
greatly reduced."

From their Church records, it appears that they performed the marriage
ceremony among themselves. The covenant of marriage is thus expressed:--

    I, J. N., take thee, M. M., to be my wedded wife, and solemnly
    promise, in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be a loving,
    tender, and faithful husband, until death.

    I, M. M., take thee, J. N., to be my wedded husband, and solemnly
    promise, in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be a loving,
    tender, faithful, and obedient wife, until death.

"The date of the first certificate of marriage is 1692, and the date of
the last that was given 1714."

                     _Wellingborough, 22nd day of the 10th month._

    These are to certify all whom it may concern, that Samuel Bearly and
    Susannah Jeffs, both of Wellingborough, did enter into the estate of
    matrimony the day and year above written. As a testimony of firmly
    indenting and joining in a marriage covenant, they have hereto
    unchangeably put to their hands and seals, the day and year above
    written.

    In the presence of the witnesses,

                 ROBERT BETTSON.      SAMUEL BEARLY.
                 JOHN FOXE.           SUSANNAH JEFFS.

It appears that the banns were published in the parish Church where the
parties lived, according to the following account:--

Preceding marriage, Mr. Bere received a note from the place where the
parties lived, according to the following testimony:--

    "These are to certify all whom it may concern, of the banns of
    matrimony between Brize, of the parish of Clifton, in the county of
    Bucks, on the one part, and Ann Rollins, of this parish, in the
    county of Northampton, on the other part, were published three
    several times in the parish of Wollaston, without any let or
    contradiction, as the Rubrick directs, by me.

                                    "J. MARIS, Vicar of Wollaston.

    "_Wollaston, July 27, 1702._"


When a Christian society is in circumstances of peculiar difficulty and
discouragement, it is important that their state should engage the
sympathies and draw forth the counsels of other Christian societies, as
a means of encouragement and assistance under the struggles to which
they are called. Acting on this principle, this Church, under its
trials, applied for advice to other Churches, and received the following
letter from the Church at Rowell, expressive of their sympathy and their
counsels:

    DEAR BRETHREN IN THE LORD,--Our messengers, sent upon your desire to
    assist you in your faults, informed us that you wanted advice
    respecting your duty towards those members who wilfully left their
    places amongst you, broke their solemn covenant with you, and
    entered into a separate covenant with excommunicated persons, to
    carry on a separate cause with them. Our messengers further informed
    us of the unanimous advice given by the messengers of several
    Churches, that you should proceed against them as covenant-breakers;
    making use of Christian endeavours, evangelical admonitions, for
    their recovery, if the Lord pleases to bless to the same end; and
    in case of obstinacy to cut them off. Of this advice we heartily
    approve as a Church of Christ; and desire that the Spirit of the
    Lord may be with you in it, and enable you to go comfortably through
    it, and give you success in it. We pity you under your great and
    sore trials, and, as helping you, prayed for you, that you may be
    filled with all the fulness of God. We pity any who have been
    deluded from their duty under specious pretences, and desire that
    the God of all grace would give them speedily to renounce them.
    However, the Lord give unto you (the weak handed) to be found in the
    way of your duty, for therein is peace. Abstain from your own
    wisdom; let your weapons be spiritual and mighty through God, to
    whose care we remit you, and remain your sympathizing brethren,

                                                    M. MAURICE.
                                                    THOS. REYNALS.
                                                    WILLM. FULLEN.

Sometimes a change in the ministry, when an interest is brought into
such a state that it can hardly stand its ground, has a favourable
effect; and may, under the divine blessing, be the means of bringing
about a pleasing change. Thus it proved in the history of this Church.
Mr. Bettson's age increasing and energies declining, they agreed to
invite a co-pastor. A Mr. Grant, another member of the Church at Rowell,
was chosen to this office. Finding his ministry acceptable, they wrote
to the Church at Rowell, requesting his dismission to them, that he
might be ordained as joint pastor with Mr. Bettson. The Church granted
their desire, and in their letter of dismission we find the following
passages:--

    It affecteth us greatly that the Lord seemeth to smile upon his
    precious cause amongst you, so that we hope the night of your
    affliction is far spent, and the day of much more abounding joy and
    consolation is at hand. "Weeping endureth for a night, but joy
    cometh in the morning."

    We are glad that any of our dear brethren and sisters, who in the
    dark and cloudy day have been turned aside from their duty, are
    brought to their covenanted places in the Church. We have no reason
    to doubt but the Spirit of God will in a gracious manner bring
    others. When He is pleased to plead, who can resist? And we hope the
    same Spirit will enable you to carry it in all meekness of wisdom
    toward them, leaving the issue to God.

    We bless God that the ministry of our beloved brother William Grant
    has been made so useful amongst you, and that the Spirit of God doth
    so fit it for edification and conversion. We pray that such fruits
    may abound more and more; and in order thereunto, upon your request
    and his desire, the Church has ordered us, in their names, to sign
    his dismission to your fellowship.

    We should be very glad of the continuance of his fellowship with us,
    and his labours amongst us; but seeing our dear Lord calleth him to
    work amongst you, and inclineth his heart thereto, we submit, and
    think it our duty to rejoice in your mercy.

In reference to the ordination of Mr. Grant, we are informed that
"letters were ordered to be written in the name of the Church to the
several Churches therein named, for their messengers to come over and
behold our order, and assist us in the ordination of brother William
Grant." Thursday, September 21st, 1723, was appointed for this purpose.

    This being the day set apart for brother William Grant's ordination,
    the Church assembled for it, in order to carry on the solemn work,
    which was conducted as follows:--

    After some time spent in prayer, the Church appointed brother
    William Curtis to be their mouth to propose the matter to the
    Church, and also to brother Grant. The matter being proposed to the
    Church, they gave their consent, by standing up and lifting up their
    hands; no objection being made by any of them. By their mouth it was
    proposed to brother William Grant, whether or no he did willingly
    give up himself to the Lord and his Church, to serve the Lord and
    them in the work and office of a pastor; which call of God and his
    people he testified that he willingly obeyed and accepted. That
    being done, the messengers of the several Churches then present, as
    a testimony of their joy and communion, gave the right hands of
    fellowship. Then brother Hanneswell prayed, and Mr. Maurice
    preached, and brother Curtis concluded the meeting with prayer; and
    in the evening brother Grant preached; and so we concluded the day.

Mr. Grant's ministry proved so acceptable, that it soon became necessary
to enlarge the Old Meeting, which was done in the year 1726.

A circumstance which appears to have been rather unusual in the life of
a plain country pastor 120 years ago, took place in the history of Mr.
Grant, followed by some interesting results. "On June 11th, 1732, the
Church gave consent for Mr. Grant to go to London." This was probably
his first visit to the metropolis. What was the special occasion of such
an important step being taken does not appear; but it was on this visit
that it is supposed the following well-authenticated events took place.
"Mr. Grant was introduced to the study of a learned brother, for whom he
was to preach. This and the other book was pointed out as of great
importance, and discovering great erudition in the author. Mr. Grant
said, 'Sir, I have had no literary advantages; therefore such works are
lost to me.' 'I am very sorry, then, that you are to preach to my
people, who have always been accustomed to such ministers as have had a
very liberal education. But, Mr. Grant, if you should be confused in
your sermon, I beg you will soon close the subject.' Lady C----, seeing
Mr. Grant's homely dress, felt much timidity about him, and no small
aversion to hear him: but at the close of the service Lady C---- and
the minister were ready to testify their approbation; and from this time
such was her Ladyship's partiality to Mr. Grant, that he frequently went
to London in the week to preach a lecture, and returned for the Sabbath;
and her Ladyship often came to Wellingborough to spend the Lord's-day."

From this time Mr. Grant had a happy change in his temporal
circumstances; for, connected with the liberal aid of her Ladyship,
another event took place which terminated in his favour. One of his
hearers had L200 left her, but found great difficulty in obtaining her
right. Mr. Grant interfered, and obtained it for her. Such was her
gratitude, that she left him L100 at her death.

During the first part of Mr. Grant's ministry at Wellingborough, he had
to struggle with great pecuniary difficulties; but he now found true
what a poor woman said to him on first coming to Wellingborough--"Mr.
Grant, I wonder what induced you to come to such a reduced and poor
people; how do you think you can be supported?" Then, as the effect of
an instantaneous impression, she said, "The Lord says, 'The silver and
the gold is mine'; and you, sir, shall have your share." Mr. Grant was
in very good circumstances at the close of his life.

In 1734 they determined to build a new Meeting House. They counted the
cost of such a building, erected in a plain manner, as they thought
would then comfortably contain their congregation, and found it to be
about L200. They built the walls, and put up part of the roof; but found
themselves, being still poor and weak, under the necessity of asking the
assistance of friends. This was obtained, so that the whole expense was
shortly cleared.

Mr. Grant's ministry extended over the lengthened period of forty-eight
years, during which 259 members were added to the Church. It was on
September 9th, 1770, that he preached for the last time, being very ill,
and for some time before this having been carried to the pulpit. On
March 22nd, 1771, after a long and painful illness, borne with Christian
patience and fortitude, Mr. Grant's death took place, closing a devoted
and successful ministry.

It is observed, that "Mr. Grant was very lively in the pulpit. His work
appeared so much like the work of heaven, that it often very much
surprised his hearers." "His charity was such, that he would deprive
himself of some comforts for the benefit of the poor." A friend said to
him, "I wonder, Mr. Grant, that you do not keep a better fire this cold
weather." He replied, "other people want fires as well as myself." He
was a firm Dissenter, and had a great aversion to all saints' days, &c.
His people frequently pressed him to preach on Christmas-day: at last he
complied with reluctancy, and chose these words--"Ye are of your father
the devil, and his works will ye do."

When the dreadful fire took place at Wellingborough in 1738, such was
the distress of the inhabitants that party names were forgotten; and the
town requested the Rev. Mr. Grant and the Rev. Mr. Homes, the clergyman,
to combine in collecting for the poor sufferers. When Mr. Homes saw the
great influence that Mr. Grant had, and the unlimited respect paid to
him, he determined he would go with nobody else, even on this charitable
occasion. Mr. Homes retained a great respect for him to the close of his
days, and would frequently say, "He was an honest and great man."

In the closing years of his life, Mr. Grant was deprived of sight. An
aged woman came to him on one occasion, when two of his friends were
leading him to the pulpit, and said, "Sir, how do you do? for I cannot
see you." He rejoined, "nor can I see you; but let us rejoice: there
will be no blind people in heaven."

The following outline of a sermon is preserved from one of Mr. Grant's
manuscripts (Psalm lxxix. 8). After a long introduction, he gives the
following divisions:--

    I. That God, as he is the God of Zion and the God of his Church,
    does sometimes remember against his own people their former
    iniquities, or the Church was mistaken here. "Oh, remember not
    against us," said they, "our former iniquities." Either God did
    remember against the Church their former iniquities, or I say the
    Church was mistaken; for the Church apprehends it so by her prayer.
    At this time she very plainly believes God did remember against her
    her former iniquities, and was now dealing with her by laying his
    rod upon her; therefore under it she cries, "Remember not against us
    our former iniquities; let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us,
    for we are brought very low."

    II. When a professing people, or particular persons, are under
    chastisements and the severe rebukes of their God, to plead his
    tender mercies is the best argument. "Let thy tender mercies," says
    the Church, "speedily prevent us;" that is, prevent our ruin, or we
    should be destroyed--we should be brought to nothing as a Church if
    thou sufferest the enemy to go forward in destroying them that are
    useful, cutting them off as they have done in times past, and the
    bodies of the saints should be still continued to be given as meat
    to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of heaven, as in verse
    2--then we should be brought to ruin: but, "Oh let thy," &c.

    III. We see from the words of our text, that the people of God may
    plead in their petitions their low estates for God's help; this may
    come in by way of petition in prayer. Our miseries and God's
    mercies are very proper pleas at the throne of grace. The poor
    publican made use of both in his prayer: "God be merciful to me a
    sinner."

    IV. Something by way of use, as (1.) Does God remember the sins of
    his people by way of chastisement? Let us take heed how we sin
    against him. (2.) Learn from hence, when God is chastising you, and
    laying his rod upon you, to turn to him that smites you, when he
    calls you by his rebukes. Many turn from God. (3.) We learn from
    hence, as the Church prays that God would not remember against her
    former iniquities, so we should do.

The following letter is inserted because it presents some pleasing
indications of the spirit that prevailed in Mr. Grant and his people.

    The Church of Christ at Wellingborough, under the pastoral care of
    William Grant, to those Christian brethren and sisters who have
    lately asked their dismission from the Church of Christ at
    Lutterworth, under the pastoral care of John Dowley, sendeth
    greeting, wishing grace and peace, &c.

    DEAR BRETHREN,--We, seeking the glory of our dear Lord Jesus, and
    the peace and prosperity of his cause in general, have been willing
    to concern ourselves in your affair so far as to seek the Lord about
    it, and then to weigh and consider well the case, which we have now
    done at no less than four sundry times; and our conclusion is, that
    we cannot receive you upon such a dismission: for, instead of a
    recommendation, you have an accusation, that you could not come to a
    temper; and then a conclusion, that your separation is groundless.
    How far this accusation and conclusion are just we cannot be proper
    judges, who live at so great a distance, and have no opportunity of
    conversing with the members of the Church, that so we might
    thoroughly know both sides; for, until then, we cannot see how we
    can judge righteously in the affair.

    All that we can further do in the case is, to mourn over it before
    the Lord. The breaches and hurts of Zion are many. Oh (have we not
    all reason to cry) that the Lord would arise in his glory, and build
    up her walls, and heal all her breaches! We earnestly desire that
    the Lord may appear for his cause in Lutterworth, that you may have
    Christ's Gospel and his law powerfully and plainly preached amongst
    you, that all that fear God in those parts may unitedly feed
    together in the ways of the Lord, and your children may be
    converted, and the seed of strangers also. Thus we subscribe
    ourselves your brethren in the best bonds.

    Owned in our Church-meeting, November 27th, 1741, and signed by us
    in the name of the Church.

                                                        WM. GRANT.

The original letter, in the handwriting of Mr. Grant, is in the
possession of T. Grundy, Esq., Northampton.

When Mr. Grant's infirmities greatly increased, both he and his people
were anxious to obtain an assistant before his departure. Prayer was
presented fervently on this behalf, that they might have a pastor come
after God's own heart. The fears of the people were great, on account of
their attachment to the ministry of Mr. Grant, that no one would be so
acceptable as to keep them together; as they considered few so
acceptable in the pulpit as Mr. Grant. After several disappointments in
probationers for the office, there remained this ground of hope--unity
of spirit and prayer were given and continued.

After a time they received information of Mr. John Carver, who was
pastor of a small Church in the village of Kirtling, Cambridgeshire, as
one that was very likely to suit them. He came and preached to them two
Sabbaths. General satisfaction prevailed in the Church and congregation;
without one dissenting voice they desired him to come and remain among
them. Mr. Carver accepted their call, and removed with his family to
Wellingborough, October 30th, 1770. The ordination took place June 20th
in the following year, which appears to have been conducted according to
the more general practice of the Churches. Mr. Smith, of Oundle, read
the hymns; Mr. Hayton began in prayer; Mr. Bond, of Toft, delivered the
introductory discourse, and asked the usual questions; Mr. Simmons, of
Bedford, gave the exhortation to the people, from Col. ii. 5, 6; Mr.
Ashpiner, of Poole, in Dorset, prayed; Mr. Gregson, of Rowell, gave the
charge, from Rom. i. 16; Mr. Walker, of Olney, concluded the service.
"And, blessed be the Lord!" it is added, "it was a very solemn day.
Every part of it was conducted with great order and satisfaction."

Then we have the covenant of the Church renewed; and another covenant
after revolt, partly given in the following terms:--

    We, the members of the Church of the living God assembling at
    Wellingborough, having greatly revolted from our dear Lord, in a
    deep sense of both former and later miscarriages against his love,
    blood, honour, crown, and dignity, as King of Souls and Churches,
    &c.

This seems to be imperfect, as it breaks off abruptly here.

During Mr. Carver's ministry, we find three who became members of the
Church, that afterwards became pastors of Christian societies--viz.: Mr.
Perry, the first pastor of the Church at Wollaston; Mr. Hennell, its
second pastor; and Mr. Hillyard, the first pastor of the Church at
Brigstock, and afterwards for many years minister at Olney.

In the year 1791 the present Meeting House was built. We are informed
"that there was much conversation previously on the subject; and at
length the congregation agreed to do it, if the expense could be
defrayed among themselves, without dependence on others." This was a
noble spirit. A subscription was opened among them, and found to be of
sufficient amount to warrant their proceeding in the business. While the
building was going forward they conducted a part of their service in
Cheese Lane Meeting, by the kind permission of the stated congregation
there. On the 11th of September, 1791, they met for the first time in
their new place of worship. "The satisfaction arising from having a
commodious large place of worship for ourselves and our posterity,
without assistance from anyone, was great indeed."

The following account of Mr. Carver's life, character, and ministry, was
drawn up by the late Mr. Bull, of Newport, the friend of Newton and
Cowper.

    The Rev. John Carver was born A.D. 1733, at Southill, in
    Bedfordshire, and was several years a member of the Independent
    Church in that place, of which Church his father was a deacon. That
    piety and those talents which shone with increasing lustre to the
    close of his life, discovered themselves at a very early period; but
    unaffected modesty and conscientious motives prevented his entering
    into the ministry till he had completed his thirtieth year. He began
    by privately exercising his gifts before the Church, and afterwards
    established an evening lecture among his poor neighbours, to whom he
    preached after the labours of the day were closed. He continued
    these exercises, and some occasional services, a considerable time
    before he relinquished his secular employment and devoted himself
    entirely to the service of the Church. At length, however, he
    accepted the unanimous and urgent invitation of a small but
    affectionate congregation at Kirtling, near Newmarket, in
    Cambridgeshire. With this people he remained until his removal to
    Wellingborough, where he continued his ministry with great
    respectability and usefulness near twenty-seven years, his life and
    his labours ending on January 31st, 1797.

    Mr. Carver had not the advantage of an academical education; but his
    understanding, naturally vigorous, was cultivated by reading and
    reflection. In conversation he was habitually serious without gloom,
    and cheerful without levity. He possessed to an uncommon degree the
    happy talent of giving a devotional turn to almost every subject.
    Far from assuming any consequential airs, he alone seemed insensible
    to what every one else perceived, that he was the life and soul of
    the company. While the advanced Christian felt himself edified by
    the depth and solidity of his remarks, the young, to whom he paid a
    particular attention, were charmed by his affectionate address, the
    simplicity of his language, and the aptness of his illustrations.

Though he did not pretend to an acquaintance with the original
languages, his biblical knowledge was truly respectable. A sound
judgment, a correct taste, and extraordinary diligence in reading and
studying the word of God, joined with a proper use of our best
commentators, enabled him to appear to great advantage as an interpreter
of Scripture.

    In preaching, he never addressed the passions, but in subservience
    to reason and truth. In explaining and defending the doctrines and
    precepts of Christianity he was calm, perspicuous, and often very
    ingenious. He was a firm but not dogmatizing advocate for the
    sentiments usually styled Calvinistical. In the practical and
    applicatory parts of his discourse he was peculiarly striking. His
    numerous hearers will doubtless long remember with what solemnity of
    voice and manner, with what pointed energy of expression, he warned
    the young, the thoughtless, and the dissipated; with how much skill
    and tenderness he administered the consolations of the Gospel to
    those who laboured under spiritual discouragements. On these
    occasions, not only his voice and gesture, but his countenance, and
    not unfrequently his tears, expressed the interest he felt in their
    eternal welfare. He greatly excelled in prayer. Often was his large
    congregation visibly affected by the seriousness and importunity of
    his addresses at a throne of grace.

    In private life he was truly exemplary. As a husband and a father,
    his prudence, gentleness, and love, the evenness of his temper and
    regularity of his conduct, commanded the veneration and promoted the
    happiness of his family. Under the pressure of great, not to say
    unparalleled afflictions, he was resigned; when troubles came in
    upon him as a mighty flood, his heart was still fixed, trusting in
    the Lord. Those who have witnessed his deportment on the most trying
    occasions have confessed their astonishment, and felt themselves
    constrained to say, "Verily this is the Lord's doing, and marvellous
    in our eyes."

    One part of his character we must not omit. He was an eminently
    peaceable man. To obtain and preserve peace he would sacrifice
    everything, a good conscience only excepted. The happy fruits of
    this disposition, and the beneficial effects of such an example,
    will, we trust, continue to be enjoyed many years by those who have
    had opportunity of observing his great anxiety and unwearied
    exertions for the sake of peace.

    In his last illness, though his disorder was of a very painful and
    distressing nature, yet neither the extremity of his sufferings on
    the one hand, nor their long continuance on the other, did ever
    extort from his lips a single expression of impatience or distrust.
    His understanding was unimpaired and his faith unshaken to the last
    moment; and he expired in the act of repeating that triumphant song,
    "O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory?"

After the death of Mr. Carver, the congregation was unsettled for some
time, and was dependent on supplies through the next two or three years.
At length Mr. Bell was invited to become their pastor. But his ministry
proved of short continuance. It is said, "that he was possessed of good
talents; but was very high in doctrine, denied the Gospel call to
sinners as sinners--that he manifested too great a degree of levity,
having much jocular wit." "He came to Wellingborough like a burning
light, and went out like a candle in the estimation of many. There were,
most probably, faults on both sides; but some sad effects resulted, it
is considered, from his sentiments and his levity." He continued only
two or three years.

Mr. Renals was the next pastor of this Church. His ordination took place
January 7, 1804. On that occasion, "Mr. Hennell, of Wollaston, formerly
a deacon of the Church, engaged in supplicating the divine presence and
blessing; Mr. Whitehead, of Creaton, delivered the introductory
discourse, asked the usual questions, and received Mr. Renals'
confession of faith; Mr. Bull, of Newport, offered up the ordination
prayer, with imposition of hands; the charge succeeded, by Mr. Grundy,
of Lutterworth, from I Tim. iv. 6; Mr. Gill, of Harborough, addressed
the people, from Phil. ii. 29; Mr. Washbourn, fellow labourer with Mr.
Renals in the same town, concluded with prayer.

The congregation assembled again in the evening, when, after prayer by
Mr. Hillyard, of Bedford, Mr. Toller, of Kettering, preached from Psalm
xxii. 30, and Mr. Phillips, of Chedworth, Gloucestershire, closed the
service with prayer." In connexion with this account it is stated, "that
a very large concourse of people, and thirty ministers, were the
agreeable witnesses of this important and happy settlement; and it is
with the sincerest pleasure we add, that the most complete union subsists
between both the Independent ministers of this town, and that the spirit
of brotherly love prevails among the people. May it be perpetual!"

Mr. Renals' ministry extended over 43 years in this situation, so that
he was one of a remarkable list of four pastors of this Church, whose
united services here make up 150 years. During the pastorate of Mr.
Renals, 113 members were added to the Church; he resigned his charge in
the year 1847.

Numerous changes had taken place in the congregation during Mr. Renals'
labours among them; there was a considerable decline in the number of
hearers in many of the latter years of his ministry, and the Church
became reduced to thirty members; this would be partly owing to another
Independent Church being formed in the town, and partly to unpleasant
circumstances that arose among them. But Mr. Renals had some sincere and
attached friends to the close of his life. He was born in the village of
Rempstone, in Nottinghamshire, April, 1769. His mother was a pious woman
of the Baptist persuasion, from whose counsels and prayers he derived
spiritual advantage. When he arrived at mature age, he resided some time
in Leicester, where he frequently heard and much admired that eminent
clergyman, the Rev. Thomas Robinson, of St. Mary's, well known for his
clear evangelical views, and for the zealous and devoted manner in which
he preached the Gospel in that town for many years. Mr. Renals
afterwards settling in Nottingham, became a member of the Church at
Castle Gate Meeting, then under the pastoral care of the Rev. Richard
Alliott, by whom he was introduced to Rotherham College, which he
entered in the autumn of 1798. Being then nearly thirty years of age,
and not having had the advantages of preparatory training, the tutors
wisely deviated from their usual course, and directed his attention
chiefly to theological studies. He first preached for a time at
Hinchley, in Leicestershire, going thither in 1802, but removed to
Wellingborough in the closing part of the next year. He had a vigorous
constitution; preached three times every Lord's-day; was a warm advocate
for maintaining the afternoon service, in opposition to the modern plan
of morning and evening only. He frequently preached on a week evening,
in some of the villages in the vicinity of Wellingborough. He was a man
of genuine piety, decided attachment to the principles of the Gospel,
sterling integrity, and considerable activity. If his mind was not
strictly logical, his spirit was devotional; if his temper was not
always amiable, his heart was sincere; if prudence did not guide in
every effort, the aim, we believe, was always upright; if there was not
excessive candour, there was much genuine kindness. Advancing years
presented a softening, meliorating, ripening influence. He would labour
in the cause of God, until entirely prevented by his last affliction.
While he cordially welcomed his successor in the ministry, and offered a
fervent prayer at his ordination for him and for the people over whom he
had so long presided, "he continued preaching most Sabbaths at the
village of Finedon, whither he was preparing to go when his last
affliction compelled him to desist and relinquish the attempt." After a
few weeks of considerable suffering, borne with exemplary patience and
fortitude, enjoying perfect peace and a hope full of immortality, he
died, being nearly 80 years of age.

Mr. Cornelius Curtis Tyte, from the academy of Rotherham, was
unanimously invited as successor to Mr. Renals. He was ordained in
October, 1847, when Mr. Bellamy, of Sheffield, now of Buckingham,
delivered the introductory discourse; Mr. Renals offered the ordination
prayer; and Dr. Stowell, Mr. Tyte's tutor, delivered the charge, from
Col. iv. 17. In the evening, Mr. Toller, of Kettering, preached to the
people from Acts ii. 42. Since this time 21 members have been added to
the Church. The present number of communicants is 37. There are 100
children in the Sabbath-schools; in actual attendance, between 80 and
90.

Occasional services are conducted in one village in the vicinity of
Wellingborough, the village of Finedon. The happy union of the present
pastor and his people, and the harmony that subsists between them and
the other ministers and congregations generally in the town, present, we
trust, a cheering prospect for the future, that "walking in the fear of
the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, they may be greatly
edified and multiplied."


SECTION 3.--THE CHURCH AT SALEM CHAPEL.

The Independent Church at Salem Chapel, Wellingborough, was originally
formed by those who separated from the Church at Cheese Lane Meeting, in
the same town, in the year 1812. However much this separation might be
regretted at the time, after the lapse of forty years it would be unwise
to attempt to enter into the grounds of that separation. The unpleasant
feelings at first produced have, we trust, long ere this entirely
subsided, and the pastors and the people can now go forward in
harmonious co-operation for the promotion of the same great cause to
which they are devoted.

It was on the evening of the Lord's-day, September 21st, 1812, that the
Church was formed here, in the presence of the Rev. Joseph Whitehead, of
Creaton, and the Rev. Shadrach Jackson, of Old. They united in a Church
covenant, which they have thus expressed:--

    We hope that by grace we have been brought to see our last state and
    condition; to behold the remedy prepared in the Gospel, Christ Jesus
    the Lord; to flee to him as such; to put our trust in him for life
    and salvation: and we do hereby resign up ourselves to Christ, in
    Church fellowship and communion, resolving and promising in his
    strength to devote ourselves entirely to him; to believe his
    promises, live by faith upon them, obey his precepts, hearken to the
    voice of his providence, and serve him according to all the laws,
    statutes, and ordinances of his house; taking the written word for
    our rule, and aiming at the glory of God in all things.

    We do further covenant and agree to walk together in Christian
    fellowship; regularly and constantly to attend all the ordinances of
    God's house; and that we will watch over one another in love,
    seeking each other's happiness and welfare, by sympathizing with the
    afflicted, comforting the mourner, strengthening the weak,
    confirming the wavering, reclaiming the backslider, and by every
    possible means do all that we can to promote each other's peace,
    comfort, and edification in Christ Jesus our Lord; while we study
    the peace and prosperity of the whole Church, that God may be in the
    midst of her, and abundantly bless her.

    Thus Christians of old "first gave up themselves to the Lord, and
    then to each other by the will of God."

The first pastor of the Church was the Rev. Pollard Davis, whose
ordination took place June 1st, 1813, when we find Mr. Gill, of
Harborough, Mr. Whitehead, of Creaton, Mr. Bull, of Newport, Mr. Fuller,
of Kettering, Mr. Chater, of Kibworth, engaged in the services of the
day.

Mr. Davis's ministry continued until January 24th, 1821, when he
resigned his charge. He appears to have admitted 23 members to the
Church.

Rev. C. T. Sevier was the next pastor, who entered on his charge in the
year 1822, and continued for about 12 years, removing from
Wellingborough in the year 1834.

Rev. J. Bevan was the immediate successor of Mr. Sevier, entering on his
pastoral labours September 20th, 1835. The ministry of Mr. Bevan was of
short continuance at Wellingborough; receiving an invitation to become
the pastor of a Church at Liverpool, he soon resigned his charge here.
He was succeeded by the Rev. Robert Davis, who, having received a
unanimous invitation to become their pastor, entered on his stated
services February 18th, 1838. The number of members in the Church when
Mr. Davis became pastor appears to have been 79, and at the close of his
ministry they numbered 107. Mr. Davis removed from Wellingborough to
Turvey, in Bedfordshire.

In July, 1846, the present minister, the Rev. Thomas Thomas, who was
educated at Homerton College, after supplying the congregation about six
months, was ordained to the pastoral office. On that occasion, the Rev.
J. A. Morris, of London, delivered the introductory discourse; Mr.
Toller, of Kettering, offered the ordination prayer; Dr. Pye Smith (Mr.
Thomas's tutor) delivered the charge; Mr. Robinson, of Kettering,
preached to the people. The attendance was large, and the services of an
interesting character.

Since Mr. Thomas commenced his ministry, new school-rooms have been
erected for the accommodation of the Sabbath-schools. The cost of them
was L300. They were opened on Tuesday, September 18th, 1849, when the
Rev. Dr. Reed, of London, and the Rev. J. Toller, of Kettering,
preached. There are 184 children in the Sabbath-schools. The present
number of communicants is 100.

The villages supplied with regular services in the vicinity of
Wellingborough are Doddington and Wilby, and occasionally Orlingbury. As
this Church is of comparatively recent formation, and as all those that
have sustained the pastoral office over it are, we believe, still
living, the account we can present is necessarily short.

The present pastor and his flock will rejoice in the tokens of divine
favour they have received; and will go forward, we trust, with the
cheering hope of continued and yet more abundant supplies of divine
blessings, so that peace and prosperity may now be increasingly and
permanently experienced in this department of Zion.




CHAPTER X.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT OUNDLE.


In attempting to trace the principles of Nonconformity to their earliest
manifestations in the town of Oundle, after the reformation from Popery,
we find two Puritan divines ministering here in the course of the
sixteenth century. These were men who could not conform to all the rites
and ceremonies of the Church as by law established, and who had to
suffer much for their refusal to comply with its requirements.

The first of these was Eusebius Paget, who was born at Cranford, in this
county, and educated in Christ's College, Oxford. During his abode at
Oxford he broke his right arm, and was lame of it ever after. When he
removed from the University he became vicar of Oundle and rector of
Langton, but was exceedingly harassed on account of his Nonconformity.

On January 29th, 1573, he was cited by Scambler, Bishop of Peterborough,
who first suspended him for three weeks, and then deprived him of his
living, worth L100 per annum. Several others were suspended and deprived
at the same time, because they could not with a good conscience
subscribe to certain promises and engagements proposed to them by the
Bishop. And this Dr. Edward Scambler, successively Bishop of
Peterborough and Norwich, was the first pastor of a Protestant
congregation in London in the reign of Queen Mary; but was compelled, on
account of the severity of the persecution, to relinquish the situation.
He was a learned man; very zealous against the Papists; and was probably
driven into a state of exile. But surely he forgot his former
circumstances, when he became a zealous persecutor of his brethren in
the days of Elizabeth; not remembering that they were as conscientious
in their objections to what they considered to be the remains of Popery
in a reformed Church, and in their endeavours to obtain a purer mode of
discipline and worship, as he had been in his efforts against what he
formerly disapproved. After this Mr. Paget was preferred to the rectory
of Kilkhampton, in Cornwall.

When Mr. Paget and his brethren were deprived, they presented a
supplication to the Queen and the Parliament for their restoration to
their beloved ministry, but to no purpose; they must subscribe, or be
buried in silence.

Further suffering awaited Mr. Paget: his unfeeling persecutors, not
content with cutting him off from his ministry and his living, ordered
him to be taken into custody and sent up to London. He was therefore
apprehended, with Mr. John Oxenbridge, another leading person in the
Association in Northamptonshire and Warwickshire, and they were both
carried prisoners to the metropolis, by an order from Archbishop
Grindal. It does not however appear how long they were kept in custody,
nor what further persecution they suffered. Mr. Paget filled different
situations in the ministry afterwards, and was repeatedly subjected to
ecclesiastical censures. He died in London, May, 1617. Wood says of
him, "He was many years a constant and faithful preacher of God's word";
and Fuller styles him "a golden sophister, a painful preacher, and
author of an excellent history of the Bible." He had a son, Ephraim
Paget, who was born in Northamptonshire, probably at Oundle, in 1575,
who became a Puritan minister.

It was probably not very long after Mr. Paget was thus driven from
Oundle, that Hugh Clark, A.M. was settled in the ministry here. He was
born at Burton-upon-Trent, August 15th, 1563, and educated first in
Jesus College, Cambridge, then in the University of Oxford. It is
stated, "that when he came to Oundle he found the people in a state of
the most deplorable ignorance and profaneness, living in the constant
profanation of the Lord's-day by Whitsun ales, morris-dancing, and other
ungodly sports. For a considerable time he laboured to convince them of
their sins and to reclaim them from their evil ways, but without any
prospect of success. Though God visited several of the ringleaders by
successive remarkable judgments, they still persisted in their profane
sports. They seem to have made a covenant with death, and to have been
at agreement with hell. At length, however, there was a pleasing
alteration. They began to take serious heed to the ministry of the word;
their lives became reformed, and many were called to a saving knowledge
of the Gospel."

During Mr. Clark's abode in this place he experienced several remarkable
providential deliverances, among which was the following: Having in his
'Sermon on the Sabbath-day' announced the just judgment of God against
certain particular sins to which the young people were much addicted,
the next morning a lusty young man came to his house wishing to see
him. Mr. Clark, having invited him into his chamber, and knowing his
vicious character, sharply reproved him, and warned him of his awful
danger; and God wrought so effectually upon his heart by this pointed
and faithful dealing, that the man, falling down on his knees and crying
for pardon, pulled out a dagger, by which he had determined to murder
him. "I came hither," said the man, "with a full resolution to stab you;
but God has prevented me. This was occasioned by your terrifying sermon
yesterday; but if you please to forgive me, I shall never attempt any
such thing again." Mr. Clark freely pardoned the offence, and after
giving him suitable advice, dismissed him.

In the year 1590 Mr. Clarke removed from Oundle to Wollaston, in
Warwickshire, where he was chosen to the pastoral office by the people,
and received the presentation to the living from Sir Roger Wigston. He
was once indicted for high treason, because he had prayed that "God
would forgive the Queen her sins"; but was acquitted. He was a constant,
zealous, and laborious preacher, a person of great learning and piety,
useful in his ministry, and an acute and powerful disputant. His death
occurred November 6th, 1634, in the 72nd year of his age. Three of his
descendants were numbered amongst the ejected ministers in the year
1662.

At the time of the restoration of Charles II., it appears that Mr.
Richard Resbury was vicar of Oundle, and that he became one of the
Nonconformist ministers, resigning his living six weeks before
Bartholomew-day. Here he afterwards preached in his own hired house,
practised medicine with some success, and was advised with by persons of
all ranks. We are informed that he was a man of brisk parts, and very
facetious; but had the general reputation of a solid divine, and made a
considerable figure in this county. He was particularly honoured for
what he wrote in opposition to Mr. John Goodwin, on the Arminian
controversy. In addition to what he published on this subject, he wrote
'The Tabernacle of God with Man; or, the visible Church Reformed: A
Discourse of the Nature and Discipline of the visible Church.'

Robert Wild, D.D., who was ejected from the living of Ayno, in this
county, after his ejectment came to reside at Oundle. He was a native of
St. Ives, in Huntingdonshire; educated at St. John's College, Cambridge.
He published 'The Arraignment of a Sinner at the Bar of Divine Justice:
an Assize Sermon, preached at Oxford, 1655, and dedicated to John
Cartwright, Esq., of Ayno.' Several other works appeared as the
production of his pen. He was noted for his facetiousness, but was very
serious in serious things. As an illustration of this, it is related
that Mr. Job Orton received the following statement from an ancient
Christian in Northamptonshire:--

    Mr. Baxter, being much displeased at some instances of his
    facetiousness which he had heard of, called on him, in his way from
    Kidderminster to London, to reprove him, as the times were very
    dark; and he appears to have thought that there was something
    especially unsuitable in this to such days of trial. When he came to
    Ayno, he found the Doctor just gone to Church, it being observed by
    him and his people as a fast-day. Mr. Baxter goes to the Church,
    seats himself in one corner, and becomes so deeply interested, and
    so well satisfied, that when the service was over he came to the
    Doctor, thanked him for his service, and desired that he would
    reprove and rebuke him sharply, as he deserved it. Being desired to
    explain himself, Mr. Baxter said, "for my great uncharitableness
    and folly in regarding reports," &c.; and then told him why he had
    called upon him.

After Dr. Wild came to reside at Oundle, it pleased God to visit Mr.
Resbury, the ejected vicar, with the palsy; and the Doctor wrote letters
to all parts of the country in order to raise him some money to take him
to Bath, for his relief. A Mr. Stancliff wrote of him, "that he was
excellently qualified unto his ministerial work; none more melted and
melting in prayer, nor more serious and fervent in preaching Christ and
his Gospel." He died at Oundle, in the year 1679. A little before his
death he preached on Rev. xiv. 12: "Here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus;" when he said, "it is but a
short time, and I shall be in paradise."

There was also in these days a Mr. Strickland Negus, ejected from
Chester, in this county, who was one of the Thursday lecturers at
Oundle. It appears to have been the custom of the Puritan ministers of
this county, while in the Church, to have week-day lectures preached at
their different churches by their brethren alternately. Of Mr. Negus it
is said, that "he was a truly good man, and a useful preacher."

Mr. Edward Cauthorn, ejected from Tansover, was one of the lecturers at
Oundle, where he had a good estate, and whither he came to reside after
his ejectment; and here he died in 1665 or 1666. "He was a man of great
meekness, and a very able preacher."

Whether these Nonconformist ministers went so far as to form a Church
here on Congregational principles, we are not informed; but their
example and their services appear to have been the means of a regular
congregation being gathered in these early days of Nonconformity; and
probably the spirit of persecution might not now discover itself so
much here as in some other parts of the country, which might be one
reason why several of those who were cast out of the Church resorted to
this place.

That there was a stated congregation, and probably a Church formed,
appears to be manifest by the next fact in relation to these things that
we find recorded; which is, that Mr. Shepherd, who had been minister at
Tillbrook, in Bedfordshire, on quitting his living a few years after the
passing of the Act of Uniformity, became pastor to a Dissenting
congregation at Oundle. This is the minister of whom it is stated, in
our account of the Church at Kettering, "that he had the true spirit of
his office, his preaching being very awful and affecting, and his life
very holy." About 1697 he removed to Kettering, where, a few months
after, he died.

There is a tradition generally credited in Oundle, that the Meeting
House was built immediately after the passing of "the Toleration Act,"
in 1790 or 1791. The founder was Joseph Hewson, a draper in the town,
who erected the building on his own freehold, for the use of himself and
other Nonconformists in the neighbourhood, who, as in other places, were
but too happy to emerge from the state of depression into which they had
been cast, to a state of comparative liberty: but in 1724, David Hewson,
of Market Harborough, also a draper, son and heir of the founder, sold
the property to the society for the nominal sum of L40; and in the month
of August, the same year, the first trust deed was made, settling the
building for ever as a place of religious worship, and conveying the fee
of the freehold to twelve trustees. It was in the deed denominated a
place for a Presbyterian congregation, but now the Church is formed on
the principles of the Independents. After Mr. Shepherd's removal from
Oundle, there appears to have been a Mr. Atkinson pastor of the Church,
for on the sacramental cups is this inscription: "The Rev. Mr. Atkinson
being our present pastor, 1713."

The next pastor was Mr. Joseph King, who probably might be first
assistant and afterwards successor to Mr. Atkinson, as there were three
of Mr. King's children buried in Oundle Churchyard, the first in 1712,
the other two in 1714. Mr. King died in 1720. A tombstone was erected to
his memory in the Churchyard, on which is a Latin inscription. The
following is a translation:--

              JOSEPH KING died 29th Jany.,
                A.D. 1719/20, aged 46.

       Thy spirit upright, and thy heart sincere;
           True piety engaged thy fervent love;
                  Instructed from above
           To feed the flock committed to thy care;
        And with the eloquent they will thy name revere.
    Happy to have fulfilled thy sacred toil, the end arrives,
                 And here thou liest.
        Blest man! thy name for ages shall survive.
        The monument that marks thy dust shall fall,
                Decays the marble tomb,
               The sepulchre comes down:
  The fame which goodness gives shall long survive them all.

Mr. King was the father of Mr. Samuel King, who was minister at Welford
for forty years. This son was born in 1815, and was little more than
four years of age when his father died. He was regarded as given in
answer to maternal prayer; for his mother, Mrs. Hannah King, a woman of
a devoted spirit, earnestly desired to have a son that might become a
minister of the Gospel. She long survived her husband; lived to realize
her highest desire on this behalf; and had the happiness of closing her
days, in a good old age, in the house of her son, when he was minister
of the Independent Church at Welford. On an upright stone in the
Churchyard of that village there is the following inscription, probably
expressive of the affectionate remembrance of her son:--

  In memory of Mrs. HANNAH KING, relict of the
  Rev. Joseph King, of Oundle, who departed this
  life the 25th day of April, 1763, aged 81 years.

      Farewell, bright soul, a long farewell,
        Till we shall meet again above,
      In the sweet groves where pleasures dwell,
        And trees of life bear fruits of love.

      Sweet soul, we leave thee to thy rest;
        Enjoy thy Jesus and thy God,
      Till we, from bonds of clay released,
        Spring out, and climb th' heav'nly road.

The next pastor of the Church at Oundle was Mr. Daniel Goodrich; his
name was inserted in the first trust deed of the Meeting House, in 1724.
In the account which Doddridge gives of his ordination at Northampton,
in 1730, he mentions Mr. Goodrich, of Oundle, as commencing the service
by prayer and reading the Scriptures. In the memoirs of Mr. Sanderson,
one of the pastors of the Church at Rowell, we find a short letter from
Mr. Goodrich, dated December 26th, 1740, which pleasingly indicates the
spirit of piety, and the attachment of the writer to evangelical
principles.

    I thank you for your long expected favour, and am glad to find that
    you hang upon the covenant; it is the great prop and support of our
    souls. Pleasant frames, and to live by sense, are what we are fond
    of; but faith and patience must have their perfect work here--these
    shall have nothing to do above. Then the redeemed of the Lord shall
    live by sight, in full fruition--see face to face, and know as they
    are known; no clouds shall come between their beloved and them; no
    corruptions from within, no thorns and briars from without; and a
    brother shall not then be as a thorn hedge; but as God is love, we
    shall be like him, swallowed up in love to God and to one another. A
    little while, and thus it shall be. The wilderness is but a short
    passage, though difficult and troublesome. Our lights are but to
    burn here for a little while. The Lord grant, that we may so shine
    that our heavenly Father may be glorified.

    I beg the Lord may fit you for your work, and crown your labours
    with success, &c., &c.                             D. GOODRICH.

At the ordination of Mr. Boyce over the Church at Kettering, Mr.
Goodrich was engaged in asking the questions and offering the ordination
prayer. He died February 25th, 1765, aged 66 years.

In the report of Homerton College, the name of Jeremiah Longfield is
given, as a student who settled at Oundle. Though the exact date does
not appear, it seems to have been soon after the death of Mr. Goodrich.

The next in succession appears to have been Mr. Wm. Ward, who was
ordained at Oundle, and continued there for about four years, when he
removed to Dudley.

After Mr. Ward, Mr. Wright, from Ringwood, was the pastor for twelve
years. He died at Boston, and was buried in the Chapel at Oundle, where
also his wife and two daughters were interred.

Mr. R. Forsyth was pastor for two years, and then Mr. Reynold Hogg, who
was afterwards minister at Kimbolton and Thrapstone, and treasurer of
the Baptist Missionary Society.

Mr. Isaac Cooke was pastor for two years, when he removed to Narborough.

Mr. Joseph Chadwick became the pastor of this Church in the year 1790,
and continued his ministry here for forty years. Mr. Chadwick was a
native of Trull, near Taunton, in Somersetshire, where he was born in
1751. He has been heard to say, that his father was a man of no energy,
and that whatever advantage he might gain from parental instruction, or
example, or aid, was derived from his mother. We have heard, that he was
a descendant from the early Nonconformists, and he evidently took a
great interest in the memorials of their trials and sufferings. Of this
he gave a singular proof at a meeting of the County Association, held at
Ashley, when he delivered a sermon from Heb. x. 34, "And took joyfully
the spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven
a better and an enduring substance;" at the close of his discourse
reading some memoranda of the sufferings and losses, the fines exacted,
the goods sold, &c., of our Nonconformist forefathers. There was a
person of the same name, a Mr. Joseph Chadwick, ejected from the living
of Winesford, in Somersetshire, of whom Mr. Chadwick was great-grandson.
He was also a descendant of Mr. Thorn, ejected from Weymouth, Dorset.

In his youth he was apprenticed to a peruke-maker and hair-dresser, at
Taunton. During the course of his apprenticeship, his general conduct
and marked piety, and ardent thirst for knowledge, as indicated by his
love of reading, attracted the attention of John Toller, Esq., an
attorney at Taunton, and the grandfather of the late Rev. T. N. Toller,
of Kettering. That gentleman, it is thought, bought out the latter part
of Mr. Chadwick's apprenticeship, and sent him to study under the Rev.
Mr. Kirkup, of South Petherton, who had been the preceptor of the late
Mr. Toller's early years. With Mr. Kirkup Mr. Chadwick continued two
years, and made remarkable progress in his studies, especially in the
classics. At the expiration of his residence with Mr. Kirkup, he was
sent, under Mr. Toller's patronage, to the Western College, as his name
stands in the list of their students. He was first settled at
Wellington, Somersetshire; from whence, after a few years, he removed to
Sherborne, in Dorsetshire, and came from thence to Oundle. He was a man
of considerable learning, and an indefatigable reader of the most solid
works in theology and in general literature. He resigned his charge at
Midsummer, 1831. He died May 7, 1841, in the 90th year of his age. Mr.
Toller, of Kettering, preached his funeral sermon.

Mr. Ebenezer Prant, from Highbury College, succeeded Mr. Chadwick. He
resigned his charge in 1835, and is now one of the Secretaries to the
London Missionary Society.

Mr. Abraham Calovius Simpson, LL.D., of the Glasgow University, was the
next pastor, serving this Church and congregation in the ministry of the
Gospel from 1836 to 1841, when he resigned his charge.

The present pastor, Mr. Alfred Newth--who studied at Homerton College,
and had been previously settled at Ripley, near Christ Church,
Hants--came to Oundle in the year 1842, as the successor of Dr. Simpson.
The present number of communicants is about 70. There are 120 children
in the Sabbath-schools.

Occasional services are conducted in two villages in the vicinity of
Oundle, viz., Tansor and Glapthorne.




CHAPTER XI.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT WEEDON BECK.


In the village of Weedon, about eight miles from Northampton, where
there is a royal military depot with barracks for 1500 men, storehouses
and magazines capable of stowing 200,000 small arms, there stands an
Independent Chapel for preaching the Gospel of peace, and maintaining
the cause of Christ by the voluntary aid of his followers. It is a
respectable village Chapel, capable of seating about 500 hearers; it has
a grave-yard in the front, and commodious school-rooms behind.

At the time of the Restoration, a Mr. George Martin was vicar of Weedon.
Such was his loyalty, that he lost an arm for the King in Sir George
Booth's rising. But, as one that "exercised himself to have a conscience
void of offence both towards God and man"--first fearing God, then
honouring the king--when the Act of Uniformity passed, he renounced his
connexion with the Church rather than violate his conscience. Such was
the spirit of the times, that in 1667 he was in Warwick Gaol for some
months, for preaching the Gospel. Some time after his ejectment he
exercised his ministry amongst a small number of worthy people at Stony
Stratford, who had a great value for his memory a considerable time
after. "He was," we are informed, "a serious, holy, good-tempered, and
courageous man."

It is probable that the cause of Nonconformity in Weedon owes its origin
to the vicar's separation from the Church. Such an event would excite
the attention of the people, and promote inquiry among them; and they
would be led to seek those ministrations without the Church of which
they were deprived within her pale by the oppressive enactments of the
day. There had been a number from Weedon and the neighbourhood who had
gone to the Church at Norton to hear Mr. Robert Allen, another of the
ejected ministers, who was a very popular preacher, whose Church was
crowded with hearers from the places around.

"A congregation was jointly formed here and at Floor prior to 1668, in
which year the first trust deed is dated."

The earliest known minister of this society was Mr. Peyto. This person
was engaged in the ordination service of Mr. J. Heywood, at Potterspury,
in 1740. He was succeeded by Mr. Thomas Howe, a native of Northampton,
and one of the Daventry students. "He removed before 1770 to Yarmouth,
in Norfolk, where he continued until his death. He published several
pamphlets and sermons."

This is the second pastor, as recorded in Baker's history of this
county. But in the early history of the Church at West End,
Wellingborough, we find the following notice of a Mr. Saywell, who
appears to have been minister at Floor and Weedon: "We ordered a letter
to the Church at Floor, with our judgment that Mr. Saywell was a member
and an officer there, and ought to abide till his ministry was
fulfilled. We ordered another to the Church at Weedon, to satisfy them
with it, and to encourage them to wait with patience." This person must
have been about the second pastor that was placed over them.

Mr. Samuel Braybrook, another Daventry student, is recorded as
succeeding Mr. Howe, and as afterwards settling at Rendham, in Suffolk.

Then we find the names of Mr. John Offord and Mr. Phares; and then Mr.
William Severn, concerning whom we are informed "that he was a native of
Nottingham; at an early age became a popular preacher among the
Methodists; was for two years a travelling associate with their
celebrated founder, John Wesley. But his sentiments undergoing a change,
he went to study divinity at Edinburgh, on leaving which University he
accepted an invitation to this society, from whence he removed to
Welford in 1782, afterwards to Hinckley, in Leicestershire, where he
embraced Unitarianism. He died at Hull, in June, 1813, in his
fifty-ninth year."

After this, we have the name of Mr. Renfrew; and after him, Mr. Evan
Johns, who removed to Welford; then Mr. T. Spencer, who was appointed in
1790, and resigned in a few years after.

Mr. Joseph Gronow was chosen to succeed Mr. Spencer. He was ordained
April 27th, 1797, when the Rev. Messrs. Chipperfield, Wood, Horsey,
Bicknell, Toller, and Denny engaged in the several parts of the service.

"Mr. Gronow's ministry was very acceptable and useful. He died Dec. 9th,
1817. He lost a beloved wife a few months before his own death. During
four months' severe illness, probably brought on by the loss of his wife
and the removal of a highly esteemed friend, he manifested a truly
Christian spirit. He had been pastor of the Church more than 21 years,
and the means of greatly improving the state of the society. Few
ministers have been more generally beloved by those who knew them, or
have lived more in the affections of their people. In the time of his
illness preparations were making for his going to Bath, with the hope
that the waters might, under the blessing of God, restore his health;
but when all the arrangements were nearly completed, and the funds
necessary for such a journey provided, through the liberality of
benevolent individuals, it pleased God to remove him. The affliction
which he suffered during the last fortnight of his life was most
painful; but the closing scene was remarkably peaceful. His remains were
interred the following Monday, with every token of respect, under the
pulpit where he had so often preached the Gospel of Christ. Many of his
brethren attended the funeral, six of whom supported the pall. His death
was improved by Mr. H. Knight, of Yelvertoft, from Acts xx. 38, to a
most numerous and deeply affected congregation."

On a neat mural tablet of white marble, at the right hand of the pulpit,
is the following inscription:--

                            This Stone
          has been raised by an affectionate congregation
              to the memory of their beloved pastor,
                    the REV. JOSEPH GRONOW,
                who for more than twenty-one years
          continued diligently, faithfully, and successfully
              to discharge the duties of his office.
        His affection, simplicity, sympathy, and sincerity
          conciliated the respect of all who knew him,
            and peculiarly endeared him to his flock.
          With great calmness, and with a blessed hope
                    of a glorious immortality,
      he closed his mortal course, December the 9th, 1817,
                            aged 49.
            "Though dead, he yet speaks to his people,"
  for whose salvation he always manifested the greatest solicitude.

Mr. Gronow was about the middle stature, plain in appearance; as a
preacher, serious, affectionate, fervent. Plainness and simplicity
marked his language and the plan of his sermons, while they were full of
evangelical truth, setting forth experimental and practical piety. He
preached as one concerned for the honour of his great Master and the
good of immortal souls. Mr. Gronow had been assistant for a short time
to Mr. Maurice, of Stretton-under-Fosse, before he came to Weedon. He
was succeeded by Mr. James Pinkerton, who had been a student at the
Newport Academy, and was ordained here May 6th, 1819, and was pastor of
this Church for thirteen years. In the year 1831 he resigned, and
removed to Totteridge, near London; but he had not filled this situation
more than two years, we believe, before he was summoned from the scenes
of time and the services of the Church on earth. Mr. Pinkerton was of a
very amiable and pious spirit, devoted to his Master's work. His sermons
appeared to be well prepared, full of important and appropriate thought,
discovering some energy of mind, and delivered with animation of manner.
He frequently preached at the meetings of the County Association, and
was always heard with interest.

At the close of 1831, the present pastor, Mr. Isaac Evans, came on
probation, and was ordained July 24th, 1832. During the ministry of Mr.
Evans a new school-room has been erected, at the cost of L120, which was
opened in the year 1847. The Sabbath-school is conducted here,
containing about 125 children.

The present number of communicants is 80. One service is conducted at
Floor every Sabbath, where the congregation is considered as a branch of
the Church at Weedon. The present Chapel there was built in the year
1810.

Some alterations and improvements have recently been made in the Chapel
at Weedon, at a cost of L115, which will, we trust, add to the comfort
of the place and the accommodation of the congregation. All would be
accompanied with the fervent and united desire of the pastor and his
flock that abundant tokens of the blessing of the great Head of the
Church may attend all their efforts.




CHAPTER XII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT LONG BUCKBY.


The populous village of Long Buckby, containing more than 2600
inhabitants, has a neat and commodious Independent Chapel, capable of
seating about 700 hearers, with convenient school-rooms, and a
respectable dwelling-house for the minister. Previous to the erection of
the present building there was an old Chapel, which had stood for many
years in another situation; but it is much to be regretted in this case,
as in some others, that no accounts have been preserved of the origin or
early history of this Church.

Before the year 1662, when Mr. Richard Allen, who became one of the
ejected ministers, preached in the parish Church of Norton, a short
distance from this village, amongst other places mentioned from which
hearers came to attend on his ministry, there were some from Long
Buckby; but whether it was very soon after the ejectment of their
favourite preacher that they sought the ministration of the
Nonconformists in this place we have no account. The earliest notice we
find of an Independent minister at Long Buckby is in the account of the
ordination of Mr. Tingey, at Northampton, in 1709, when a Mr. Jackson,
minister at Long Buckby, was present. In the account which Mr. Sanders,
one of the pastors of the Church at Kettering, gives of his ordination,
as preserved in the records of that Church, which took place November
23, 1721, he states--"Mr. Cartwright, of Buckby, began with prayer, and
prayed well." This proves to us that there was a Mr. Cartwright, a
Dissenting minister, at Buckby, 131 years ago. Again, we find his
signature attached to the certificate of Mr. Hextal's ordination at
Creaton in 1738, which shows us that his ministry extended over some
considerable period in this place. He was also engaged in the ordination
of Mr. J. Heywood, at Potterspury, in 1740.

As a further memorial of him, we have discovered a very old upright
gravestone in the Churchyard of Long Buckby, erected to his memory. With
some considerable difficulty we deciphered the inscription, which states
concisely his age, the time of his death, and the character he bore.

                      In memory
          of the Rev. Mr. THOMAS CARTWRIGHT,
          who died April 13th, 1744, aged 57;
  having by a diligent, faithful, and humble discharge
        of the various duties of the Christian and
                  ministerial life,
          obtained a good report of all men,
              and of the truth itself;
          being most highly esteemed of those
          by whom he was most intimately known.

Mr. Cartwright left a widow, who survived him thirty-nine years.

The next pastor of this Church was a Mr. Walker, but of his life or
ministry we find no records preserved.

Mr. Richard Denny became pastor of this Church in 1763, and continued
his labours for nearly forty years. During his ministry the present
Meeting House was built, in 1771; and in one part of that ministry a
remarkable revival of religion took place, followed by permanent results
of the most important kind. He was the last surviving student of Dr.
Doddridge, for whom he retained to his last day the strongest affection.
He survived until the year 1813, when he died at the age of nearly 90
years, having been disabled from regular public service for almost
twenty years.

Mr. Denny was born at Barby, a small village in Northamptonshire. Having
pious parents, he was from a child the subject of religious impressions.
Serving an apprenticeship at Lutterworth, the preaching of the Gospel he
heard there deepened and ripened these impressions, so that he was led
at an early age to make a solemn dedication of himself to God as his
Creator and Redeemer.

He was recommended to an eligible mercantile situation in the
metropolis; but a peculiar coincidence of circumstances rendered his
application unsuccessful, and, as he had long felt a great desire to
devote himself to the work of the ministry, and that desire having been
confirmed by his attendance while in London on the labours of Mr.
Whitefield, the sacred flame of holy zeal was so enkindled in his
breast, that from an ardent concern to honour his Saviour in the
conversion of sinners, he now consecrated himself to this work. Being
introduced to the notice of Dr. Doddridge, he kindly and cordially
received him under his tuition. Though there was a great disparity
between him and his tutor in talents and acquirements, yet there was a
great resemblance in Christian affection, holy zeal, and ardent piety;
and such was his regard to the "dear Doctor," as he generally styled
him, that he often mentioned his name and his excellencies with the
tear glistening in his eye.

He was placed in two situations as minister after leaving the academy
before he came to reside at Long Buckby; but here was the scene of the
largest portion of his ministerial life, his labour, and his success;
and at one particular time, as we have hinted, he was honoured with what
was considered as remarkable success. He had been repeatedly complaining
of the want of a blessing on his labours, and was greatly discouraged;
but he wrestled hard, to use his own expression, by fervent and constant
prayer, for a blessing to attend his efforts, and his great Master heard
the voice of his supplication. There was an extraordinary revival in the
congregation at large; many were awakened to the most serious concern
about their everlasting interests; and in the course of two or three
years about forty members were added to the Church.

After he had resigned his charge, in consequence of advancing years, he
set an attractive example of piety and holy consistency; his lively and
spiritual conversation was rendered useful to many. In his intercourse
with Christian friends he manifested the supporting and cheering
influence of religion under the infirmities of age, affording the most
pleasing evidence of its reality and power. He was so remarkable for his
kind and affectionate disposition, that he was often compared to the
apostle John. He could converse on divine subjects to the last, when his
frame was enfeebled and his mental powers weakened. Dr. Watts' Hymns
were his constant companions; and those sentiments in them which appear
almost too seraphic for common minds, exactly suited the element in
which he lived. In his last hours he said, "I shall soon see the
blessed, blessed Redeemer, and the dear Doctor Doddridge." When he could
no longer speak, he intimated a wish that his finger might be placed on
a particular verse in Watts' Hymns. This is the language in which he
wished to express the sentiments and feelings of his soul, when his lips
could no longer move--

  "Dearest of all the names above,
    My Jesus and my God,
  Who can resist thy heavenly love,
    Or trifle with thy blood?"

He died April 13th, 1813, and his remains were interred in the Meeting
House he had been the means of erecting, and near the pulpit he had so
long and so usefully filled. Six neighbouring ministers attended his
funeral, and one of them, Mr. Gronow, of Weedon, delivered an affecting
and suitable address on the occasion. The following Sabbath the funeral
sermon was preached by his successor, Mr. D. Griffiths, to a very
crowded audience, from Rev. xiv. 13: "And I heard a voice from heaven,
saying unto me, write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth; yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labours; and their works do follow them."

The immediate successor of Mr. Denny was Mr. Mosely, who came from
Atherstone to Buckby, continued here about eight years, and then removed
to Hanley, in Staffordshire. It was during the ministry of Mr. Mosely
that the present dwelling-house was built for the minister.

Mr. Daniel Griffiths was the next pastor of the Church; he commenced his
stated ministry at Buckby March 27th, 1803, and was ordained the 17th
of November following, when Mr. Anthony, of Bedford, began the service
by prayer and reading the Scriptures; Mr. Horsey, of Northampton,
delivered the introductory discourse, asked the questions, and received
the confession of faith; Mr. Denny, the former pastor, offered the
ordination prayer; Mr. Toller, of Kettering, gave the charge, from 1st
Tim. iv. 13-16; Mr. Gill, of Harborough, addressed the people, from
Deut. i. 38; Mr. Knight and Mr. Morrell were engaged in the devotional
parts of the service; and Mr. Cox, of Clipstone, preached in the
evening, from Matt. vi. 33.

The ministry of Mr. Griffiths was continued in this place for
thirty-nine years. In the year 1819, the congregation having much
increased, the Chapel was considerably enlarged, and a fourth gallery
erected, at an expense of more than L300, which was cheerfully defrayed
by the people. At the re-opening of the Chapel in September, the late
Mr. Toller, of Kettering, preached, and it is supposed to have been the
last time that he officiated out of his own pulpit. Mr. Robertson, then
of Stretton, in Warwickshire, "preached," observes Mr. Griffiths, "a
noble sermon in the evening, from 'All souls are mine.'"

In the year 1825 a new and commodious school-room was erected, by means
of a legacy of L50 left by Mr. David Ashby for that purpose; the
remainder of the cost being defrayed by the relatives of Mr. Ashby.

Mr. Griffiths resigned his charge on the 19th of December, 1841. He
still survives, and, with the remaining strength of declining life, is
able to preach once on the Sabbath to assist his son, who is minister at
Cannock, in Staffordshire.

After the resignation of Mr. Griffiths, the congregation was supplied
for some time chiefly by the students from Spring Hill College; but at
length an invitation was given to Mr. Apperly, from Blackburn Academy,
who entered on his pastoral duties on the 2nd of October, 1842.

The ministry of Mr. Apperly continued for about ten years. We regret to
state that the congregation did not remain in a united or prosperous
state; and on the 4th of July, 1852, Mr. Apperly resigned and emigrated
to Australia. His friends, as a token of their regard, made him a
present of thirty guineas before his departure.

The present number of communicants is near 50. There are 100 children in
the Sabbath-schools.

The interest of L230, and the rent of a small close of land, amounting
in the whole to about L17 per annum, belong to the place towards the
support of the minister for the time being.

A village containing the population there is in Long Buckby, with
everything convenient for the worship of God, the ministry of the word,
and the instruction of the young, in the commodious Chapel and
school-rooms, presents an interesting sphere of labour; and we hope to
hear that this cause again revives and extends, under the labours of a
devoted and successful pastor.

Mr. F. Evans, of Ulverston, Lancashire, has accepted an invitation to
the pastoral office, and was to commence his stated labours here October
31st, 1852.




CHAPTER XIII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT POTTERSPURY.


The Independent Church in this place has existed about 160 years; not
tracing its origin quite to the earliest days of Nonconformity, but
commencing about thirty years after the passing of the "Bartholomew
Act." It was not by the immediate operation of that Act, leading an
ejected minister to raise a congregation of Nonconformists here, as in
many other places, but by its gradual influence, that it led on to the
formation of this Church.

At the time of the passing of the Act referred to, in 1662, the village
was favoured with the ministry of Mr. Joseph Newell, who was
sufficiently conscientious not hastily to submit to the requirements of
this Act, for he suffered himself to be ejected from his living, though
he subsequently conformed; but the minister by whose labour this Church
was formed was the Rev. Michael Harrison, who preached in the parish
Church of Caversfield, Bucks, and resided in the vicarage there, where
he had performed the duties of a faithful minister of Christ for a
number of years. He became dissatisfied with the terms of conformity;
maintained familiar intercourse with evangelical Dissenters; and at
length became fully prepared to recede from the Church.

Dr. Calamy, who was then studying at Oxford, says: "There were at this
time monthly fasts appointed by authority, and generally observed very
regularly, to implore the divine blessing in order to the success of our
forces. At one of these fasts I was at Bicester, and assisted old Mr.
Cornish, who was indisposed, at his Meeting House, in the morning; and
afterwards walked over to Caversfield, about a mile distant, the
Dissenters in a body bearing me company. There I preached in the public
Church in the afternoon, and had a crowded Church from the country
round. Mr. M. Harrison preached in the Church, of which Mr. Beard was
patron; and he lived in the house adjoining. But Mr. Harrison was now
from home, in Northamptonshire, where he was gathering a congregation of
Dissenters about Potterspury, designing to quit the Church and settle
among them."

Mr. Harrison's efforts were successful; he soon gathered around him some
friends, removed to reside amongst them, formed a Congregational Church,
and purchased a property, on which he fitted up a place of worship.

When Mr. Harrison removed to Pury, a Mr. John Warr, who formerly lived
in the neighbourhood of Caversfield, came with him to enjoy the benefit
of his ministry. And connected with this circumstance is another, which
will show something of the spirit of the times. "When Mr. Harrison came
to Pury, he brought a pulpit with him, which he deemed it necessary to
conceal; therefore, to prevent it being known, Mr. Warr, being a
shoemaker, contrived to fill it with shoe-pegs, and brought it among his
own goods in a waggon from Bicester."

Some property his wife possessed, in the county of Chester, it is
supposed was sold, to enable Mr. Harrison to purchase the premises on
which his dwelling-house and the Meeting House were fitted up. When the
barn which formed the humble Meeting House was prepared, at the request
of the people Dr. Calamy preached at the opening, and had a numerous
auditory. It should here be observed, that the disinterestedness and
sincerity of Mr. Harrison were strikingly evinced by his willingness not
only to relinquish his clerical stipend, but to hazard his own private
property amongst a people who had never been accustomed to make
voluntary efforts for the support of the Gospel ministry. He trusted,
however, to the great principles for which he made these sacrifices, and
to the faithfulness of their glorious Author; and he did not trust in
vain. After labouring here about nineteen years, Mr. Harrison removed in
the year 1709, and became the minister of an Independent Church at St.
Ives, in the county of Huntingdon, where he continued to labour for many
years, and died in January, 1726, leaving two daughters to lament their
loss.

The property at Pury now passed into other hands; for Mr. Harrison, on
leaving, sold it to a gentleman in the neighbourhood of London;
reserving, however, to the people the pulpit and other fittings of the
Meeting House. The congregation for some time rented the place; but
subsequently purchased the whole property, and vested it in the hands of
trustees.

The immediate successors of Mr. Harrison did not continue long at
Potterspury, and of their labours little is known.

The first of these was the Rev. Mr. Bennett, who, declining to take the
pastoral office, soon removed, and was followed by the Rev. Isaac
Robinson, who sustained the pastoral office about four years. In 1714,
the Rev. Wm. Bushnell was the pastor, and continued to preach here till
Michaelmas, 1729, when he left, and removed to Andover, in
Herefordshire; and from thence, in 1732, to Nailsworth. He was succeeded
at Pury by the Rev. Samuel Taylor.

The minister of whom we have the fullest account, and whose ministry
appears to have been most extensively and permanently useful in this
Church, though attended with some eccentricities that diminished its
value, was the Rev. John Heywood, who came from Lincoln to this place in
1739. "After preaching here for about twelve months, he was ordained
September 25th, 1740; on which occasion Mr. Petto, of Floor, began the
service with prayer; Mr. Cartwright, of Long Buckby, prayed before
sermon; Mr. Hunt, of Hackney, preached the sermon to the people; Mr.
Clark, of St. Alban's, offered the ordination prayer, accompanied with
imposition of hands; Dr. Doddridge gave the charge; and Mr. Drake, of
Yardley Hastings, concluded with prayer."

When Mr. Heywood passed his examination previous to his ordination, he
was required to maintain the following thesis in Latin--"The Scriptures
a rule of faith." The manuscript, carefully and curiously written,
together with the hymn which he composed to be sung at the ordination,
remains to the present day, as a proof of his learning and a specimen of
his talents. The ordination hymn, and about forty others which he
composed for the use of his congregation, were afterwards published,
dedicated to Dr. Doddridge, with whom Mr. Heywood was on intimate terms,
and to whom he expresses himself as under very great obligations.

At the time of this settlement the Church appears to have consisted of
fifty-seven members, of whom fifteen had been admitted by Mr. Harrison,
one by Mr. Robinson, twenty-four by Mr. Bushnell, and nineteen by Mr.
Taylor.

The following Church covenant was drawn up by Mr. Heywood, which is
agreed to by all who join the Church:--

                           _Church Covenant._

    1. We avouch the Lord this day to be our God, and ourselves to be
    his people, in the truth and sincerity of our hearts.

    2. We call heaven and earth, angels and men, to witness this day
    that we recognize our baptismal covenant, and give up ourselves to
    God the Father, Son, and Spirit, as our Creator, Redeemer, and
    Sanctifier, in an everlasting covenant never to be forgotten.

    3. We do bind ourselves, in the presence of God, to walk together in
    his ways; to attend upon his word and ordinances of his grace;
    resolving to cleave to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to him alone, for
    pardon and salvation.

    4. We do sincerely promise, through divine assistance, to make the
    glory of God our aim and end; to watch against everything that would
    offend God, grieve his Holy Spirit, and bring a reproach upon the
    good way of God.

    5. We solemnly promise to walk with all our fellow Christians with
    all humility and tenderness; to love one another, even as Christ has
    loved us, and given himself for us; to avoid jealousies, suspicions,
    backbitings, censurings, provokings, secret risings of spirit
    against them; to bear and forbear, to give and forgive, as our dear
    Lord has taught us.

    6. At all times we desire, by the help of divine grace, to watch
    against everything that would offend our fellow Christians, and
    promise to be willing to submit to the advice and council of our
    minister and fellow Christians.

    7. We promise to behave with all possible loyalty and allegiance to
    his sacred Majesty King George, and to pray for him and all his
    royal family, that God may bless them, and confound all the designs
    and blast the counsels of all his enemies, both at home and abroad.

    8. We promise to cultivate the duties of the closet, and to promote
    family prayer, that God may dwell with us and bless us, and all that
    are dear to us. We also promise to abound in the strict
    sanctification of the Lord's-day, and to bring all we can under the
    droppings of God's sanctuary. And all this we promise, not in our
    own strength and power, but in the name and strength of our Lord
    Jesus Christ, with whose blood we desire this covenant may be
    sprinkled.

Such was the active spirit and ardent zeal of Mr. Heywood, that he
engaged in an extensive range of itinerant labour, not only in the
villages in which his predecessors had preached, but in many and more
remote places, where, but for his abundant efforts, the Gospel would
have been unknown. He kept a journal of all the places in which he
preached. Great prosperity in the Church appeared to be the result of
these zealous and faithful labours. Mr. Heywood addressed a pastoral
letter, on "the nature and importance of regeneration," to the Church
and congregation, which are represented as residing in about twenty
places around Potterspury, the names of which are given. In this wide
sphere of pastoral labour, Mr. Heywood used to travel for many years on
an old grey horse, which often stumbled, and sometimes fell; but he,
nothing injured or dismayed, would prosecute his journey with his
waistcoat open, and the long ends of his neckcloth streaming in the
wind, while his tall lank figure, his slovenly appearance, and his too
often despised employment, caused him to be regarded by many as among
the most eccentric of men. This impression was doubtless increased by
the colloquial style of his village discourses, in which he often
condescended to employ the most common provincial expressions. The
excellent Mr. Robins, in his memoir of Mr. Strange, of Kilsby, speaks of
Mr. Heywood as "that singular gentleman, much more famed for his zeal
than for the prudence or propriety of his conduct."

But he made suitable preparation for his more stated labours, and
preserved his taste for classical and polite literature; a great many
sermons, beautifully written in a peculiar kind of long hand, prove the
former, while his association with noblemen of patriotic and classical
minds in the neighbourhood proves the latter. His Grace the Duke of
Grafton not only condescended to visit him, but gave him free access to
his library at Wakefield, as he did also his immediate successor. The
Duke was in principle a Dissenter, and in sentiment a Unitarian. Though
his Grace differed widely from both Mr. Heywood and his successor, he
was very kind to them both; he once, at least, attended at the Meeting
at Pury, and till the time of his death subscribed L10 a year to the
support of the cause. His subscription was continued some time after his
death, but withdrawn at the decease of the Rev. Isaac Gardner.

But Earl Temple, the noble proprietor of Stowe, formed a much closer
intimacy with Mr. Heywood; his classic wit, sound learning, and
inflexible patriotism, induced his Lordship to spend much time in the
company of this worthy pastor. On the death of George II., he preached
and printed a sermon on the occasion, which he dedicated to his noble
friend. An amusing anecdote in connexion with this nobleman is related
of Mr. Heywood, in the following words:--

    Soon after the accession of George III., as was usual on such
    occasions, the Dissenting body went up to the throne with an
    address of congratulation. Mr. Heywood, who was known to them, went
    up with them; but when he came into the Royal Palace at St. James's,
    he happened to see there his friend Earl Temple, with whom he
    immediately entered into conversation. Nothing could equal the
    vexation of the London ministers, when they saw Mr. Heywood enter
    the room at Dr. Williams's library, where they were assembled to go
    to the Royal Palace, nor their surprize at finding that he was the
    only one of their number who had a friend at Court; for their
    plain-looking country brother had no sooner entered than he was
    recognized by Earl Temple. While Mr. Heywood was conversing with the
    noble Earl, the ministers were admitted to his Majesty's presence,
    kissed hands, and were in the act of returning, which being
    perceived by Earl Temple, he suggested to Mr. Heywood the danger of
    losing the opportunity he came to enjoy. Mr. Heywood instantly
    turned round, and passing by his brethren who were returning, called
    out to the King, as he retired from the throne, "Stop, please your
    Majesty, stop! I have come all the way from Potterspury to kiss your
    Majesty's hand, and I hope I shall be allowed the honour." The King,
    with all that excellency of disposition for which he was remarkable,
    turned round and presented his hand. Mr. Heywood gave it two or
    three hearty kisses, adding, "God bless your Majesty! and I hope you
    will make a good King."

Scenes and associations like these, however, formed but parentheses in
the history of this devoted man, whose general occupation in the
instruction of the young, village preaching, and pastoral visits,
secured him more satisfaction, and doubtless more honour too, than the
noblest friendships earth could have supplied. Scarcely a Church-meeting
was held without some addition to the society through his useful
labours. It appears that during the many years he was pastor, there was
not more than one person suspended from Church fellowship for improper
conduct.

Mr. Heywood was unfortunate in his marriage relation, and for
twenty-eight years endured all the painful consequences of not taking
heed to "marry in the Lord"; his home was uncomfortable, his work as a
minister of the Gospel often impeded, and its difficulties increased.
The violence of disposition, equalled only by the selfishness, of his
wife, formed quite a contrast to the amiableness and liberality of his
own. The effects of this unsuitable union were partly apparent in his
neglected person and comfortless appearance; but what his spirits
suffered from it was known only to God, to whom it was presented in the
many prayers he offered up on her account. These prayers were ultimately
answered, and in the year 1768 he had the great happiness to receive her
into the Church of which he was pastor.

Other domestic afflictions came upon him; particularly the loss of a
beloved and only son, who, having evinced true piety from his earliest
years, was devoted to the ministry, and studying with Dr. Ashworth, at
Daventry; when on the 3rd of May, 1762, he was drowned while bathing, in
the eighteenth year of his age. The pressure of these afflictions,
together with the effects of unremitting labour and frequent exposure to
wet and cold in his village excursions, began to show themselves in his
constitution, and his health and strength declined. His dread, however,
of being an idle servant, induced him to continue his efforts to the
utmost extent. At length he was obliged to relinquish all public
engagements but those of his own pulpit, for which he soon became
unequal; but when he could no longer ascend the desk or walk to the
Meeting House, he insisted on being carried there, and, seated in one of
the aisles, like the beloved Apostle he continued to exhort his people
to come to Christ. His great affection and solicitude for children and
young persons was always displayed; and when confined to his bed in his
last sickness, this anxiety did not forsake him, for he would have the
young people of his charge assembled in interesting groups around his
bed-side, and, after addressing them with much Christian feeling, he
desired them to kneel down that he might lay his hands upon them, with
fervent petitions for the divine blessing to rest upon them. At length,
while surrounded by a few of his chosen friends, to whom he bore a
peaceful testimony of the grace of Christ, he fell asleep in the Lord on
the 1st of January, 1778. His venerable friend, the Rev. William Bull,
of Newport, preached his funeral sermon.

Whilst this excellent man displayed at times an eccentric manner, and
there might be something imprudent connected with his zeal, yet his
excellent temper, disinterested labours, sound learning, and true piety,
secured for him the respect and veneration of many; and the formation of
several flourishing congregations, and the conversion of many souls,
prove that he did not labour in vain.

As might have been expected, when Mr. Heywood's village labours
decreased, the Church and congregation became much reduced, and it
required the services of a young and devoted man to revive the declining
interest.

Mr. John Goode, a student at Newport Academy, had assisted Mr. Heywood
before his death, and he was invited to become the pastor, and was
ordained October 24th, 1782, when his tutor, Mr. Bull, gave him the
charge, from 1st Kings xx. 11: "Let not him that girdeth on his armour
boast as he that putteth it off." The declining congregation was
greatly revived; for though Mr. Goode did not attempt to fill the whole
sphere of labour which his predecessor occupied, yet he preached in all
the principal places. A decisive proof of his success remains in the
present Meeting, and the pastoral house adjoining. The old Meeting
House, which had originally been a barn or out-building belonging to
what was called "Padder's Farm," and in which the congregation had
assembled from its first establishment, was now pulled down with the old
house adjoining, in which Mr. Harrison and his successors had resided.
The present Meeting House and Parsonage were erected on the site, and
the former was opened for public worship by Mr. Bull on the 9th of
August, 1780.

Mr. Goode was born at Buckingham, March 26th, 1754. He served a regular
apprenticeship to an apothecary there. During his early days, Buckingham
Church was favoured with the ministry of the excellent Rev. David
Simpson, afterwards of Macclesfield, well known as the author of the
'Plea for Religion and the Holy Scriptures.' Mr. Goode and his brother,
afterwards the Rev. William Goode, the successor of the celebrated
Romaine, at Blackfriars, were brought to the knowledge of the truth
under the ministry of Mr. Simpson. When brought earnestly to attend to
his own salvation, he had a lively and anxious solicitude after the
salvation of others. He was in the habit of rising early, and,
accompanied by a few young friends, going to preach in some of the
neighbouring cottages, and then returning to his daily duties at the
time of commencing business. He also frequently met a few friends in the
evening at a private house for prayer, and the exhortations he then
delivered appear to have been made useful to many, who lived to
exemplify the power of religion. It is a pleasing fact, which deserves
to be recorded in connexion with this little social meeting, that the
great Head of the Church was at this time training up three of its
members to occupy important stations of usefulness in distinct portions
of his vineyard--the subject of this account, his brother (afterwards
the clergyman of Blackfriars), and the Rev. James Hinton, for many years
the highly-esteemed and useful pastor of the Baptist Church in the city
of Oxford.

Mr. Goode determined on devoting himself to the work of the ministry,
entered the academy at Newport, and from thence came to Pury, where he
continued for fourteen years. The Duke of Grafton favoured Mr. Goode
with many marks of kind attention and friendship. An epistolary
correspondence which passed between them at different times is still
preserved, which, while it illustrates the liberal and condescending
respect of the nobleman, exhibits the consistent though gentlemanly
demeanour of the Christian pastor, availing himself of any opportunity
that offered to do good. At length Mr. Goode removed to London: the
Church at White Row, deprived by death of a popular and excellent
minister, the Rev. Mr. Trotman, invited Mr. Goode to become their
pastor. This removal was very unfavourable to the Church and
congregation at Pury; a sad state of trials and difficulties was soon
experienced. At White Row Mr. Goode continued to labour for thirty
years, during a considerable portion of which he had a large
congregation, and was the instrument of conversion and edification to
many. In the latter part of his ministry, in consequence of removals and
deaths, it was much reduced; but in the year 1819 there were 150
members in communion.

After the removal of Mr. Goode, the members of this Church who resided
at Towcester, deeming it more expedient to form themselves into a
separate Church than continue their attendance at Pury, five miles
distant, were dismissed from this connexion for this purpose, which was
the commencement of the Independent Church in that town.

The Rev. George Vowell, of Homerton Academy, was invited as a candidate
for the pastoral office after Mr. Goode's removal, and entered upon his
labours here. He had not long resided at Pury before he was married to
Miss Hall, the only child of Mr. Abraham Hall, a gentleman of
considerable reputation and property, in Aldermanbury, London; but not
many weeks after this, symptoms of a rapid decline made their
appearance, and terminated his short but honourable life, November 20th,
1795, aged 23 years.

The Rev. Stephen Morrell preached here for some months, and afterwards
settled at Kilsby.

Early in 1795, Rev. William Whitefoot preached for several Sabbaths; but
as his doctrinal sentiments were not approved by all the congregation,
he withdrew to Hanslope, and with him the members of the Church who
resided there seceded, and in that village a separate cause was
attempted.

During the two following years, the Rev. Messrs. Savage, May, and
Saunders preached as candidates, but no permanent arrangements were
concluded. In September, 1798, the Rev. E. White was invited as a
candidate for the pastoral charge; and in March, 1799, the Church, which
had by this time fallen into a very low state, was re-organized under
his direction, there being only eight of the members then remaining
united together out of forty-seven which had belonged to the Church
under Mr. Goode's ministry; five others were admitted at the time of the
re-organization. Mr. White continued to preach at Pury till October,
1800, when he finally declined accepting a call to the pastoral office,
and removed to Hertford, where he was ordained in April, 1801. He
ultimately went to Chester, and died there May 5th, 1811.

During the time the Church and congregation were in this low condition
no person took a more lively interest in their affairs than the Rev.
Samuel Greathead, of Newport; he not only frequently preached to them
and administered the Lord's Supper, but suggested to them such plans as
were likely, through the blessing of God, to revive the interests of
religion among them. In 1805 he recommended to them the Rev. Isaac
Gardner, then preaching at Newport, in Essex, as a person likely to suit
them as a pastor. Mr. Gardner came to reside among them, and it was
hoped that the time had come for God again to favour this part of his
Zion; but Mr. Gardner's age rendered him incapable of the exertions
required, and during the sixteen years he remained at Pury his
infirmities were such as to render him more fit for a station of
comparative ease than for one requiring all the zeal and activity of
youth. During the ministry of Mr. Gardner another Church was formed at
Stony Stratford, which drew off some of the best subscribers, and left
but few to uphold the mother Church; but about this time a Mr. Smith,
one of the friends to this Church, left L100, the interest to be paid to
the minister for the time being for ever.

Mr. Gardner died on the 21st of October, 1821, in the 67th year of his
age. A small neat tablet, by the side of the pulpit, marks the spot
where his remains are deposited.

Again the Church was supplied from the Newport Academy, and the Rev.
James Slye, one of the students, was invited to become the pastor. He
succeeded Mr. Gardner in 1823, and was ordained on the fifteenth day of
June, 1825, on which occasion the Rev. James Pinkerton, of Weedon, began
with reading the Scriptures and prayer; the Rev. E. Barling, of
Buckingham, delivered the introductory discourse, and asked the usual
questions; the Rev. D. W. Aston, of Buckingham, offered the ordination
prayer; the Rev. T. P. Bull, of Newport, gave the charge, from Phil. i.
17; the Rev. William Chapman, of Greenwich, preached to the people, from
2nd Cor. v. 18; and the Rev. T. Adkins, of Southampton, concluded with
prayer.

Mr. Slye's settlement was attended with a happy revival in the
congregation; two new galleries were soon after erected for the
accommodation of the children of the Sabbath-school; and in 1826, the
room in which the evening lecture had been carried on (Yardley Gabion)
being found too small to contain the increased attendance, a new Chapel
was erected, in which service is regularly conducted on the Sabbath
evening. Mr. Slye still fills the office of pastor here, and continues
his acceptable and useful services amongst this people. The report of
the North Bucks Association, to which this Church belongs, states "that
at Potterspury the attendance is still good, and there is reason to
believe the word is not preached without effect. The Sabbath-school
continues in an encouraging state. This place has been visited during
the past year by a deputation from the Missionary Society, and the sum
of L16. 16_s._ 3_d._ has been transmitted to the funds of that
institution. Grafton and Alderton are supplied from this Church as
formerly, at both of which places the attendance is good. The present
number of Church members is 65. There are 130 children in the
Sabbath-school. In 1846, two new school-rooms were erected. Services are
conducted in three villages in the vicinity."

Thus this Church has been preserved to the present time, through
changing circumstances and many difficulties; yet the name of the
Redeemer is still honoured among them, and vital Christianity promoted.




CHAPTER XIV.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT YARDLEY HASTINGS.


The name of this village is familiar to many of the lovers of poetry
from Cowper's celebrated lines on "Yardley Oak," standing in "Yardley
Chase," about a mile and a half from the village.

A stranger paying a visit to Yardley might have his attention excited by
the appearance of a large and beautiful stone building, as an
Independent Chapel, with a respectable minister's house on the south
side of the Chapel, and spacious school-rooms on the north. The whole of
the buildings, standing on an elevation and being enclosed by a wall and
ornamental iron railing, add much to the appearance of the village.

It would be highly gratifying to any friend to Dissenting Churches to be
able to tell from what small beginnings this rose, who commenced an
Independent interest here, what difficulties were overcome, what trials
were borne, and with what success the efforts were crowned. But in these
respects disappointment meets us. Those who first laboured here, and
laid the foundation of this Church, were more anxious, we presume, to
have their services approved and recorded on high, than to secure a
record of them to be handed down to their successors in the Church
below. We think it would have been wiser if they had left us some
written memorials of the labours in which they engaged, and of the
blessing that attended them, not for our gratification merely, but for
our encouragement and improvement.

The earliest trust deed of a Meeting House at Yardley is dated 1719, and
it speaks of the building as having been recently erected. The first
notice that we have been able to find of a stated minister in this place
occurs in the certificate of Doddridge's ordination at Northampton, in
1730. One of the signatures to that document is Mr. J. Drake, of
Yardley. The same name occurs in a certificate which we have seen,
preserved in the handwriting of Doddridge, of the ordination of the Rev.
W. Hextal, at Creaton, in 1738. Mr. Drake was also present at the
ordination of Mr. Haywood, of Potterspury, in the year 1740, and he also
officiated in the ordination service and signed the certificate of the
late Rev. W. Bull, of Newport, in October, 1766. Thus we learn that he
was for a considerable number of years minister of this place. It was
also stated by the late Mr. Bull, that during the latter years of his
life he resided at Olney, was pastor of the Independent Church there,
and was accustomed to preach one part of the Sabbath at Yardley, and the
other part at Olney.

About the year 1782, the Church at Yardley, being destitute of a
minister, requested Mr. Thomas Raban, of Olney, to render them his
assistance. After supplying them with acceptance for some time, he was
invited to become their pastor, and was ordained in 1783. There are some
interesting particulars preserved of the character and labours of Mr.
Raban, which we shall briefly present to the reader. He was born at
Turvey, in the county of Bedford--the village that was for years
distinguished by the ministry of Legh Richmond, and by the results of
his ministry leading to the formation of an Independent Church in that
place. Mr. Raban was apprenticed at Olney, where he first heard the
truths of the Gospel from Mr. Moses Brown, author of 'Sunday Thoughts,'
then the vicar of Olney. When about ten years of age, he was deeply
convinced of sin, and guided to the Saviour of sinners. He became a
stated hearer and an affectionate friend of Mr. Brown's, and joined in
communion with the Church. He had occasional opportunities of hearing
Mr. Whitefield, and to his dying day he retained the savour of the
truths which that eminent servant of Christ delivered. Speaking of Mr.
Whitefield, he would say, "I once had the honour of having him hang on
my arm; and, to be sure, I thought myself the happiest of men:" at
another time--"I attended him as a guide to a village where he was going
to preach, to my unspeakable gratification." He sometimes also attended
Mr. Hervey's ministry, and would speak of his sermons with renewed
satisfaction and delight to the end of his life. About the year 1778, in
conjunction with an intimate friend, he began to exhort at
prayer-meetings attended by members of the establishment. They
persevered in this practice for some time solely with the view of being
serviceable to their fellow Christians in that neighbourhood; though the
Lord, by this step, was preparing them for spheres of usefulness in
another direction, and the great Bishop of Souls soon found employment
for both of them. This friend of Mr. Raban's was Mr. Perry, who
afterwards became minister at Wollaston.

When Mr. Raban had accepted the invitation to Yardley, he was much
devoted to the spiritual interests of his flock; but having a numerous
family, he continued at Olney, following his occupation as a mechanic or
builder. This enabled him to serve his flock with scarcely any reward
but their affections and their prayers. In addition to his labours at
Yardley, he preached lectures in different places; and it is worthy of
remark, that he was the first Dissenting minister who established a
lecture at Woburn, Bedfordshire, where there is now a settled
congregation.

Several remarkable escapes from danger and death were experienced by Mr.
Raban. On one occasion, being in an unfinished building two stories
high, his foot slipped and he fell to the ground and pitched upon an
axe, the edge of which stood upright; it cut his hat, but missed his
head, and he sustained little or no injury. At another time, a large
piece of timber, on which he had set his foot, heaved up and fell with
him into a saw-pit, and an anvil of a hundred pounds' weight, connected
with the wood, fell upon him; but it only bruised his leg, which was
soon healed. There was another still more remarkable preservation which
he had to record. As he was assisting in raising a beam in a mill, the
rope slipped, when the beam, under which he stood, fell with him from a
height of four stories; but though much injured by the fall, his life
was wonderfully preserved. At another time, he was driving a team with a
load of hay down a narrow lane, when, by attempting to get on the other
side of the waggon, he was thrown under the wheel; but he had the
presence of mind to call to the horses to stop, which they did in a
moment, and thus he was once more saved from instantaneous death. Such
deliverances must have deeply affected the heart of a good man, and have
led him with some deep emotion to say, with the Psalmist, "who
redeemeth our life from destruction." But within the last month of his
existence, the truth of Cowper's beautiful lines were exemplified--

  "Safety consists not in escape
  From dangers of a frightful shape;
  An earthquake may be bid to spare
  The man that's strangled by a hair."

On Lord's-day, May 9th, he was engaged in preaching at Woburn. After
service, when leaving a friend's house, his foot slipped over a
pebble--he fell, and found his right leg was broken; and that was the
means of bringing him to the end of his life, on the 31st of the same
month.

"In his person," it is said, "Mr. Raban was tall, being full six feet
high, of an athletic habit, and of regular features. His perceptions
were quick, his memory strong, his spirit ardent and undaunted, mingled
with a good degree of patience and perseverance; in fine, he enjoyed the
union of those good qualities which rendered his life highly serviceable
and honourable in the situation where infinite wisdom had placed him."

The Rev. William Bull, of Newport, preached his funeral sermon, at
Yardley, from 2 Chron. xxxii. 33 ("And all Judah and Jerusalem did him
honour at his death"), in which he gave the following account of Mr.
Raban's character and ministry:--

    It may appear needless for me to dwell upon the character of your
    deceased pastor, to persons who have known him so many years; but I
    believe very few, except his own family, were so intimately
    acquainted with him, either as a man, a Christian, or a minister. He
    had long been accustomed to open his mind freely to me; and I have
    remarked, that those who best knew him esteemed him most; so I am
    conscious the more I saw of his heart the stronger affection I felt
    for him. Few persons have filled up a greater variety of relations
    in life than our departed friend. Early habituated to business, his
    increasing family and peculiar circumstances led him into
    complicated scenes of worldly engagements, all of which, to the best
    of my knowledge, he discharged with unblemished integrity and
    uncommon disinterestedness. In such a situation, I believe, no man
    ever lived wholly without censure, much less a real Christian, and
    least of all a minister of the Gospel. Envy is sure to attack such a
    character on one side or the other. Failings, from which the best of
    men are never exempt, are often in such cases dwelt upon with
    pleasure, if not magnified with diligence. However, I can truly say,
    that scarcely any man I know had fewer or smaller faults than my
    late dear friend. Whatever they were, they may now properly be
    buried with him, while his good works, in which he abounded to the
    glory of God and the good of men, have followed him to another
    world. His disposition as a man was peaceable, loving, and friendly.
    His weeping family bear testimony to his peculiar tenderness and
    love, both as a husband and parent. It is my duty to unite with his
    friends in speaking of that kindness and disinterestedness with
    which he administered every service in his power to all who enjoyed
    his familiar friendship. I do not doubt but the town of Olney will
    miss and lament him, and so will this Church and congregation; and I
    am sure several ministers of the Gospel will feel the wound deeply.

    His hope of salvation was firmly grounded on the Lord Jesus Christ;
    his views of the Gospel were evangelical and clear; his experience
    deep and lively; and his desires after real holiness of heart and
    life were steadfast and influential. While from the first of his
    separation from the Established Church he was conscientious and firm
    in his dissent, no person was ever more removed from bigotry towards
    any party. He was friendly and affectionate to pious people, and
    useful to the encouragement of ministers whose judgment in trivial
    matters differed from his own. Seldom has the loss of one individual
    been so deeply and affectionately felt as his will be, on this
    account. An earnest desire to be useful to those about him strongly
    marked all his actions, whether it respected their temporal or their
    spiritual concerns. It is no wonder, therefore, that he took
    peculiar delight in preaching that free grace which he himself had
    tasted and enjoyed. To this his congregation can bear a decided
    testimony; and I hope, my dear friends, you will prove your love to
    the Gospel which so long has been freely preached to you, by your
    exertions for its continuance now your worthy pastor is no more.
    "Remember him who has had the rule over you, whose faith follow,
    considering the end of his conversation." He is gone to give an
    account of his ministry; and very soon you must follow him, to give
    your account of the use and abuse you have made of his labours of
    love. How happy are those who went before him to glory! and how
    happy will it be for you, if you follow after!

    As to his family, prudence tenderness and love say, Be sparing. I
    commit them all to the support of his Lord and their Lord, to his
    God and their God. His dying prayer for his son in the ministry was,
    that he might be kept in a humble and faithful attachment to the
    truths of the Gospel; and to this I add my hearty Amen!

    Upon the whole, there might be some things in his example for us to
    avoid; but I am sure there were many for us to imitate. His happy
    spirit is now doubtless before the throne, enjoying the friendship
    of his companion and fellow labourer, Mr. Perry. Now their labours
    are ended, in the enjoyment of that "rest which remaineth for the
    people of God."

      "There, on a green and flowery mount,
        Their weary spirits sit,
      And with transporting joy recount
        The labours of their feet."

The next minister who was placed over this people was Mr. John Hoppus,
who accepted an invitation to the pastoral office, and was ordained in
May, 1804. Mr. Hoppus was born in London, 1761; and becoming early
acquainted with real religion, he joined the Church under the care of
the Rev. W. Bennett, Moorfields, availing himself also, on suitable
occasions, of the pulpit instructions of the Rev. Messrs. Newton and
Romaine; and the Rev. Rowland Hill greatly attracted his admiration, on
account of his fervent and zealous address. He sympathized with that
school of Christians which sprung from the labours of Whitefield, whose
letters, detailing his labours in Britain and America, were always
perused by Mr. Hoppus with delight. The very name of their author was
sufficient to animate him to earnest conversation, when oppressed by
bodily affliction and declining years. Indeed, such was his admiration
of the zealous spirit of Whitefield, as recorded in his history, that to
feel and to express the same sentiment in the hearing of Mr. Hoppus was
one of the readiest avenues to his friendship. While engaged in
business, he became connected with the London Itinerant Society,
preaching in many places in the vicinity of the metropolis; and his
labours proved very acceptable and useful. The following remarkable
instance is deserving of notice: "When he was preaching on one occasion
at Lewisham, a lady who through domestic trouble was resolved on
suicide, and was on her way to commit the deed, passed the door of the
place where Mr. Hoppus was at that moment speaking of the sin of Judas,
who "went out, and hanged himself." Hearing the preacher's voice, she
entered, was much struck with his earnest manner, and applied the
subject to her own case. She told him, in a subsequent interview, that
he had been the means of saving both body and soul."

Mr. Hoppus at length resigned his business, to devote himself entirely
to the work of the ministry. He removed to Newport Pagnell, to avail
himself of the advantages of the academical institution there, under the
care of the Rev. W. Bull. While there, he was highly esteemed by his
worthy tutor, his fellow students, and many of the good people in the
town and neighbourhood.

He had several invitations to the pastoral office, but declined the
others to accept the one he received from Yardley, though the cause was
then in so low a state that the Church consisted of only nine members,
and the congregation of about forty hearers. But it was soon found
necessary to erect a gallery, and remodel the interior of the Chapel;
and as there was no house suitable for the minister, a commodious one
was erected adjoining the Chapel, by the liberal permission of the
Marquis of Northampton, the ground landlord.

Mr. Hoppus was a devoted village pastor; he paid great attention to the
young, and a weekly meeting was held at his house on Saturday evenings,
for the catechetical instruction and the encouragement of those young
persons who appeared religiously disposed. He excelled in pastoral
visitation; was much in the habit of introducing religious conversation
in families, and in the work-rooms of the lacemakers. He endeavoured to
extend the knowledge of the Gospel to the villages around him. For many
years he preached on stated evenings in the week at Denton, Easton, and
Grendon, as well as at Yardley, beside visiting other places. Sometimes
he conducted services in the open air. He had a very happy method of
dropping a word of religious advice to persons whom he accidentally saw
at their worldly calling: in this he was very useful, not only in
conciliating the minds of some, but often of implanting deep and
permanent impressions.

In the year 1813, in the midst of great pastoral success, a fire broke
out, which destroyed many houses in the village; and the Chapel also was
destroyed, which had stood nearly a century. This grievous trial would
have overwhelmed a mind of less energy and enterprise, as the people at
Yardley were totally unable to defray the expense of a new building. Mr.
Hoppus, however, immediately set about the arduous task of appealing to
Christian benevolence, and after many months of unwearied labour raised
a sufficient sum in the adjacent counties and the metropolis to erect a
Chapel of twice the size of the other place. A gallery was afterwards
added, to accommodate a still increasing congregation.

But during a pastorate of thirty years, he had to share in some of the
trials of the faithful minister. He often lamented that his hands were
not more strengthened by the conversion to God of such as might have
proved influential in discountenancing vice and immorality by an
exemplary life, in consequence of their better circumstances. In some
cases his fidelity gave offence.

After having been accustomed, till his seventy-second year, to preach
three times on the Sabbath, increasing infirmities induced him to resign
the pastoral office. The last time he preached at Yardley was on May
4th, 1834; and he administered the Lord's Supper to his late charge only
a few weeks before his death.

In the latter years of his life Mr. Hoppus often appeared to enjoy much
happiness in religion, and when unable to sleep would speak much and
fervently of the great truths of the Gospel, and the glorious
anticipations of believers. He would repeat many Scripture passages and
hymns from which he derived comfort and edification. It was often
evident to those around him that his mind was maturing for the great and
blissful change that awaited him. He had recovered from an attack of
indisposition, and still appeared to retain a portion of the vigour of
his naturally fine constitution. On the 30th of August, 1837, he had
taken some exercise in his garden, and in the evening had prayed in his
family as usual; but he had not long retired to rest before he was heard
to breathe deeply twice, apparently in sleep. His appearance indicated
what proved to be the event. Medical aid was called in, but the vital
spark had fled. Thus, in his seventy-seventh year, did this servant of
God obtain what he had for years desired might be granted him in death,
"an easy dismission."

Mr. Hoppus was interred in the burial-ground of the Chapel. The funeral
sermon was preached, according to the long expressed wish of the
deceased, by his esteemed friend, the Rev. T. P. Bull, from a text
chosen by himself--1 Cor. xv. 58.

Mr. Hoppus's labours were eminently disinterested. "I have stated," said
Mr. Bull, in his sermon, "that he was in business seven years; and,
successful as he was, when his industry, perseverance, and talents for
business are considered, if he had continued in it he might have
accumulated much wealth. But it was not his object to seek that which
has been the ruin of so many; and at Yardley you have seen, my friends,
that he 'sought not yours, but you.' As to his life, it is unnecessary
to say anything, for you all know his consistency. His views of the
Gospel were clear. His religion was that of the heart: it was sterling,
rational, and practical, and influenced his life and conduct. He
'travailed in birth for souls.' When he came to Yardley, the place of
worship was small, the Church was small, and there was no minister's
house. He enlarged the Chapel, built the house; and when the Chapel was
burned down, he accomplished the laborious task of collecting, and built
this commodious place." "What he did for the cause of Christ at Yardley
will remain as his monument to future times."

These particulars are taken from an account written by Mr. Hoppus's only
daughter. His only son is Professor Hoppus, of the London University.

After Mr. Hoppus had resigned the pastoral office, the Rev. J. Bunn
succeeded him, commencing his stated labours in January, 1834. He
removed to Abergavenny, in Wales, in 1838. During the ministry of Mr.
Bunn, two new galleries were added to the Chapel.

The Rev. James Spong, of Newport Pagnell Academy, succeeded Mr. Bunn,
becoming pastor in October, 1838. He resigned about the end of 1840.

The Rev. William Todman, the present pastor, took the oversight of the
Church and congregation and commenced his labours on the 5th of June,
1842. During the ten years that have elapsed since then, the large and
convenient school-rooms have been built adjoining the Chapel, at a cost
of nearly L400. In the daily Infant-school there are upwards of 80
children, and in the Sabbath-school 260. Many additions have been made
to the Church, and the congregations never were better than at the
present time. The number of communicants is about 116. Occasional
services are conducted in the villages in the vicinity of Yardley.

The state of this interest shows what may be done, under the divine
blessing, to sustain and advance a Christian society on voluntary
principles, in a situation of not the most promising character, by men
of a devoted spirit, concerned to promote the glory of the Saviour and
the welfare of immortal minds.




CHAPTER XV.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT KILSBY AND CRICK.


The Independent congregation in these places owes its origin, there is
reason to conclude, to the labours of ministers ejected by the Act of
Uniformity. Mr. Worth, who had been vicar of Kilsby, and Mr. Stephen
Fowler, who had been rector of Crick, were useful here, after their
ejectment. Concerning the former, Palmer states "that he preached for a
while, as a Nonconformist, at Daventry and Chipping Norton"; on other
authority it is stated that "he also continued to labour at Kilsby." Of
the latter we are informed, that "after leaving the Church at Crick, he
came to reside at Kilsby; and that, after attending the services of the
Church in the day, he repeated a sermon in his own house, in the evening
of the Sabbath, to such as chose to attend." The labours of these two
devoted ministers of Christ were rendered useful to several families in
the village, so that they became attached to the preaching of the Gospel
and to the mode of conducting religious worship as it was practised
among the Nonconformists.

Of Mr. Worth it is stated that "he had three sons, ministers among the
Dissenters"; of Mr. Fowler, that "his rectory at Crick was very
valuable, but it proved no temptation to him to conform against his
conscience." He was a very popular preacher, and indefatigable in his
labours. He died through an excess of hard study and too frequent
preaching, as he went to Newbury upon the removal of Mr. John
Woodbridge, who was ejected there. We are informed that "he was eminent
for the holiness of his life, his zeal and constancy in his work at all
times, his great moderation, and many other excellent qualities."

There was also a Mr. Richard Thorpe, ejected from Barby, a village about
a mile from Kilsby. Such was his high attainment in the exercise of
prayer, that none of the ministers in those parts were thought to excel
him. The youth of the village stood in great awe of him, so as to be
kept from profaning the Sabbath, as had been too common there. He was so
much taken up with spiritual things, that he left all his worldly
concerns to the care of a faithful servant. After his ejectment, he
preached in his own house on Thursdays without molestation.

The separation of these eminent men from the Established Church, and
their labours in this vicinity, were the means of bringing some to be
decided Nonconformists; but their number for many years was too small to
constitute a separate Church, for the support of a pastor, so that they
travelled on the Sabbath to attend the Dissenting ministry at Long
Buckby and Daventry, and invited the ministers of these places to preach
a week-day lecture at Kilsby, in a house licensed for this purpose.
Their numbers gradually increased; the room became too small for them;
they purchased another house, and fitted it up as a place to be
appropriated to religious worship. This was in the year 1738. When this
was done, the ministers of Daventry and Buckby engaged to preach to them
alternately on the Sabbath morning. The number of hearers still
increased, so that early in the year 1750 they built a gallery for the
further accommodation of the people.

At this time they had attained to such a degree of strength as to
indulge the thought of having a stated pastor over them. In the latter
part of this year, with the hearty concurrence of the ministers by whom
the lecture had been preached, they invited Mr. Thomas Strange to
minister amongst them, with a view to a settlement. After a suitable
trial, the following invitation to the pastoral office was presented to
him:--

                                         _Kilsby, June 1st, 1752._

    DEAR AND REVEREND SIR,--We, a Church of Protestant Dissenters in and
    near this place, have through a remarkable kind providence enjoyed
    the benefit of your labours for upwards of twelve months to our
    entire satisfaction, and we hope, through the blessing of God, to
    our advantage. And, sir, as your religious sentiments, piety, zeal,
    and ministerial ability afford an encouraging prospect of your
    usefulness, it appears to us very desirable that you would now, sir,
    enter into the relation of a pastor to us, in which request you may
    depend upon our unanimity, and our endeavour to make your situation
    comfortable and useful, by our constant prayers and all other means
    proper to us as private Christians, who are, sir, your cordial
    friends and most humble servants. (Signed by thirty-two names.)

This invitation Mr. Strange accepted; and though the numbers, the place
of worship, and the accommodations he found were unusually defective,
yet he went with the noble resolution of exerting all his powers for the
increase and improvement of his humble charge; and his exertions were
uncommonly great, prudent, and successful.

Mr. Strange was born at Evenley, in the county of Northampton. When he
was about six years of age his father was removed by death; but the
father had discerned in his son, at that early age, such a thoughtful
spirit as led him to express a wish that he might in after life become a
Christian minister. As he grew up, to obtain good books was his greatest
aim; and when he had obtained a new one, he would scarcely allow himself
time for his meals. He would conduct family worship at sixteen years of
age, with great seriousness and propriety. On the family removing to
Shelston, near Buckingham, he formed an intimate acquaintance with Mr.
Boughton, afterwards a fellow student with him, and subsequently
minister at Buckingham. These two friends, in the ardour of their
youthful zeal, walked ten miles on the Lord's-day to hear Mr. Haywood,
of Potterspury, and became members of his Church. Mr. Strange felt a
great desire to be devoted to the work of the ministry, but could see no
prospect of attaining that desire. But his mother mentioned the subject
to Mr. Hayward; he introduced it to Dr. Doddridge, who, with his usual
generosity and zeal, kindly engaged to procure for such a youth all
necessary supplies during his academical course. He entered the academy
at Northampton in 1745, and continued there for six years, and then
entered on his ministry at Kilsby, where he pursued his labours as a
Christian pastor till near the end of his days.

The following is a copy of Mr. Strange's certificate of ordination:--

                                   _Kilsby, September 11th, 1753._

    These are to certify whom it may concern, that we whose names are
    hereunto subscribed, pastors of Churches, having received
    satisfaction concerning the Rev. Mr. Thomas Strange, as to the
    regularity of his education, the soundness of his judgment, the
    seriousness of his temper, and his other qualifications for public
    service in the ministry, have this day proceeded to set him apart to
    that work by prayer and imposition of hands, and cordially unite in
    recommending him to any Church who may need his assistance.

                                        R. GILBERT.
                                        JAMES FLOYD, Daventry.
                                        JOHN DOWLEY, Lutterworth.
                                        GEORGE HAMPTON, Banbury.
                                        JOHN HEYWOOD, Potterspury.
                                        SAMUEL KING, Welford.
                                        CALEB ASHWORTH, Daventry.

An unhappy peculiarity in the elocution and gesture of Mr. Strange in
the pulpit prevented the popularity to which his other excellencies
entitled him; but these defects became so annihilated to his stated
hearers by nobler impressions, that they were surprised when strangers
were disgusted by them. He generally preached twice at Kilsby and once
at Crick on the Lord's-day, and conducted a fourth service either at
Barby or Hillmorton, having also to walk about eight miles. The
congregations increased under him, so that in two years after his
settlement they were obliged to erect two new galleries in the house at
Kilsby. In the year 1763 they found it necessary to build a new place of
worship. Towards this object they subscribed liberally, for their
circumstances, raising amongst themselves L170; and by means of an
appeal to other congregations, their plan of building a place at a cost
of L400 was accomplished. A plain, commodious, and substantial Meeting
House was erected. A few years after, finding the private room in which
the meetings at Crick were held very strait and inconvenient, out of an
estate settled by Mr. Henfrey on the Dissenting Society Mr. Strange
erected a small but decent place of worship there, and about the same
time purchased a cottage at Hillmorton, and fitted it up for the same
purpose.

The people purchased the premises adjoining the Chapel for a
dwelling-house for their minister, which, by Mr. Strange's skill and
industry, were greatly improved. He was one of the most useful and one
of the most noble-hearted of village pastors; he catechised the young
people of his charge, he visited the afflicted and tried, he kept a
Day-school for the benefit of the rising generation, the profits of
which he devoted to pious and charitable purposes. As his own family
grew up, he admitted six boarders to his house, at twelve guineas per
annum and one guinea entrance. Frugality, neatness, and hospitality,
were never more perfectly united than in his dwelling. A salary of L40,
with the interest of L300, and some occasional benefactions, would
hardly admit of a hired servant; Mrs. Strange, therefore, and her
daughters, managed the whole business of the family (washing and brewing
not excepted), with admirable ease and regularity. Whoever entered, or
at whatever hour, no deshabille, either in the house or inhabitants, no
confusion or bustle, was perceived, nor any want of decent accommodation
or cordial welcome. No time, no money was wasted; and by this means,
little as they possessed of either, they always had some of each to
spare at the call of indigence, friendship, or civility. No worthy
supplicant or proper visitor left the house complaining; yea, the most
concealed wants or distresses of their neighbours seldom escaped the
kind vigilance of its inhabitants, or were suffered to remain without
some endeavour to alleviate them. Yet, with all this kindness, Mr.
Strange found every year a surplus to add to the little stock reserved
for his family. He has often been heard to say, "that though when single
he could scarcely make both ends meet, since his marriage he had been
able to save a few shillings." A higher compliment to Mrs. Strange he
could not easily have paid. Indeed, that management must have been truly
astonishing, which out of his income, and with his liberality, could lay
by, in no long course of years, several hundred pounds for his widow and
his four children. The authors of the 'History of Dissenters' say, "let
it not be supposed that this was the fruit of niggardly penury; the man
was liberal, and had the spirit of a prince."

He took time by the forelock. On a Monday, though his Sabbath was a
laborious day in travelling and preaching, it was his custom to rise an
hour or two before the family, to draw out the schemes of his intended
discourses on the ensuing Sabbath, as a directory to his thoughts,
reading, and conversation through the week.

When he was getting near to his sixtieth year, his strength greatly
declined, and he felt that his end was drawing nigh. In his last
affliction he said to some of his brethren who accidentally met at his
house, "I have always valued and preached the doctrine of grace, but
nothing gives me so much concern, on a review of my ministry, as that I
have no more insisted upon and pressed the fruits of grace." When all
united in their testimony to the practical strain of his preaching, he
added, "as death and eternity draw nigh, I see more than ever I did
before the infinite importance of these fruits, and the comparative
insignificance of all opinions without them." As to the person of
Christ, he desired his flock might be assured that "he died in a firm
belief that Jesus Christ was the true and proper Son of God, in whom
dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; a doctrine," he added,
"which I firmly believe, but do not attempt to explain." "I wish to
die," he said on another occasion, "a broken-hearted sinner, renouncing
everything of my own, and depending entirely for future happiness on the
free grace of God, through the atonement and righteousness of Christ."
His last words to his surrounding friends were, "Farewell, till the day
of the Lord Jesus. The Lord have mercy, spiritual and eternal mercy, on
every one of you, upon this congregation, and upon the whole Israel of
God. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath a right to take away; blessed be
the name of the Lord!" He died September 1st, 1784, aged sixty years.

Thus lived and died the first pastor of the Independent Church at
Kilsby.

Concerning his death, the historians before referred to, say--"the tears
and groans of his flock attested the greatness of their loss: it would
be, indeed, a less difficult task to find a suitable successor to the
see of Canterbury, than to the village of Kilsby." Subsequent events
indicate that there is considerable truth in this statement; for though
sixty-eight years have passed since the death of Mr. Strange, and Kilsby
has had in that period pastors of varied excellence and usefulness, not
one has yet been found to live, and labour, and die amongst them after
the manner of the first pastor.

The noble-spirited village pastor's wife is worthy of a short record, as
we find the following notice of her death, written by the Rev. H.
Knight, of Yelvertoft:--

    December 12th, 1819, died at Yelvertoft, in the county of
    Northampton, aged 84, Dorothy, the widow of the late Rev. Thomas
    Strange, many years Protestant Dissenting minister at Kilsby. She
    was "an Israelite indeed, in whom there was no guile." To the last
    she manifested an ardent attachment to the Redeemer, and a great
    delight in the ordinances of religion. As her course was holy, so it
    pleased God that her end should be peaceful. Under the most severe
    affliction, which terminated her life, she was supported by those
    words--"The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear?
    the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?"
    from which Mr. Knight preached her funeral sermon. Knowing in whom
    she believed, and longing to depart that she might be with Christ,
    she sweetly breathed her spirit into his hands. Her truly amiable
    spirit, unaffected piety, exemplary conduct, and Christian
    benevolence, endeared her to all who knew her. "The righteous shall
    be had in everlasting remembrance."

The records of this Church have not been to any extent preserved, so
that the numbers that entered into communion during the ministry of Mr.
Strange cannot be ascertained; and the names of the subsequent pastors,
with the date of their ministry, constitute nearly all that can be now
presented.

Mr. Jacob Harwood was ordained here in 1786. He removed to the
neighbourhood of Leeds. Mr. H. Gritten was pastor in 1790. Mr. Thomas
Gardiner was the next minister, and he left in 1794. Mr. Morrell came in
November of that year, and left at Midsummer, 1799. Mr. Thomas Spencer
came at Michaelmas in that year, and left in 1805. Mr. Thomas Jones
almost immediately succeeded, and removed in 1811. Mr. Morgan followed
Mr. Jones, and continued until 1824. Two or three ministers occupied the
pulpit successively until 1827. On the 28th of June in that year Mr.
Thomas Porter was ordained. Mr. Porter was from the academy at Hackney:
at his ordination, Mr. Pinkerton, of Weedon, prayed and read the
Scriptures; Mr. Griffiths, of Buckby, delivered the introductory
discourse; Mr. Hobson, of Welford, offered the ordination prayer; Mr.
Collison, Mr. Porter's tutor, delivered the charge; Mr. Scott, of
Rowell, preached to the people.

Mr. Porter resigned his charge at Kilsby, Nov. 10th, 1839, and removed
to Godalming, in Surrey.

Mr. James Rees Jones accepted the pastoral charge, and was ordained June
18th, 1840. He removed to Bolton, in Lancashire, in 1851.


CRICK.

The connexion between the congregations at Kilsby and Crick continued
until the removal of Mr. Morgan, in the year 1824, when fifteen members
resident in Crick separated themselves from the Church at Kilsby; and
early in 1825 Mr. Bicknell, formerly of Welford, became their pastor.
During his ministry, which continued for fourteen years, twenty-three
members were added to the Church. He resigned, in consequence of age and
infirmity, in 1838.

Mr. Cuzens, the next pastor, commenced his ministry in July of the same
year, and left in October, 1841. He admitted eight members to the
Church.

Mr. Hall, who succeeded Mr. Cuzens, came in January, 1842, and resigned
in September, 1850, removing to Rugeley, in Staffordshire. Twenty-eight
members were admitted during the ministry of Mr. Hall.

Mr. Thomas Islip, late of Stamford, ministered here from May, 1851, to
January, 1852; since that time, supplies have been obtained. The present
number of members is 37. There are 35 children in the Sabbath-school.




CHAPTER XVI.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT BRIGSTOCK.


In the village of Brigstock, which contains upwards of 1200 inhabitants,
an Independent Church was formed about seventy-four years ago. There was
a small band of decided Christians, attached to the principles of
Nonconformity, who in the year 1778 united together in the faith of the
Gospel, to sustain a Christian ministry and to have the ordinances of
Christ administered unto them. This took place with the encouragement
and advice of some ministers of Christ in their vicinity, who had
occasionally preached unto them, and knew the circumstances in which
they were placed; but there are some interesting memorials preserved of
events which preceded, and which manifestly prepared the way, under the
blessing of the great Head of the Church, for the formation of a regular
Christian society in this place.

It is stated on satisfactory evidence, that during the time of the
Plague in London, a godly tradesman of the name of Leigh retired to this
village; and it appears that the piety of this Christian and his family,
with the attention they paid to the means of grace among the
Nonconformists of the neighbourhood, at Kettering, or at Rowell, with
whom they for many years became identified, was gradually the means of
awakening the attention of others to the subject of true religion and to
the cause of Nonconformity. This presents us with a pleasing example of
the useful influence that may be exerted by a Christian household, in
exciting attention to the means of grace and the principles of the
Gospel in a benighted neighbourhood. As their numbers increased, they
attended at different places around them, as it might suit their
convenience or their taste, those places being from eight to thirteen
miles distant; some of them becoming decided Christians, they united in
Christian fellowship with those Churches where they generally attended.
Thus things continued until the days of Doddridge's ministry, when some
stated services were commenced at Brigstock, of which the following
account has been preserved:--

    Many in this place, several years ago, were very desirous of having
    the Gospel preached amongst them, as they are six miles from Oundle,
    eight from Kettering, nine from Rowell, and ten from
    Wellingborough,[6] and have bad roads all around us; consequently
    old people, and such as have large families, could seldom hear the
    word, these being the nearest places in which it was preached.
    Therefore they made their case known to the Rev. Mr. Doddridge, and
    by his means obtained an exhibition from the Independent Fund for
    the support of a monthly week-day lecture, which was preached for
    some time by the following ministers, viz.: Messrs. Doddridge,
    Saunders, Boyce, Hextal, Haywood, and Grant. A blessing attended the
    word; our numbers greatly increased; many joyfully received the
    Gospel, and became very desirous of hearing it, if possible, on a
    Lord's-day. They entered into a subscription for a lecture once a
    month on Lord's-day, which was the means of enlarging our interest
    still more. We continued in this state many years, till, having
    many that we hoped had received the grace of God, we began to think
    of embodying into a Church, and had it recommended to us by the
    ministers that used to attend our lecture, especially the Rev. Mr.
    Addington, who, being providentially cast amongst us for the first
    time about the year 1774, talked with us particularly upon this
    subject. What he said appeared to rest on many minds, and convinced
    us that it was our duty to attend on all the ordinances of Christ:
    we therefore sought direction and assistance from God in prayer; and
    after watching for some time the openings of providence, Mr.
    Hillyard, a member of the Church at Wellingborough, under the
    pastoral care of Mr. Carver, was recommended as a proper person to
    be our minister. We took opportunities of hearing him often; and it
    being always to our satisfaction, we applied to him to come amongst
    us. We first invited him for a quarter of a year, and when that was
    expired, for a year, fully approving his gifts and his general views
    of Christian doctrine and discipline. Thereupon, being desirous to
    honour Christ, as King and Head of the Church, and to testify our
    allegiance to him; in hope likewise of the fulfilment of his
    promise, "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
    am I in the midst of them," we desire to give up ourselves and ours
    to the Lord, to be ruled by his laws and to attend all his
    ordinances, agreeable to our confession of faith and Church
    covenant. And after having given ourselves to the Lord, we also give
    ourselves to one another, by a declaration of God's dealings with
    us, in a meeting appointed for that purpose, and the mutual giving
    and receiving the right hand of fellowship.

    Witness our hands, the 4th of March, 1778. (Here follow the names of
    ten brethren.)


[6] The document quoted above does not state the distances correctly.
Oundle is seven miles, Kettering eight, Rowell eleven or twelve, and
Wellingborough thirteen miles distant.


Then, in their Church covenant drawn up and subscribed June 9th of the
same year, they say--

    We, the professed disciples of Christ, whose names are hereunto
    subscribed, meeting together for the worship of God in Brigstock,
    having long enjoyed the means of grace through the favourable
    indulgence of God towards us, cannot think it will be for the glory
    of God to continue any longer as scattered individuals, like lambs
    in a large place, but judge it our duty, both from the openings of
    providence and from rules lying before us in God's word, to cleave
    to him with fuller purpose of heart than heretofore we have done,
    each one for ourselves, and, in the judgment of charity, each one
    hoping well for each other; and having given ourselves to the Lord,
    in a perpetual covenant that shall never be forgotten, do here, in
    the presence of God, angels, and men as our witnesses, give each
    other the right hand of fellowship, binding ourselves by covenant
    and by oath to walk together according to that order which is, for
    distinction sake, called Congregational, according to the Abrahamic
    covenant, including believers and their children, which we find
    pointed out to us in the New Testament by our Lord Jesus Christ and
    his holy apostles. Having thus covenanted together under Christ our
    Sovereign Lord and Head, we look upon it our duty to him solemnly to
    engage, in his strength, to maintain those truths which are
    essential to real Christianity, against all opposers whatever, at
    the expense of our properties and our lives, if God in his
    providence should call and strengthen us so to do.

    (Then follow the articles of their faith.)

In reference to the commencement of Mr. Hillyard's ministry, who was the
first pastor of this Church at Brigstock, we find the following records
preserved by the Church at Wellingborough, of which he was a member:--

    _March 2nd, 1775._--The Church was informed that brother Hillyard
    had given an exhortation to some of the brethren, who should report
    to the Church their thoughts next meeting.

    _May 5th._--Brother Hillyard exercised his gift before the Church,
    when it was unanimously agreed that he should continue until the
    path of duty was more plain.

    In 1776, _June 6th_, the Church met by appointment, and sent brother
    Hillyard to preach whithersoever the Lord is pleased to call him.

    In 1778, _May 3rd_, a letter was read from Brigstock, saying that
    they had formed themselves into a Church, and requested that we
    would send messengers to behold their faith and order, on the 9th of
    June. That Church afterwards agreed, by the advice of ministers, to
    invite brother Hillyard to be ordained their pastor, and for this
    purpose requested his dismission.

    He was ordained May 20th, and on this occasion Mr. Toller, of
    Kettering, Mr. Robins, and Mr. Toller, of London, preached.

Of Mr. Hillyard's early ministrations it is stated, "that they were
distinguished by a glowing, holy, and enlightened zeal, accompanied with
great modesty and diffidence. He was fully sensible of the disadvantages
under which he laboured for want of a more liberal education, yet
earnestly desirous of devoting all that he had attained, all that he
possessed, to the good of souls and the furtherance of the Gospel. With
much regret he was compelled to relinquish his station at Brigstock, on
account of the inability of the people to meet the wants of his
increasing family. He then settled for a few years at Kimbolton, in
Huntingdonshire, until he fixed for the remainder of his life at Olney,
in Buckinghamshire, where during forty years he experienced the great
goodness of his God and Saviour. He fell asleep on the twelfth of July,
1828, in the eighty-third year of his age. His address was plain,
powerful, and pointed. His ministry was abundantly blessed; his place of
worship at Olney was enlarged four times."

An unsettled interval, attended with repeated changes, appears to have
followed Mr. Hillyard's removal. A Mr. Griffin appears immediately to
have succeeded Mr. Hillyard; then Mr. Maurice Phillips was placed here
for a short time--he came in the year 1790, when this place became
united with Weldon, under one pastor: Mr. Phillips afterwards became
tutor of Rotherham College, in connexion with Dr. Williams. Mr. Morgan,
from Dr. Williams' academy, was a candidate for one year (1796); Mr.
William Bull, for nine months; Mr. Spencer also ministered unto them for
one year (1798). About the year 1798 we read, "that Mr. Mitchel was
universally approved of, and about being settled with us; but he removed
to Leicester, and the hopes of the people were disappointed." It does
not appear that any person was settled long as pastor for a number of
years. This undoubtedly had a very unfavourable influence as to the
numbers in Church fellowship, for the next pastor observes, when he
first admitted four members to the Church, "for nearly twenty years
there had been no addition to the little band, the result probably of
being without a pastor." "The number of communicants at the time of my
first dispensing the Lord's Supper was only five, and two of them were
members of another religious community. The members of the Church were
reduced to eight only, and for some reasons three did not unite with us
at the table. O thou Spirit Divine, carry on the work of salvation, that
many may first give themselves to the Lord, and then unto us for
Christ's sake! 'By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small, but by thee,
O Lord?'" Again he wrote--"With gratitude I now look back nine years,
and with holy joy my heart exclaims, What has God wrought, through whose
blessing the Church has increased to upwards of sixty members! This is
the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes."

Thus wrote Mr. Robert Pickering, who was the next that was settled over
them as a minister of Christ.

But during this unsettled interval, a new Meeting House was built. A
statement of their case was drawn up, sanctioned by the names of a
number of ministers, soliciting aid from the Churches towards this
object, dated 1798. In this document they say--

    We now have stated supplies, in hopes that the great Head of the
    Church will send us a pastor that will go in and out before us, and
    feed our souls with spiritual food. Our numbers being increased to
    about two hundred, the place which has been rented about fifty years
    being very small, and we being only tenants at will and under a
    discharge to quit at Lady-day next, we have been under the necessity
    of purchasing a house, with ground to it sufficient for the purpose
    of erecting a new place for public worship, on which we have built a
    shell, the walls of stone, and covered with slate, to finish which
    in a plain comfortable manner will cost in the whole expense about
    L300. We are not able to raise more than L100 amongst ourselves,
    there being no individual belonging to the congregation of
    independent fortune; therefore we are obliged to make our case
    known, and to request the assistance of our friends of other
    congregations.

By the assistance rendered the building was completed, and the expense
ultimately cleared.

It was in the year 1803 that Mr. Pickering, who had been a student at
Rotherham College, was introduced to the notice of the congregation at
Brigstock; and after ten months' probation, he was publicly ordained to
the pastoral office.

Mr. Pickering was born at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in the county of Leicester,
March 12th, 1777. His entrance into a state of spiritual life he dates
about the spring of 1794, when he says--

    It pleased God to convert me to himself under a sermon preached by
    the Rev. Mr. Moseley, from Matt. vii. 21: "Not every one that saith
    unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he
    that doeth the will of my Father that is in heaven." I have not much
    recollection of what was said, but remember that such was the
    impression made upon my mind that I was much affected: on reaching
    home, I walked about the garden in much distress. When I reflected
    upon that heaven of which I had been hearing, I could not help
    exclaiming, "I shall never reach there." Alarmed at my dreadful
    state as a sinner, I began to seek after God by prayer and a more
    constant attendance at the Chapel, and eagerly sought every
    opportunity of pouring out my heart before him in the closet, the
    shop, or the field. Nor was it long before God was pleased to break
    in upon my soul with light and comfort. Soon after, I found great
    encouragement in a discourse from John vi. 37: "Him that cometh unto
    me, I will in no wise cast out." My experience at that time was not
    the same as many of God's people. I had not that horror, darkness,
    and awful dread which some have passed through. No, blessed be
    Immanuel! he "drew me with the cords of a man, and with bonds of
    love."

Mr. Pickering became a member of the Church at Atherstone, where he then
resided; and soon after this he began to engage in occasional religious
services for the benefit of others; and on the 29th of August, 1798, he
entered the academy at Rotherham. On the completion of his studies he
laboured for a year at Driffield, in Yorkshire; but difficulties arose,
which rendered it unsuitable for him to remain. He was invited on
probation by the people at Brigstock. "I selected," he says, "as the
ground of my first address to the congregation of Brigstock, Rom. i. 16:
'I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.' To the speaker it was a
merciful season, and a time of saving impression to a person who
afterwards joined the Church of Christ. In the afternoon I preached at
Weldon, and in the evening at Corby." These places combined in promoting
the temporal support of the same minister, while they mutually reaped
the benefit of his pious labours. For the first twenty years of his
ministry Mr. Pickering preached statedly at Brigstock and Weldon every
Lord's-day, and once a month, in the evening, at Corby also.

On the 21st of June, 1804, he was ordained to the pastoral office. "The
religious services of the day," he observes, "were very impressive, and
highly interesting. The brethren engaged were Messrs. Toller, Whitehead,
Gronow, Bullock, Wood, Spencer, and Chadwick." "The day after my
ordination, a deep sense of the important work and awful responsibility
of the ministry induced me to cry to God for assistance, that he would
cheer me with his presence and assist me on all occasions. The care of
the Church was much upon my spirit, and the eternal welfare of souls
before me. How weighty the charge! how weak the instrument! and how
arduous the employment! Oh, to be spiritually minded, watchful, and
useful! Lord, form my mind to bear all the trials and duties of my
station, and thine shall be the praise!"

Mr. Pickering's labours were continued here for thirty-three years. He
was the pious, affectionate, kind, amiable, and faithful pastor of the
village Church. He had, on the whole, a peaceful and useful course;
always plain and serious, evangelical and devout, in his engagements as
a minister, while his daily temper and conduct recommended the Gospel he
preached. He died suddenly, August 27th, 1836. He was interred in the
front of the Chapel where he had so long preached. Mr. Green, of
Uppingham, delivered the funeral oration; Mr. Renals, of Wellingborough,
who had been a fellow student with Mr. Pickering, preached the funeral
sermon, from John xi. 16: "Let us also go, that we may die with him."
Mr. Renals prepared and published a memoir of his friend. On his last
birth-day, Mr. Pickering wrote--

                            _March 12th, 1836._

    I am this day fifty-nine years of age. I was nineteen when I began
    to exhort my fellow sinners residing in villages to think of God;
    and two years after, the Christian Church procured admission for me
    at Rotherham College; so that I must have been engaged, more or
    less, about forty years in the work of the Lord. All these years I
    have found him a good Master--a friend near at hand, ever ready to
    help, and a constant refuge to my soul; still employing me in hoary
    age, and rendering my services somewhat useful in his cause.

When Mr. Pickering was settled, a new gallery was erected; and in the
course of his ministry, in the year 1819, a large vestry, measuring 20
feet by 17 feet, with a school-room of equal size over it, and both
opening into the Meeting House, were added, to accommodate the young and
the poor. The Meeting House, the vestry, and school-room together, are
calculated to accommodate 450 persons.

On the death of Mr. Pickering, the destitute and afflicted people
applied to Rotherham, and Mr. Isaac Vaughan came on probation,
respecting whose introduction to Brigstock the following is recorded:--

    Isaac Vaughan, having been invited by the Church and congregation at
    Brigstock, and having visited the place, entered upon his labours
    the third Sabbath in July, 1837. His ordination took place on the
    2nd of May, 1838, when a very large concourse of people assembled,
    and a goodly company of ministers, many of whom were called upon to
    take part in the services. Mr. Thomas Toller delivered a most
    beautiful introductory discourse; Mr. H. Stowell, Mr. Vaughan's
    tutor, gave an interesting and impressive charge; Mr. J. Green
    offered the ordination prayer; and Mr. E. T. Prust preached to the
    Church and congregation a very appropriate sermon. The services were
    peculiarly solemn and interesting, and the impression good.

In the spring of 1841, after four short years, Mr. Vaughan saw fit to
remove to Olney (subsequently to the new Tabernacle, London), and the
people were again as sheep without a shepherd, and were in an unsettled
state for several years. Many supplied the vacant pulpit, among whom may
be mentioned Mr. Hillyard, since of Pocklington, and Mr. Simpson, now of
Shepton Mallett, both of whom stayed a considerable time, and were made
useful during their temporary sojourn among the people.

In January, 1845, the cause had become greatly weakened and the
attendance reduced, so that the spirits of the people were much
depressed, when their attention--which in 1842 had in vain been directed
to the present minister, Mr. Thomas Lord, then pastor of the Independent
Church at Wollaston--was again turned in that direction, and ultimately
with success. He entered upon his labours on the 18th of the following
May. The union was formed under hopeful circumstances, and has hitherto
continued most cordial and harmonious.

"In the year 1847, being the jubilee of the erection of the place of
worship, it was found needful," states the present minister, "to effect
considerable repairs and improvements. The people came forward with a
willing mind and a liberal spirit, and raised upwards of L40, which,
with some other donations, was sufficient to prevent any remaining
debt." "There is," he observes, "no record of members prior to the time
of Mr. Pickering being settled, who, numbering himself one, entered all
those that were in fellowship; and from that time a record has been
kept. The whole number admitted, up to the present time, has been 201;
of these many have fallen asleep. In the year 1824, seventeen were
dismissed in peace and love, to form a separate Church of the same
order at Weldon. A few have tired and fainted, and walk the ways of God
no more; some have removed to a distance; while about sixty remain in
communion. The average attendance on public worship through the year
verges upon 300. The Sunday-schools contain about 110 children, the
average attendance being about seventy each part of the day. These are
attended to by about twenty teachers, who are most of them on the Lord's
side. A separate service is maintained for the benefit of the children
every Lord's-day, which is conducted by the minister, deacons, and
others in rotation. Several who have been trained in the schools have
become children of God, but stand connected with other Churches, where
they have been called in the providence of God to reside.

"There is no pecuniary endowment of any kind in connexion with the
Church at Brigstock, but a good house erected for the residence of the
minister, about thirteen years ago, upon which there has rested a debt,
which is slowly decreasing, and constitutes the only difficulty which
presses upon the people, who are, almost without a single exception,
working people. There is no Day-school in connexion with the Chapel,
which is a serious drawback; but the want is partially met by schoolroom
and scholastic privileges which exist in the village, which, however,
through high Church and Puseyistic influences, are not so efficient or
acceptable as might be.

"On the whole, the Christian friends at Brigstock have much to be
thankful for; and, in language employed at a late public meeting of the
Church and congregation, minister, and other friends, they say--'In
looking backward, we cry, "hitherto hath the Lord helped us"; and in
looking forward, we "thank God and take courage." In looking inward, we
feel that we are the subject of manifold deficiencies, and confess our
need of a fresh baptism of heavenly and spiritual blessings; and looking
upward, we cry, "O Lord, revive thy work" "O Lord, we beseech thee, send
now prosperity." Amen.'"




CHAPTER XVII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT WELDON AND CORBY.


In the early part of the last century, there resided in the village of
Little Weldon a freestone mason, Mr. Edward Nutt, who was a Protestant
Dissenter of the Independent denomination. He usually attended divine
worship at the Independent Meeting in Kettering, under the ministry of
the excellent Mr. Thomas Saunders. After the death of Mr. Saunders, he
travelled to Oundle on the Sabbath, to hear Mr. Goodrich; but, not
satisfied with going himself to obtain improvement and enjoyment under
the ministry of the Gospel, he was anxious to bring it home to the
inhabitants of the village in which he resided, with the hope that it
might be rendered useful to them. Therefore, at the quarter sessions at
Northampton, July 17th, 1706, he had his dwelling-house and premises
registered for the worship of God, and then he began to have occasional
preaching there by the Dissenting ministers in the vicinity. The
following copy of the license granted him has been preserved:--

         _Northamptonshire._

    These are to certify, that Edward Nutt, of the said county, did
    certify to her Majesty's justices of the peace, assembled at their
    general quarter sessions of the peace, held for the county
    aforesaid, on Tuesday, the 16th day of July, that the
    dwelling-house of the said Edward Nutt, with its appurtenances,
    situated in Weldon aforesaid, in the said county of Northampton, is
    set apart and intended a place of meeting for Protestant Dissenters
    to meet for the exercise of their religious worship and service of
    God.

    Given under my hand, and the seal of my office, this 17th day of
    July, anno Domini 1706.

                                                        J. HORTON.

In his dwelling-house Mr. Nutt had occasional services conducted for
several years; but about the year 1736 or 1738 he fitted up, in a very
plain manner, a small barn, where the Meeting House now stands: it had a
small window, a square pulpit, three stone steps to the pulpit, and the
people sat on forms. Thus it continued, and here the services were held
until the present Meeting House was built.

Mr. Nutt left by will to the Rev. D. Goodrich, of Oundle, and the Rev.
Samuel King, of Welford, his dwelling-house, with its appurtenances, a
close of pasture land, and one hundred pounds, which they were to
receive at the death of his wife; and Mrs. Nutt made the same parties
joint executors of her will, and residuary legatees. It was understood
that this property was meant to be applied for the maintenance of some
services in the village of Weldon by Dissenting ministers. The parties
to whom it was left, well knowing that it was the desire of Mr. and Mrs.
Nutt to have a sermon preached there once a month or oftener, by
Dissenting ministers of the Independent denomination, consulted with
some of the neighbouring ministers as to the best mode of securing the
money for this purpose. It was ultimately determined to lay it out in
the purchase of a piece of land in Titchmarsh field, the rents and
profits of which continue to be received towards the support of the
minister for the time being. The dwelling-house was found to expose the
executors to some trouble in obtaining tenants and keeping it in repair,
so that they determined on the sale of the house, with its
appurtenances, for which they received L80. The half of this sum was
expended in the enclosure of the land at Titchmarsh, and the other half
was applied towards the building of the new Meeting House. Some years
after, the dwelling-house was again purchased for the residence of the
minister, when they had a settled pastor at Weldon.

While Mr. Nutt was living, his business calling him very much from home,
the services were irregular, being ordered so as to suit the convenience
of Mr. Nutt and the ministers that he invited to preach: what little
expense was incurred was borne by him. After his decease, the services
were held with greater regularity; and after the death of Mrs. Nutt, the
ministers that usually preached met annually at Weldon, in July, to fix
the course of lecture for the next year, and audit the accounts for the
last. The plan was, to have a sermon once a month, on Sabbath evenings,
in the summer, and on Thursday at eleven o'clock A.M., in the winter;
and there was seven shillings and sixpence a time allowed out of the
estate and money left by Mr. and Mrs. Nutt; the surplus paid for a
lecture on other Sabbath evenings, which was usually preached by Mr.
Bacon, pastor of the Independent Church at Ashley. The preachers of the
monthly lecture were generally the ministers of Oundle, Kettering,
Bowell, Ashley, Harborough, Welford, and Uppingham, all of whom gave up
to Mr. M. Phillips, the minister at Brigstock, when it was determined to
connect Weldon with that place.

As the lectures could not be much oftener than once a month, on the
Lord's-day evening; and being in the forenoon on the week-days, were
very thinly attended, it was considered by the ministers, trustees, and
others, that it would be better for the people at Weldon to become
united with the Church at Brigstock, and so to get a regularly educated
minister between them. At that time, a Mr. Griffin was minister at
Brigstock; but being seventy-six years of age, he was willing to retire
as soon as the people could obtain a successor. "Just at that time,"
writes Mr. Nathaniel Collis, of Kettering, who felt a lively interest in
their concerns, "I had occasion to write to Dr. Williams, tutor to the
academy, then at Oswestry, and took the opportunity of inquiring whether
any young man was there suitable for such a situation, on which the
Doctor recommended Mr. Maurice Phillips: he was a Welchman, and came at
the Midsummer vacation, 1790. At first he was a poor speaker in English,
but in a few months so improved as to become a very acceptable preacher;
and he was a close student." Upon his coming, he regularly preached at
Brigstock and Weldon, so that both places had preaching once every
Sabbath, and sometimes an additional service in the evening; and he
generally preached once a month at Corby, on a Sabbath evening. Under
these arrangements, the attendance considerably increased at Weldon.
They made some enlargement of the place of meeting; but the number of
hearers still increasing, and the place being an old building, low, and
inconvenient, they at length determined on building a new Meeting House.
According to the plan that was formed, it was to be twenty feet wide,
thirty-three feet long, sixteen feet high to the top of the side walls,
and cove of the ceiling about three feet higher, all inside measure;
which, it was thought, would be large enough to seat them all on the
ground floor, and be high enough for a gallery, if it should be wanted.
The foundation stone was laid May 23rd, 1792. The whole expense of the
building was L182. 9_s._ 3_d._ All these particulars have been minutely
recorded by Mr. Collis, with the manner in which the money was obtained,
and every donation that was received for the purpose; and he adds to his
account the following characteristic note: "If the Meeting House had had
but one door, and a much less window, it would have been better, and
saved some pounds in the expense." But, to his honour be it recorded, he
gave a larger sum towards the building than any other subscriber. This
place continued in connexion with the Church at Brigstock until the time
when Mr. Pickering, who had for twenty years served both congregations,
determined on confining his labours chiefly to the latter place. During
the ministry of Mr. Pickering, the Weldon congregation increased; so
that it was thought necessary to erect a gallery across the end of the
Meeting, to face the pulpit, five seats deep, which was done in the year
1808, at an expense of L39.

About the year 1824, Mr. Pickering resigned his connexion with Weldon,
and the members of the Brigstock Church residing here received their
dismission to form themselves into a distinct Church of Christ, when
they came to the determination to endeavour to obtain a stated pastor to
reside at Weldon, and to preach regularly on the Sabbath at Weldon and
Corby. After some time, they gave an invitation to Mr. John Philip, who
became their first pastor here, and laboured among them about twelve
years, and then was called to close his life suddenly in their service.
One Sabbath morning, while engaged in preaching, he ruptured a blood
vessel, was carried from his pulpit to his house, and, after a short
time, died in his chair. Mr. Toller, of Kettering, improved his death,
from Zech. i. 5: "The prophets, do they live for ever?"

The next minister was Mr. Moffat, who was with them but a short time. He
was succeeded by Mr. S. A. Bradshaw. After the removal of Mr. Bradshaw,
an invitation was given to Mr. Thomas Thomas, from Newport Academy, who
became their pastor, and was ordained May 25th, 1848. The following
account of the ordination service we find in the records of the
Church:--"On this day," it is stated, "Mr. Thomas was ordained. Mr.
Coleman, of Ashley, commenced by reading portions of Scripture, and
prayer; Mr. Thomas Toller delivered the introductory discourse, and
asked the questions; Mr. Green, of Uppingham, offered the ordination
prayer; Mr. J. Bull, M.A., of Newport, delivered the charge; Mr.
Robinson, of Kettering, preached to the people in the evening. The
services were numerously attended, and were peculiarly interesting: near
300 ministers and friends took tea together, in a close lent for the
purpose. Mr. Robinson preached in the Chapel close, in the evening; near
upon 500 persons were present, and appeared much interested with the
faithful and appropriate discourse." Mr. Thomas is still the minister of
the congregations at Weldon and Corby.

The village of Corby is situated about two miles to the west of Weldon,
containing about eight hundred inhabitants; a small sum of money was
given a hundred years ago for the preaching of a lecture here on a
Sabbath evening by Independent ministers. This appears to have been
first preached by Mr. West, who was minister at Ashley, and afterwards
by Mr. Bacon, his successor. When the congregation at Weldon was taken
into connexion with the congregation at Brigstock, the Corby lecture was
preached by the Brigstock minister; but in the year 1824, when it was
determined to have a settled minister at Weldon, it was agreed that he
should preach once every Sabbath at Corby; and this is the arrangement
at the present time.

About the year 1834, William Rowlatt, Esq., who was born at Corby, but
who was then residing at Burton, in the parish of Christchurch, in the
county of Southampton,[7] anxious to do something for the benefit of his
native place, first erected good school-rooms for Day-schools of both
sexes in Corby and its vicinity, and liberally endowed them, and gave a
dwelling-house for the teachers. By a deed of gift, they were
transferred to the British and Foreign School Society, and are placed
under the superintendence of a local Committee. They are efficiently
conducted by the present teachers, Mr. D. Fisher and Miss Ross. The
schools have already proved a great advantage to Corby and the
surrounding villages. Soon after the schools were erected, the Old
Meeting House was greatly improved, by a new gallery, pews, and pulpit,
at the expense of Mr. Rowlatt; and he has left an endowment of L500 to
be placed on Government security, the interest to be applied towards the
support of the minister. Whatever opinion may be entertained as to the
principle or the working of endowments for religious objects, the
kindness of Mr. Rowlatt's spirit and design must be acknowledged, and
that hitherto the result has been good.


[7] The name, in legal proceedings, of Hampshire.


There is a Sabbath-school connected with this place, consisting of
fifty-four children. The school connected with the congregation at
Weldon numbers twenty-one children. The present number of communicants
is twenty-seven.

In the year 1850, the sum of L55 was left by Mrs. Mary French, partly
for the purpose of renewing the trust deeds of the minister's house and
the close belonging to this interest, and partly for making improvements
in connexion with the premises. The larger part of this sum has already
been applied according to the will of the donor.

While we record the pecuniary aid thus afforded to a small body of
Nonconformists in these places, who have no wealthy individuals amongst
them, and who have to stand against much influence that bears against
the advancement of their principles, we trust it is ever borne in mind
that the promotion of the cause of pure and undefiled Christianity, the
conversion of sinners unto God, and the advancement of believers in
divine knowledge, faith, holiness, and love, are the great objects for
which a Christian Church is formed and the ministry of the Gospel
sustained. Here may these objects be abundantly promoted!




CHAPTER XVIII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT YELVERTOFT.


In the village of Yelvertoft, which has a population of between six and
seven hundred inhabitants, there is a neat Independent Chapel, capable
of accommodating near four hundred persons, situated about the centre of
the village, with school-rooms adjoining. Passing on to a rather lower
part of the village, on the opposite side may be observed a respectable
dwelling-house, with garden and orchard, which is the residence of the
Independent minister. To be able to go back to the commencement, and
trace the onward progress of such a cause, thus situated, must be
especially gratifying to those who are now connected with it, while it
might be gratifying to all who take an interest in the things that
relate to the kingdom of Christ and the highest welfare of men.

It is not more than sixty years since the present Chapel was erected, an
Independent minister regularly settled as pastor, and a Church formed on
Congregational principles; but in the early part of the last century,
occasional services were conducted here by Dissenting ministers, chiefly
from Welford, where those residing in Yelvertoft who dissented from the
Established Church were in the habit of attending.

In the book containing the records of the Church, we find an account of
the earliest efforts made by Nonconformists in this village, and how
they led on to the formation of the present interest. This account we
shall now present to the reader.

    Some time before any attempt at all was made to introduce the
    preached Gospel into this place, and also during the time that the
    weekly lectures only were enjoyed, a few persons were in the habit
    of going to Welford (about five miles distant), where they could
    attend that mode of worship which appeared to them most agreeable to
    the word of God; and there can be little doubt that it was at the
    suggestion of some of them that the preaching of the Gospel here was
    commenced.

    When this took place (which must be now, if it occurred in the time
    of Mr. Norris, who died in 1738, nearly one hundred and twenty years
    ago),[8] a private house was licensed, to afford the minister at
    Welford an opportunity to preach a week-day lecture. It is probable,
    though difficult to ascertain with certainty, that Mr. Norris, of
    Welford, was the first that ever preached the Gospel in this place
    amongst Dissenters. His service consisted of a monthly lecture on a
    Tuesday afternoon, which was continued by his successor, the Rev.
    Samuel King. The number that usually attended on these occasions was
    between twenty and thirty, composed in part of the revered ancestors
    of those families that form no small part of the present
    congregation.


    [8] Some alteration has been made in the account here, to bring it
    to an agreement with the present date, 1852.


    In the year 1758, a place was fitted up out of an old barn, in a
    central part of the village, for the better accommodation of those
    who attended. Then it appears, at least towards the close of Mr.
    King's service, in addition to the monthly lecture, the students
    from the Independent Academy, then at Daventry, supplied
    occasionally on the Sabbath-day--procured, perhaps, through the
    instrumentality of Mr. Richard Norton; and partly from this
    circumstance, together with occasional help when it could be had,
    and the greater convenience of the place for worship, the
    congregation gradually increased, notwithstanding the fact that a
    Dissenting place of worship was considered by many a degradation,
    and the name of Dissenter or Presbyterian, which were confounded
    with each other, had considerable odium attached to it. It is to be
    observed, however, that the means of grace about this time were very
    irregularly enjoyed, for, besides its being but seldom on the
    Sabbath, the monthly lecture was continued only nine months in the
    year, beginning about the first Tuesday in October, and continuing
    till Midsummer. [The lecture being preached on the afternoon of a
    week-day, we suppose they found it necessary to omit the service
    during the busy seasons of agriculture, the hay time and the
    harvest.]

    From tradition, which is indeed the chief source whence this
    imperfect account has been drawn, it would seem that the first
    person who assumed anything like the character of a settled minister
    was a Mr. Bryson, the author of a book explanatory of the 8th
    chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. He was one of those ministers
    the late Countess of Huntingdon in her liberality provided, as a
    means in the hands of Christ to extend his Church. He stayed here
    about two years. As her Ladyship had been solicited to permit Mr.
    Bryson to continue, he being much approved of after he had been
    heard a little while, it is likely that she would consider herself
    as bound to attend to the necessities of this place, for three more
    gentlemen who were under her directions followed in succession. The
    next who succeeded was a Mr. Green, whose services were enjoyed but
    one year. After him followed a Mr. Porter, who, leaving at the
    expiration of a year, was succeeded by a Mr. Pritchard, who it seems
    did not stay quite one year. These ministers being, as to their
    personal expenses, permitted to draw upon their patroness, the
    people had only to provide them board and lodging; they boarded
    amongst the friends, as circumstances determined. The labours of
    these men were followed up by those of a Mr. Coulson, who divided
    his attention between Rugby and this place. He resided some time at
    Hillmorton, but afterwards came and lived here, and this place then
    enjoyed the whole of his services. He commenced his labours in the
    year 1783, and continued until the year 1788, occupying during his
    residence here a house adjoining the premises used as a place of
    worship.

    About three months after the removal of Mr. Coulson, in which there
    was no public worship (an inconvenience which the cause here had
    experienced more than once), Mr. Garner, who properly speaking was
    settled at Kilsby, preached here one part of the day for about three
    months, his services commencing at Michaelmas and ending at
    Christmas the same year. Mr. Jones was the next person who
    endeavoured to advance the Redeemer's cause in this place. He lived
    at West Haddon, whose services at both places were all which at the
    time they enjoyed. He continued in this sphere about two
    years--first preached here in the beginning of the year 1789, and
    left in November of the year 1790.

    Although we have reason to hope that during all these years the
    labours of the several persons above named were not entirely
    useless, but that some persons were suitably impressed with divine
    things, and lived and died under the influence of them, contributing
    in some humble proportion to preserve the worship of the true God,
    yet it is certain that a Church was never formed, and that the
    ordinance of the Lord's Supper was never administered, until a
    period to which we are now approaching. Those who felt themselves to
    be members of the invisible Church of Christ, and were desirous of
    commemorating his dying love, sought the privilege in the
    neighbouring Churches, as their particular views led them.

    It was in the beginning of March, in the year 1791, that Mr. Knight
    was, by the good providence of God, called to this place; and it was
    now that the cause of Christ, after experiencing many vicissitudes
    and serious interruptions in its progress, was destined to enjoy a
    greater permanency and regularity in the means of grace than it had
    ever done from its first existence.

    Mr. Knight was a student from the academy at Mile End. He left the
    academy to come and reside amongst this people when the cause of
    Christ did not present a very encouraging appearance; and he was
    removed from hence to his eternal rest, this being the only place
    that enjoyed the stated labours of that highly esteemed servant of
    God. He served his great Master in this place from March, 1791, to
    September, 1822, a period of more than thirty years. During his
    ministry the cause of religion was considerably improved. The
    present Chapel, a very compact one, capable of accommodating two
    hundred and sixty persons [it has since been enlarged] was erected
    in the year 1792, in a very suitable part of the village, and near
    the site of the former place. Whilst it was erecting, the service of
    God was performed in a spacious barn. Mr. Knight had been here some
    time when his ordination took place. The following ministers took
    the principal parts in the services of that day: Mr. Grundy
    delivered the charge, from Titus ii. 15, last clause; Mr. Gill
    preached to the people, from 2 Thessalonians iii. 16. Mr. Horsey
    preached in the evening, from Acts xiii. 40. The service was highly
    interesting, bringing together great numbers, being rather novel at
    that time to many in this neighbourhood. After the ordination a
    Church was formed, which at the beginning was small; but in the
    course of Mr. Knight's ministry several were added as the fruit of
    his labours. As must be expected, however, in a place circumstanced
    as this is, the Church never reached to any very great number. It
    has so happened, indeed, that soon after any who promised to be a
    great acquisition to the Church, and to form its brightest ornament,
    were joined to it, they were removed by providence to some other
    place; and when the Church has been deprived of two or three of its
    members venerable for their experience, by the stroke of death, the
    Church's loss being their eternal gain, the void thus made has not
    been speedily made up; so that the Church has assumed those
    appearances which have served alternately to raise and depress the
    spirits of those who tremble for the Ark of God. Some, indeed, of
    those who have been reluctantly transferred to other Churches,
    remain, not only as monuments of divine mercy and preserving grace,
    but as proofs of usefulness attending the ministry of the Gospel
    here; and many have fallen asleep in Christ, a part preceding and
    the others following him who had been the honoured instrument of
    their conversion.

Here the account closes, as written by one hand. It appears to have been
penned shortly after the death of Mr. Knight.

We have some rather slight recollections of Mr. Knight. The year
preceding his own death he was present at the funeral of the Rev. T. N.
Toller, of Kettering, when he offered a solemn suitable prayer before
the delivery of the funeral sermon by Mr. Hall. At the half-yearly
meeting of the Association, held the next April, at Rowell, he delivered
a sermon in reference to the character and death of Mr. Toller, from
Acts xiii. 36: "After he had served his own generation according to the
will of God, he fell on sleep." The next year Mr. Knight died, in an
equally sudden manner. In person he was robust, with a florid
countenance; his manner in the pulpit was earnest and impressive, but
laborious, strained, and sometimes painful to the occasional hearer; his
voice was powerful, but rather harsh. A ministry faithful and
persevering left its testimony in the hearts of his people. He was
highly esteemed by his brethren, and by a considerable circle of
Christian friends.

For about six months from this time the pulpit was kindly supplied by
the neighbouring ministers; after which, Mr. Nettleship, from Rotherham
Academy, was invited on probation for a month, which invitation was
renewed with a view to a final settlement; but he declined acceding to
it. After an interval of two months, during which several students from
Mr. Scott's seminary at Rowell preached, Mr. Gibson, from Rotherham,
paid a probationary visit, and on further invitation resided here three
years, at the expiration of which he was induced by various
circumstances to direct his attention to some other part of the
vineyard of the Lord. This left the congregation again destitute of a
minister, and opened the way for the introduction of Mr. Barber, who had
been educated for the ministry at Wymondley, and came here the 30th of
July, 1826. His ordination took place October 9th, 1827, on which
occasion the following ministers were engaged:--Mr. Gawthorne, of Derby,
stated the nature of a Christian Church; Mr. Scott, of Rowell, gave the
charge; Mr. Pinkerton, of Weedon, preached to the people; Mr. Hobson, of
Welford, offered the ordination prayer. Mr. Gravestock, of Old,
addressed the congregation in the evening.

Mr. Barber remained the highly respected pastor of this Christian Church
until October, 1831, when, agreeably to his own wish, he removed to go
into America. He and his wife set sail on the 20th of October.

The congregation was supplied two Sabbaths by students from Rowell; and
on the 23rd of the same month in which Mr. Barber left, Mr. Islip, late
pastor of the Independent Church at Ketton, Rutlandshire, entered on his
stated labours here.

It was during the ministry of Mr. Barber that the dwelling-house for the
minister was rebuilt, and fitted up in the state in which it now
appears. In the spring of the next year after Mr. Islip commenced his
ministry, the Chapel was enlarged ten feet in length, and completed by
the 8th of July. The cost of enlargement was L110, which, with a debt
remaining on the house, was in the spring of 1837 entirely defrayed by
the united efforts of the friends.

Mr. Islip's ministry was attended with a good degree of comfort and
success, but was of rather short continuance here, for, owing to the
unfavourable state of his health, he was obliged to resign his charge
after about six years' labour in this situation. He was succeeded by
Mr. G. Nettleship, who, after labouring thirteen years and a half in
another situation in Cumberland, accepted now the united invitation of
this Church and congregation to become their pastor. Mr. Nettleship
commenced his stated labours here on the 18th of June, 1837, and removed
from Yelvertoft in the year 1846, when he was shortly after succeeded by
the Rev. Thomas James, the present pastor of the Church.

The number of Church members recorded when Mr. Barber commenced his
ministry in 1826 was twenty-one; and five in addition appear to have
been admitted by him. About the same number we find when Mr. Islip took
the pastoral charge of this people in 1831. On the first Sabbath in
April, 1837, the minister writes--"This closes the services and the
pastorate of Thomas Islip: twenty-eight admitted." When Mr. Nettleship
commenced his labours, there appears to have been forty-five members in
the Church; and there were thirty added during his ministry. Since Mr.
James accepted the pastoral office, thirty-two additions have been made
to the Church; and during his ministry new school-rooms have been
erected for the children of the Sabbath-school, at a cost of L116. The
present number of communicants is above 80. There are 130 or 135
children attending the Sabbath-schools.

There is a Chapel in the village of Swinford, about four miles from
Yelvertoft, connected with this cause, in which a regular
Sabbath-evening service is conducted by the pastor of this Church. There
have been occasional services here for some years past, and a new Chapel
was erected a few years ago.

Thus we have seen that there has been a gradual and pleasing advancement
in this cause, giving hope of still further tokens of the divine
presence and favour; while the pastor and his flock unitedly plead, "Let
thy work still appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their
children."




CHAPTER XIX.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT WOLLASTON.


The Independent Church in the village of Wollaston is of rather recent
formation. Not more than sixty-four years have passed since the
professing Christians residing in this place who dissented from the
Established Church were formed into a regular independent Christian
society; but in looking back to the early days of Nonconformity, we find
a Mr. Edmund Matthews, a man of good learning, sound judgment, and
serious piety, who had been the vicar of Wollaston, resigning the
living, refusing to submit to the terms imposed by the Act of
Uniformity, coming out from the Church, and taking his place among the
noble band of Nonconformist worthies. It was a considerable sacrifice
that he had to make, for truth and a good conscience. "Cut off from his
former means of support, he lived privately at Wellingborough, and
practised as a medical man, but was often reduced to great straits. When
things were at the lowest, he would commit his wife and seven children
to the care of Providence; and God mercifully appeared for them. He was
laid on the bed of affliction, and saw his end approaching, with the
prospect of leaving his family unprovided for. There came a messenger
from two of his relations, one a draper and the other a minister,
bidding him be easy about his wife and children, for the one would
clothe them all, and the other provide them with food;" and to show how
well they were disposed of, it is stated "that his wife afterwards
practised medicine, and sent two of her sons to the University, while
the eldest daughter married a knight." Mr. Matthews was a man full of
compassion and genuine charity; exemplary for faith, meekness, patience,
resignation to the will of God, and reliance on the promises. He had
great comfort in death.

It does not appear that Mr. Matthews made any attempt to raise a
congregation or to carry on his ministry after his ejectment; but as
there were Nonconformist ministers who in this early period took
opportunities to preach the Gospel at Wellingborough, which is within
four miles of Wollaston, those who separated from the Established Church
in the latter place would travel to the former to attend those services,
and would become connected with the Independent Churches that were early
formed there, while they endeavoured to obtain occasional services in
the village where they resided.

It was soon after the middle of the last century that the present Chapel
was built, viz., in 1752; but it was not until the year 1788 that the
Church was formed and the first pastor settled. In that year Mr. Perry,
of Lavendon Mill, near Olney, was invited to take the pastoral charge
over them. He was the intimate friend and had been the fellow-labourer
of Mr. Raban, who was pastor of the Church at Yardley Hastings. They had
been connected with the Established Church at Olney; both of them had
engaged in delivering exhortations at meetings for social prayer and for
the mutual improvement of their fellow Christians who belonged to the
Church. These engagements were the means of introducing them to further
service, so that they both became pastors of Independent Churches in
these villages, which were but a short distance from their former abode.

In the records of the Church at West End, Wellingborough, it is stated
that "at a Church-meeting held October 5th, 1778, Mr. Perry, of Lavendon
Mill, who had for some time before exercised his gifts among Dissenters,
though at that time in connexion with the Church of England as by law
established, having testified his desire to join this Church with a view
to his being sent out to the ministry in an orderly way, he came, and
gave an account of his call to speak the word, the reasons that induced
him to approve of the order of Congregational Churches, and his reasons
for desiring to join with this Church. He was proposed to the Church to
join next Church-meeting." In a month from this time another meeting was
held, when "Mr. Perry gave in his experience to great satisfaction, and
then, according to former appointment, preached amongst us to good
satisfaction also; and the Church being consulted, they thought it was
plainly their duty to send brother Perry out to preach the Gospel
wherever the Lord should be pleased to call him, and concluded the next
Church-meeting should be held for that end and purpose." Then it was
unanimously agreed that brother Perry should preach wherever Providence
should call him.

It appears that Mr. Perry put himself into the hands of this Church that
they might judge of his qualifications for the ministry, with a
determination to submit to the judgment they formed. In the year 1778 it
is recorded, "we dismissed brother Perry to the newly formed Church at
Wollaston, and on May 28th he was ordained their pastor."

Some time before this Mr. Perry had been preaching at Wollaston, and
when he was invited to the pastoral office twenty-four persons had
united together in the fellowship of the Gospel. At the ordination
service, Mr. Hillyard prayed; Mr. Carver stated the nature of the
service, and proposed the usual inquiries; Mr. Raban offered the
ordination prayer; Mr. Carver gave the charge, from Rev. ii. 10--"Be
thou faithful unto death," &c.; Mr. Bull preached to the people, from
Phil. i. 27--"Only let your conversation be as it becometh the Gospel of
Christ." In the evening Mr. Greathead prayed, and Mr. Goode preached
from Psalm li. 18--"Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion," &c.

Mr. Perry's ministry, after his settlement, was of short duration,
scarcely extending to five years; during its continuance he admitted
twelve members to the small society. On February 28th, 1793, he died. He
was interred at Lavendon the Sabbath following, when Mr. Raban preached
the funeral sermon, from 1 Thessalonians ii. 8--"So, being
affectionately desirous of you," &c. He was a man of a truly pious,
affectionate spirit, and was much beloved by the little flock over which
he presided.

Immediately after the death of Mr. Perry, another member of the Church
at Wellingborough, who had been chosen to the office of a deacon there,
but who was resident in Wollaston, was called to take the oversight of
this infant Church. In the records of the Church to which he belonged it
is stated, under the date of April 8th, 1793, "Brother David Hennell
exercised his gifts by expounding Scripture to the Church in the vestry,
which was very acceptable." October 3rd, "He was dismissed to the
pastoral office, having the united and fervent desire of his Church for
his usefulness and comfort." The friends at Wollaston record,
"immediately after the burial of our late worthy pastor, the Lord was
pleased to show us he had seen our distress and heard our cries, for he
was disposing the mind of a dear friend of this place to the work of the
ministry--Mr. David Hennell. His gifts were tried at Wellingborough, at
the Church to which he belonged, under Mr. Carver, and approved; they in
Christian love gave him liberty, unanimously, to come and statedly
preach amongst us. The ordination service was held October 8th, 1794,
when Mr. Raban commenced and asked the questions; Mr. Carver delivered
the charge, from Matthew xxviii. 20--'Teaching them to observe all
things,' &c.; Mr. Bull preached to the people, from 1 Thessalonians v.
12, 13--'I beseech you, brethren, to know them which are over you in the
Lord,' &c. Mr. Hillyard, junior, preached in the evening, from Acts xi.
23."

Mr. Hennell continued his services as pastor for twenty-nine years, and
during that time the place of worship underwent some enlargement, and
some additions were gradually made to the Church, seventy-five members
being added during the course of his ministry. At the commencement of
the year 1822, owing to advancing years and increasing infirmities, Mr.
Hennell felt it to be his duty to resign his office, which he did on
Lord's-day, January 21st.

Immediately after this, the attention of the people was directed to Mr.
Thomas Coleman, who was a member of the Independent Church at Kettering,
then under the pastoral care of the Rev. T. N. Toller. Mr. Coleman had
preached at Wollaston for the first time on the Christmas-day previous
to the resignation of Mr. Hennell, and was now invited to preach to them
on probation. This engagement was continued until Midsummer, when he was
invited to become the pastor, and was ordained September 5th, 1822. The
following is the record preserved of the ordination service:--

    Mr. West, of Harrold, read the Scriptures and prayed; Mr. Morris, of
    Olney, delivered the introductory discourse and asked the questions;
    Mr. Hennell, the former pastor, gave a brief statement of the steps
    that had led to the formation of the present connexion; Mr. Coleman
    stated the motives which he trusted influenced him to engage in the
    work, the reasons why he preferred to exercise his ministry among
    Dissenters, and his views of the doctrines of the Gospel; Mr.
    Jacomb, of Wellingborough, offered the ordination prayer; Mr.
    Renals, of the same place, delivered the charge, from 1 Tim. iv.
    16--"Take heed to thyself and to thy doctrine," &c.; Mr. Toller, of
    Kettering, preached to the people, from 1 Peter ii. 2--"As new-born
    babes desire the sincere milk of the word," &c. Mr. Pickering, of
    Brigstock, preached in the evening, from Col. i. 12--"Giving thanks
    unto the Father," &c.

    A Sabbath-school was first formed here after this settlement.

Mr. Hennell survived nearly eight years after the ordination of his
successor, and acted during the whole of that period in the most kind
and affectionate manner towards him. He died July 28th, 1830. By his
request, his death was improved by his successor, from words chosen by
the preacher as appropriate to his character and the peaceful close of
his life (Luke ii. 29): "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in
peace, according to thy word."

In the year 1831 Mr. Coleman removed from Wollaston, having received an
unanimous invitation from the Church and congregation at Ashley and
Wilbarston. During his ministry twenty-two members had been admitted to
the Church.

After this, Mr. Edwards was engaged in preaching to the people for about
ten months. When he had left them, different supplies were engaged,
until, at the commencement of the year 1834, Mr. Thomas Lord, who was a
member of the Independent Church, Castle Hill, Northampton, was engaged
as a supply. His services proving acceptable, after a suitable time of
trial he was invited to become the pastor, and was ordained October
24th, 1834, when Mr. Morris again stated the nature of a Christian
Church, and asked the questions; Mr. Renals offered the ordination
prayer; Mr. Bennett, of Northampton, delivered the charge, from 1 Tim.
iv. 6--"A good minister of Jesus Christ;" Mr. Phillips, of Harrold,
preached to the people, from Phil. ii. 1--"If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ," &c. Mr. Vorley, of Charlton, preached in the
evening, from Phil. i. 27--"Only let your conversation," &c. Mr. Lord's
ministry here continued until the year 1845, when he removed to
Brigstock. During the course of it about fifty members were added to the
Church; but ere it closed, some declensions took place. Considerable
improvements were made in the place of worship, by its being repewed and
a new vestry erected, at a cost of about L250. A dwelling-house was also
purchased and fitted up for the minister, and made over to the interest,
by the liberality of Mr. John Ward, of Knutson.

On the third Sabbath in August, 1846, Mr. John Anderson became the
pastor; but he resigned his office in July, 1847.

In the year 1848, Mr. E. W. Finch, from Mr. Frost's seminary at Cotton
End, near Bedford, became the minister of the place; but on March 27th,
1851, Mr. Finch resigned, and removed to Portshead, Somerset. Fourteen
members were added to the Church by Mr. Finch.

In October, 1851, Mr. D. Herschell came to Wollaston, and is at present
ministering there. There are now about forty-one members in the Church.
There are about fifty children in the Sabbath-school. Occasional
services are conducted in villages in the vicinity.

Amidst various and frequent changes of late, this interest still
remains, attended with difficult circumstances. May it be greatly
revived, its numbers increased, and its efficiency promoted!




CHAPTER XX.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT PETERBOROUGH.


The Independent Church at Peterborough appears to have originated in the
labours of a Mr. Glascott, a minister belonging to Lady Huntingdon's
connexion, who came to this place about the year 1776 or 1777, to preach
the Gospel of Christ. He first took his stand under the Cross in the
Market-place. He was often interrupted in his services, and experienced
much opposition; but on some occasions there was seen the Lady of ----
Orme, Esq. standing beside him, which proved some protection to him from
the assaults of the rude assemblage around.

There was also the late Mrs. Baker, who was one of the first fruits of
his ministry, who became an eminent Christian, useful in the cause of
God, regarded as a mother in Israel, surviving to a good old age.

After some time they obtained a small building for public worship, on
the premises of Mr. Ashby, of Westgate Street. At length an opportunity
was presented for building a more commodious place. Roger Parker, Esq.
was willing to let them have the piece of ground where the Chapel now
stands, for the small sum of five guineas; but the circumstances
connected with this agreement show that to the poor emphatically the
Gospel was preached, for they were unable to raise the sum above
specified, and were obliged, when they met Mr. Parker at the office of
the attorney where the agreement was to be fulfilled, to inform him
privately that they could not raise the amount required; and he put his
hand into his pocket and nobly gave them the five guineas, that they
might fulfil the contract before the attorney. The Chapel was erected in
1779 or 1780.

Mr. Thresher was the first minister that was settled over them. But such
was the intolerant spirit then prevailing in the place, that much
persecution was endured by the minister and his people. They were
frequently assailed on leaving the Chapel, pelted and sometimes almost
covered with mud and dirt. After Mr. Thresher's ministry closed amongst
them, Mr. Woodward became the pastor. He preached every third Sabbath at
Pinchbeck, near Spalding, to which place he subsequently removed.

The people had to struggle with great difficulties, and the congregation
became very low; so that at length the Chapel was closed, and remained
shut up for about seven years. At the end of this period a lay preacher
from Northampton visited Peterborough; and seeing the desolate state of
things, he endeavoured to collect the scattered few, and to preach the
word unto them. Application after this was made to Thos. Wilson, Esq.,
who sent supplies from Hoxton Academy. The Chapel was re-opened and
stated services restored about the year 1804.

The labours of Mr. Harris, one of the students from Hoxton, proved very
acceptable; he received an invitation to become the pastor, and was
ordained over them. In his days the congregation flourished; he became
very popular, and great numbers heard the word from his lips. Such was
the interest that his preaching excited, that the late Bishop Madan, who
manifested a liberal spirit towards Dissenters, has been known to stand
at the entrance of the Chapel, with his hat in his hand, to hear Mr.
Harris. But he removed to Swansea about the year 1810.

After this, supplies were again obtained from Hoxton. Mr. Jeanes was
invited to become the pastor; his preaching was acceptable and useful;
but a few years after he removed to Market Deeping. Mr. Cave was another
of the students who accepted an invitation to minister here; but after a
few years he removed to Yaxley. The next minister was a Mr. Phillips,
who had been in Lady Huntingdon's connexion, and had ministered in Zion
Chapel, London. He was pastor for a few years, and some success attended
his labours; but the people again wishing for a change, Mr. Phillips
retired in the year 1818, but continued to reside in Peterborough, and
preached occasionally. He was at length seized with paralysis: tried by
long and heavy affliction, under which he was very graciously sustained.
He died in the year 1831.

Mr. J. E. Isaac was the next minister who received an invitation to the
pastoral office. The congregation was in a very low state when he
entered on his labours, but it increased under his ministry; and after
he had laboured for three years, the Church was re-organized, and Mr.
Isaac was ordained May 22nd, 1821. On that occasion, Mr. Jervis, of
Ramsay, commenced the service; Mr. Holmes, of Wisbeach, delivered the
introductory discourse; Mr. Morrell, of St. Neots, offered the
ordination prayer, and gave the charge; Mr. Wright, of Stamford,
preached to the people. In the course of his ministry, Mr. Isaac had
some serious trials to contend with; but he persevered in his labours,
and they were rendered in some measure successful; so that in the year
1832, the Chapel having become too small for the congregation, it was
thought desirable to attempt an enlargement. This was effected, and the
place was re-opened for divine worship in July of that year: on that
occasion, Dr. Pye Smith preached in the morning and evening, and Mr.
Haynes, of Boston, on the following Sabbath. About this time a
Sabbath-school was commenced in connexion with the Chapel.

There are the names of about thirty persons recorded "who," it is
observed, "regarded Mr. Isaac as their spiritual father." But under date
of 1834 we find the statement, that the Church saw the necessity of a
change, on account of the great decrease in the number of hearers; so
that Mr. Isaac resigned in September of that year. Some time after this,
Mr. Penman became the minister, and was ordained February 3rd, 1836.
About this period, application was made to Earl Fitzwilliam for the
grant of a piece of ground on the south side of the Chapel, on which to
build a school-room for the use of the Sabbath-school. This was
obtained, at a rental of five shillings per annum, on a lease of
ninety-nine years. The cost of building, with some alterations in the
Chapel, was about L205.

During the last five years, Mr. William Palmer has been the pastor of
this Church. His labours have been rendered very successful, in
increasing the congregation and making many additions to the Church.
Side galleries have been added to the Chapel, at a cost of L100. There
have been 120 members in Peterborough and Yaxley added to the Church.
The Sabbath-school has increased from 60 to 200 children. But in the
month of October, this year (1852), Mr. Palmer was obliged to resign his
charge and retire from his labours for a season, on account of long and
severe affliction.

Thus another change has come over this people; but if the spirit of the
Gospel prevails amongst them, they will receive direction from above,
and God will carry forward his designs of mercy by the ministry of his
truth and the other appointed means of his grace.




CHAPTER XXI.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH IN TOWCESTER.


In the early part of the 17th century, Mr. Samuel Stone, one of the
Puritan divines, ministered in the Church at Towcester. He was born at
Hertford, and educated in Emanuel College, Cambridge. Having finished
his studies, he resided for some time in the house of the excellent Mr.
Richard Blackerby, where he received useful instructions, and imbibed
the spirit and principles of his venerable tutor. Afterwards he became
minister at Towcester, in Northamptonshire, where his superior
accomplishments and great industry were manifest to all. This, however,
could not screen him from the oppression of the times, as he was an
avowed but modest Nonconformist to the ecclesiastical impositions. At
length, seeing no prospect of enjoying his liberty in his native
country, he resolved to withdraw from the scenes of persecution and
retire to New England, where he arrived in the year 1633, and there he
died, July 20th, 1663. It is observed, that "Mr. Stone was a pious,
learned, and judicious divine, equally qualified for the confirmation of
the truth and the refutation of error. His ministry was attended with
the powerful demonstration and application of the truth: his views of
Church discipline were Congregational."

The first regular services by Dissenting ministers that are known to
have been held at Towcester were conducted chiefly by Mr. Heywood, while
he was pastor of the Church at Potterspury. He preached for some time,
every third Sabbath morning, in a licensed house; and in the same place,
a Mr. Stranger, a Baptist minister, residing at Weston, preached
occasionally. In the year 1764, the pious people of both denominations
united to build a Meeting House for their mutual accommodation. When Mr.
Goode became the pastor at Pury, he continued the services in the manner
of his predecessors, and his labours were crowned with a happy degree of
success. But a change occurred, which interrupted the union which had
hitherto subsisted between those who held different views on the subject
of baptism. In 1782 a Mr. Reddy, a Baptist minister, came to reside at
Towcester, and then the stated use of the new Meeting House was refused
to Mr. Goode and his hearers, who, in consequence of this, met for three
years after in a private house. The attendance increasing, it was deemed
necessary to build another place of worship, in which they were
generously assisted from various quarters. On the removal of Mr. Goode
from Pury, they obtained supplies from Newport and Hoxton Academies.

April 6th, 1794, the members of the Church at Potterspury that resided
in Towcester separated from that Church for the purpose of commencing an
Independent Church here, Mr. Thomas Slattery, from Hoxton Academy,
preaching to them for the first time on that day. On May 5th, 1794,
eleven persons were formed into a Christian Church, Mr. Hillyard, of
Olney, presiding. For some time they were supplied by various ministers,
Messrs. Bull, Greathead, and Hillyard occasionally administering the
Lord's Supper. At length Mr. Gunn, a student from Hoxton Academy, was
invited to become the pastor, and he was ordained October 16th, 1796.
Upon this occasion Mr. Denny, of Long Buckby, offered the ordination
prayer; the solemn engagements mutually confirmed between the people and
the minister they had chosen were introduced by some observations on the
proper tendency and principles of such a transaction, from Mr.
Greathead, of Woburn; Mr. Bull, of Newport, gave the charge, from Col.
iv. 17; Mr. Horsey, of Northampton, addressed the Church, from 2nd Cor.
iv. 15.

In little more than three years after this settlement Mr. Gunn removed
to Aylesbury, and was succeeded at Towcester by Mr. Joshua Denham, who
commenced his ministry here February 9th, 1800. Mr. Denham continued his
services as pastor until the year 1814, when he resigned, and was
succeeded by Mr. Joseph Gravestock, from Newport Academy, who was
ordained on the 17th of August in that year, when Mr. Jackson, of Old,
began with prayer; Mr. Thomas Morrell delivered the introductory
discourse; Mr. Watson offered the ordination prayer; Mr. Bull gave the
charge, from Ezek. iii. 17; Mr. Aston preached to the people, from 1st
Thess. v. 13. Mr. Jackson preached in the evening.

On the death of Mr. Jackson Mr. Gravestock removed to Old; when, after a
period of four years, Mr. Hitchin became the pastor, in July, 1818. In
the year 1823 Mr. Hitchin removed to Hockliffe, and Mr. William Hawkins,
from Newport Academy, was chosen to the pastoral office. Mr. Hawkins
laboured here between twenty and thirty years; during his ministry a new
Chapel was erected. Mr. Buckingham, minister at Potterspury, went out
from this Church.

Mr. S. Causby, the present minister, entered on his labours in July,
1851. The records of the Church contain 146 names of members admitted to
the Church from its formation to the present time; but for seventeen
years, _i.e._ from 1815-1832, the book appears to have been neglected,
and no names were entered. The number of members at this time is 50.
There are 110 children in the Sabbath-schools, and 24 teachers who take
part in their instruction.




CHAPTER XXII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT OLD.


In the village of Old there is a neat brick building as an Independent
Chapel, with a small burying-ground enclosed in connexion with it; and
nearly adjoining it is a dwelling-house for the minister. Though this
Chapel was not erected until the year 1809, yet we have to look backward
for a little more than a hundred years to observe the first efforts that
were made to obtain some stated services by Nonconformist ministers in
this place. It appears highly probable that the Gospel was occasionally
preached at Old and Scaldwell (the latter village being about a mile
from the former) in the early part of the last century. We have found,
in the records of the Independent Church at Rowell, that there were a
number of persons who were members of that Church residing in Scaldwell
and its vicinity soon after the commencement of the last century, who
expressed a desire to be formed into a separate Church in that place, on
account of the distance they were from Rowell; but their numbers were
thought not to be sufficient then to justify such a step.

In the year 1750, Mr. Thomas Palmer, of Old, great grandfather to the
late Mr. Palmer, by deed of bargain and sale invested certain premises
at Old in the hands of four trustees, that out of the rents and profits
thereof they should pay L5 per annum, by four quarterly payments, to
some Dissenting minister, teacher, or preacher, to do divine service and
preach a sermon once a month at Old for ever.

Neighbouring ministers performed this monthly service for some time. The
attendance on this lecture was so good as to lead the friends to obtain
more frequent services, which were conducted in a barn on the property.
Some of the hearers were in the habit of attending the Baptist Meeting
at Walgrave, a short distance from Old; but the practice of strict
communion cut them off from participating in divine ordinances there, so
that it was at length determined to form a Church at Old, and to look
out for a stated pastor.

Mr. Shadrach Jackson, from the Newport Pagnell institution, visited Old
in the year 1808, and preached in the barn with acceptance and success.
The increasing attendance rendered it desirable and indeed necessary to
have a more suitable and commodious place for divine worship, and the
present Chapel was erected on the premises, at a cost of L850.

At the ordination of Mr. Jackson, his tutor, the late Mr. William Bull,
the friend and correspondent of Newton and Cowper, delivered an
affectionate and impressive charge, taking for his motto the remarkable
words of Joseph, addressed to his brother Benjamin (Gen. xliii. 29):
"God be gracious unto thee, my son." The late Mr. Hillyard, of Bedford,
in his own peculiar, affectionate, and persuasive manner, gave a most
excellent address to the people, from the words of Ruth (i. 16, 17):
"Entreat me not to leave thee," &c.

Mr. Jackson was a native of Doncaster. He early became acquainted with
Mr. Samuel Hobson, of Sheffield, afterwards pastor of the Church at
Maldon, Beds. The late Mr. Thorpe, of Bristol, married the sister of Mr.
Hobson, and to him both these young men were considerably indebted for
their ministerial prospects. Both of them became students at Newport;
they were both men of ability--Hobson having perhaps most philosophy,
and Jackson most genius and pulpit unction. The latter was a striking
and impressive preacher, decidedly popular, not failing to secure the
attention of his audience. He had an excellent gift in prayer, and was
often called upon to pray at the meetings of his brethren in the County
Association. But it was not a long course of service that was allotted
to him. His health was not good; he was subject to an affection of the
throat; but it is thought that the affliction which ended in death was
brought on by his preaching one night in wet clothes at the neighbouring
village of Holcott. He never ceased to feel the effects of that night,
and gradually sunk, though occasionally giving some hopes of recovery.
After a long and painful affliction, he died, September 3rd, 1817. His
remains were interred near the pulpit, and a tablet was erected to his
memory by subscription.

Mr. Hillyard, minister at Bedworth, who was a member of the Church at
Old, and has supplied some of these particulars, states--"I saw him just
as he was dying, being then about nine years of age; he mentioned my
name. Almost the last thing he said referring to himself was, 'A sinner
saved by grace.' I well remember the deep impression his death made on
my mind; and all the circumstances of the funeral; and the funeral
sermon being preached by the late Mr. Toller, from Acts xx. 24: 'And
none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself,
so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.'"
The writer of these 'Memorials' attended that service, and has a vivid
recollection of the crowded assembly, the impressive sermon, the solemn
tones and the tears of the preacher, with the testimony he bore to the
increasing spirituality of Mr. Jackson's mind during the closing period
of his life.

In the first part of Mr. Jackson's ministry the prospects of the society
were very encouraging; but it soon became manifest that, although the
Church is not of this world, yet, being in the world, it is more or less
affected by those visitations that transpire therein, for three very
efficient friends and supporters of the cause were soon removed by
death. These events, with the early removal of Mr. Jackson, and some
dissensions that afterwards arose, greatly weakened the cause, and cast
some gloom over its prospects.

The Church was now supplied by neighbouring ministers and students until
April, 1818, when Mr. Joseph Gravestock, of Towcester, who had been a
short time fellow student with Mr. Jackson, came to Old as a supply. As
his connexion with the Church at Towcester was dissolved, his services
being acceptable here, after a period of probation he received an
invitation to the pastoral office. On the 3rd of September, in this
year, he removed with his family to Old; and on the evening of his
arrival, preached from Heb. xiii. 8 ("Jesus Christ, the same yesterday,
to-day, and for ever"), having special reference to the death of his
predecessor, who had been in the world of spirits just one year, and
dwelling on the immutability and all-sufficiency of the ever living
Redeemer.

"Amidst varied scenes, producing diversified fears and hopes, Mr.
Gravestock (who is still living) pursued his ministerial course till
September, 1843, when failure of health and other circumstances induced
him to resign his office and terminate his labours in a farewell
address, from Rev. ii. 10: 'Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a crown of life.'" The stated ministry of Mr. Gravestock at
Towcester and at Old extended to nearly thirty years, for he was
ordained at the former place August 17th, 1814, when Mr. Jackson
commenced the service with prayer; Mr. Bull, his tutor, delivering the
charge; Mr. Aston, of Buckingham, preaching to the people; and Mr.
Jackson preaching in the evening.

After this resignation, supplies were obtained until 1845, when Mr.
Ingram Moody was invited to the pastoral office, in which he continued
until 1849, when he resigned and emigrated to Australia.

After the removal of Mr. Moody, Mr. John Spence, of Kettering, a member
of the Independent Church under the pastoral care of Mr. Toller, who had
for some time previously engaged in occasional services in the vicinity,
was invited to supply the pulpit at Old. His ministry proving acceptable
to the people, at the expiration of four months he received an
invitation to become the pastor, and entered on his stated labours in
January, 1850, and has now become the resident minister of the place.

In the spring of 1852, alterations and improvements were made on the
premises, the burying ground enclosed, at the expense of about L60. On
Lord's-day, June 13th, three sermons were preached (morning and evening,
by Mr. Toller, of Kettering; afternoon, by Mr. Samuel Marsh, of
Moulton), when collections were made towards the expenses incurred.
Numerous congregations assembled in the afternoon and evening. On the
following day a public tea-meeting was held, when 200 persons took tea;
after which there was a public meeting, when Mr. J. Stockburn, of
Kettering, presided. Mr. Spence read a brief history of the cause, when
effective addresses were delivered by several ministers and gentlemen
that were present. The collections and donations produced L36. 17_s._
11-1/2_d._, leaving a debt of L23. 2_s._ 0-1/2_d._, which it is hoped
will be entirely extinguished at the next anniversary, and by means of
exertions that may be made previous to that time. The prospects of the
Church appear to be more pleasing than they have been for some years
past; and we trust that the present pastor and his flock will go forward
with united efforts and realize an abundant blessing, peace and
prosperity being richly enjoyed among them, that the great Head of the
Church in all may be glorified.

In connexion with this cause at Old there is a small place of worship at
Scaldwell, where one service on the Sabbath is generally conducted. The
number of communicants at present is twenty-six. There are twenty-five
children in the Sabbath-school--number in minister's Bible class,
thirty; and occasional services are conducted in villages in the
vicinity.

From this village society three Independent ministers have been raised
up, viz.: Mr. T. Hillyard, of Bedworth; Mr. Gammage, of Ketton; and Mr.
Gammage's son, Mr. Henry Gammage, of Dunmow, Essex.




CHAPTER XXIII.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT EVERDON.


The village of Everdon, four miles from Daventry, contains nearly 800
inhabitants. There were no regular efforts made here for the preaching
of the Gospel by Dissenters until the year 1811. Mr. Barge, a member of
the Independent Church at Weedon, under the influence of compassion for
the state of the inhabitants, fitted up a small place of worship at his
own expense, measuring twenty-two feet by ten feet, which was opened May
30th, 1811, and regularly supplied twice on the Sabbath by Mr. Meacock,
a member of the Independent Church, West Orchard, Coventry; and
occasionally in the week by Mr. Gronow, of Weedon. The services were
well attended, and the place was soon found to be too small for the
number of hearers; which induced Mr. Barge to give a piece of ground for
the erection of a new Chapel, which was opened October 26th, 1813, on
which occasion Mr. Jerrard, of Coventry, preached from Rev. i. 12, 13,
and Mr. Whitehead, of Creaton, from Matt. xviii. 20, and Mr. W. P.
Davis, of Wellingborough, from Num. x. 29. This building was invested in
the hands of trustees of the Independent denomination. Several persons
from the neighbouring villages began to attend the services, and there
was a pleasing prospect of success. The following spring a Church was
formed by Mr. Gronow, and Mr. Meacock was invited to become their
pastor, and was ordained on the 23rd of August, when Messrs. Morgan, of
Kilsby, Watson, of Daventry, Gronow, of Weedon, Whitehead, of Greaton,
Bicknell, of Brownsover, Knight, of Yelvertoft, and Griffiths, of Long
Buckby, were engaged in the services of the day. An endowment of L500
was bequeathed to the Chapel by William Falwell, Esq., the interest of
which is to be applied toward the support of the minister for the time
being.

Much opposition has been experienced here, but some have been brought to
the knowledge of the truth. The villages of Bradley, Newnham, and
Farthingstone have shared, at different periods, in the pastor's
labours; but in his later years Mr. Meacock chiefly confined his
services to Everdon. At length, through the increasing infirmities of
age, after labouring for a period of thirty-two years amongst his little
flock in peace and harmony, he resigned the pastoral office the first
Sabbath in April, 1845, and was succeeded by Mr. S. G. Stirmey, the
present pastor.

Mr. Stirmey observes, that at the present time the Church is reduced to
a low state, and that the Sabbath-school numbers but about thirty
children; for great efforts are made, and very considerable influence is
employed, on the side of the Established Church, so that the
difficulties with which this cause has to struggle are very
considerable.




CHAPTER XXIV.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT BRACKLEY.


Brackley is a small market town and ancient borough, near the south-west
extremity of the county: it has, in former times, been a place of
considerable importance. In the early days of Methodism, John Wesley
might have been seen sometimes, preaching to a rustic throng from the
steps of the Market-house. But the Independent Church in this place is
of very recent date, and its history will therefore be comprised within
a very small compass.

A short time previous to the year 1835, "the North Bucks Association"
made an ineffectual attempt to obtain a place of worship in this town.
At length a room was secured for the purposes of divine worship and
preaching the Gospel. This proving inadequate to accommodate the
attendants, in 1836 a Chapel was erected, at a cost of L650, capable of
seating about 300 persons. The services of Mr. John Ashby, formerly a
student at Newport, now minister at Stony Stratford, were engaged by the
newly formed congregation, and he laboured here for somewhat more than a
year. After his removal, the pulpit was principally supplied by students
from Newport Academy. In January, 1838, Mr. G. Smith, late of
Halesworth, accepted an invitation to labour here. In the same year a
Church was formed, consisting of twenty persons--the ordinance of the
Lord's Supper was first administered June 24th of that year; but in the
beginning of 1839 Mr. Smith was compelled by indisposition to resign his
connexion with the Church.

Again supplies were obtained from the Newport seminary, until 1842, when
Mr. W. R. Lewis commenced a probationary course of labour, and
afterwards settled as the pastor. Under his superintendence the Church
was re-organized; but after the lapse of three or four years
circumstances arose which rendered his removal to a more extended sphere
of labour a subject for consideration, which resulted in his resignation
about Christmas, 1846. In 1847, Mr. Robert Davis, who had been pastor at
Turvey, Bedfordshire, accepted an invitation to minister in this place,
and continued his services until December, 1851. The Church, again being
destitute of a pastor, was supplied for a time by ministers from the
vicinity; until, in August of this year (1852), Mr. T. Roberts, late
student at Newport Pagnell, accepted an invitation to become the pastor
under somewhat pleasing circumstances; and it is hoped that his ministry
will be rendered truly useful, that the Church may be increased, and the
name of the Redeemer glorified. The present number of communicants is
thirty-three; children in the Sabbath-school, rather more than fifty.




CHAPTER XXV.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT BYFIELD.


The village of Byfield, containing more than 1000 inhabitants, has in it
a small Independent Church, of recent origin; but it has struggled with
many difficulties, and a number of changes have taken place during its
short history, of which we can only present some very concise
statements.

About thirty years ago, some persons residing here, who were members of
a Dissenting Church in the vicinity, determined to invite some of the
neighbouring ministers to preach the Gospel of Christ in this place. For
three months the services were conducted in a room, which was rented and
fitted up for the purpose. The Home Missionary Society then agreed to
give L30 as a grant for one year, and recommended Mr. Grey as the
minister, formerly of Oakham, Rutlandshire. During the first year of his
ministry, which was 1827, a neat little Chapel was erected. Mr. Grey
remained three years, during which time his ministry was rendered
useful. A short time after Mr. Grey had left, the place was supplied by
Mr. Kidgell, from Newport Academy, who became the pastor of the Church
in 1831. His ministry was continued here for four years. Mr. Phillips
next supplied the place for three months, under whose ministry things
greatly revived; but through some misunderstanding, he quitted the
pleasing scene of usefulness that appeared to be opening before him, the
Church much regretting his removal. After this Mr. Moses became the
pastor, and continued with them three years. Then a Mr. Sanderson was
invited for twelve months, in consequence of an advertisement; "but
since then," it is remarked, "the Church has had no faith in advertising
ministers." Mr. Kidgell then returned to his former scene of labour, and
remained for eighteen months, but under considerable discouragement.
After his final removal, the congregation was supplied by neighbouring
ministers and occasional preachers for more than twelve months. At
length they invited a Mr. Berrill, who remained with them seven years.
He laboured under many difficulties, weathered many storms, and at
length retired from the situation. For ten months they remained
destitute, having supplies as they could be obtained. In March, 1849,
their present minister, Mr. Robson, came to supply them, and was invited
to remain. He found the place in a very low state, but things have taken
a favourable turn. The Chapel is now well attended, and seventeen
members have been added to the Church. The present number of
communicants is thirty-three. In the Sabbath-school there are thirty
children, instructed by six teachers.




CHAPTER XXVI.

MEMORIALS OF THE INDEPENDENT CHURCH AT PAULERSPURY.


In this village, known as the birth-place of the celebrated Dr. Carey,
of the Baptist Mission at Serampore, the Independent Church is of recent
formation. In the year 1826 a Chapel was erected, and the whole of the
expenses were cleared off by the exertions of Mr. Hawkins, Independent
minister, of Towcester. About the autumn of 1841, Mr. Buckingham, the
present minister of this place, was invited to preach in the Chapel on
the week evenings. His services proving acceptable, attention being
excited, and indications of usefulness appearing, the congregation
expressed a desire to enjoy the benefit of his stated labours. In
connexion with this proposal, arrangements were made between the
congregation at Paulerspury and the Church at Towcester, for the Chapel,
then the property of that Church, to be put in trust for the use of this
congregation. In the summer of 1842 Mr. Buckingham began to labour
statedly among the people, and was much encouraged by the increasing
attention, and the disposition manifested by the people to hear the
word. A Sabbath-school was formed, when between forty and fifty children
attended: it had a gradual increase, until, in the following year, the
number of scholars rose to 200. Since then the numbers have varied,
owing to different causes which will arise in this changing world. The
congregation increased so, that it was found necessary to erect two side
galleries, in addition to the front gallery that had been already
formed. The week-day services were also well attended. A small number of
persons, most of whom had been brought to an acquaintance with divine
things under Mr. Buckingham's ministry, were desirous of enjoying the
benefits of Church fellowship, and were encouraged to give themselves to
the Lord and to each other in these bonds of the Gospel; and were
accordingly formed into a Church, consisting of sixteen members, on the
28th of February, 1844. The services on the interesting occasion were
conducted by Messrs Hawkins, of Towcester; Slye, of Potterspury; J.
Bull, of Newport Pagnell; and Wager, of Stony Stratford: then the
ordinance of the Lord's Supper was first administered to them, in which
persons of different religious denominations united, who appeared to
feel a deep and lively interest in the solemnity.

In the beginning of the year 1845 some of the members of the Church
experienced much persecution, which caused a few to halt, and others to
keep back. It rose to such a height, at one time, as to threaten the
extinction of the rising energies of the Church; but through the kind
interposition of a gracious Providence, a reaction took place, and the
wrath of man was made to praise God.

In the early part of the year 1847, the subject of Mr. Buckingham's
ordination was mentioned; neighbouring ministers having hitherto
administered the Lord's Supper. After much deliberation and prayer, the
subject was laid before the ministers of the North Bucks Association,
and after mature consideration the approval of their committee was
expressed. It was arranged that the ordination service should take
place on the 24th of November, 1847. On that day, Mr. Hawkins commenced
the services; Mr. J. Bull expounded the principles of Congregationalism
in an introductory discourse; Mr. Slye proposed the questions; Mr. Davis
offered the ordination prayer; Mr. T. P. Bull gave the charge; Mr. Aston
preached to the people.

The year immediately succeeding this, Mr. Buckingham's health began very
seriously to fail, and he was obliged to desist from preaching for
several months, during which time supplies were obtained. His health is
still very delicate, and but for frequent assistance he would be obliged
to resign the pastoral oversight of his much attached people.

In consequence of the large number of school children, it was deemed
advisable to erect new school-rooms for their better accommodation. In
the year 1850 the school-rooms were erected, at a cost of L150. Through
the kindness of friends, and especially the friends at Pury, the whole
is now cleared off. A burial ground is attached to the Chapel, and more
than fifty interments have taken place since it was appropriated for
this purpose in 1843.

In regard to the future, the pastor observes "that the prospects are
very cheering." On the Sabbath and week-evening services the attendance
continues steady and regular, and never better than at the present time.
The Church has continued to increase. The present number of communicants
is seventy-two; Sabbath-school children, one hundred and
fifty-nine--teachers, forty.

We trust the blessing of the Lord will still rest upon them, and that,
"walking together in the fear of the Lord, and the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, they will be edified and multiplied."




CHAPTER XXVII.

HOME MISSIONARY STATIONS.


1.--KING'S CLIFFE AND NASSINGTON.

In the north-eastern part of the county of Northampton there are two
Home Missionary Stations. In the first of these the agent statedly
preaches at King's Cliffe and Nassington, having a Chapel at Castor also
under his superintendence.

The Church that has been formed at King's Cliffe originated in the
efforts of the General Baptists about thirty years back. The Rev. Mr.
Payne, who belonged to that denomination, and was minister of Baradon,
Rutlandshire, preached the Gospel here, and had a Chapel erected. But
Mr. Payne shortly after left the neighbourhood; and after repeated
efforts by Baptist ministers, with but little success, the place was
resigned into the hands of the Independents.

The Northamptonshire Association of Independent Churches took the place
under their direction for a time, in connexion with Nassington, and the
Rev. J. Matthews and the Rev. J. Dann laboured in these places, having
their residence chiefly at the latter village. A Church was formed at
Nassington on the 8th of April, 1835; and the present Chapel was opened
for public worship on the 21st of May, 1839, when the Rev. B. Hobson, of
Welford, and the Rev. E. T. Prust, of Northampton, preached.

In the year 1841 the station was taken into connexion with the Home
Missionary Society. In March, 1844, the Rev. G. Amos, one of the
Society's agents, was sent on probation, and accepted as the minister of
the two Churches. On the 24th of June in that year his ordination took
place, in the Chapel at Nassington: the ministers who engaged were the
Rev. Messrs. Islip, of Stamford, Gammage, of Ketton, Goode, of
Peterborough, Newth, of Oundle, Smith, of Wymondham. In October of that
year Mr. Amos commenced his residence at King's Cliffe.

The ground on which the Chapel was first erected here being private
property, and as no satisfactory arrangements for its purchase could be
made, it was at length determined to give it up, and to build a new one.
The present Independent Chapel in King's Cliffe was built in the year
1846; the opening services were held on the 29th of September. The Rev.
J. Richardson, of Tottenham Court Chapel, London, preached two sermons
on the occasion; and on the following Sabbath sermons were preached by
the Rev. J. Matthews, of Shepton, Norfolk, the Rev. A. Newth, of Oundle,
and the Rev. W. Robinson, of Kettering. A school-room was built in 1847,
and opened for a Day-school in October of that year. The cost of the
Chapel and the school-room was about L500. Of this sum, there now
remains a debt of about L150. At Castor a neat Chapel was erected in
1848; the Rev. T. Toller, of Kettering, and the Rev. E. T. Prust, of
Northampton, preached when it was opened for divine worship. There are
thirty-seven members in the Church at King's Cliffe, and forty in the
Church at Nassington--total, seventy-seven. The Sabbath-school in the
former place has one hundred and thirty children, and the Sabbath-school
in the latter place, seventy--total, two hundred.


2.--BOROUGH FEN.

This place is extra parochial, the property of Sir Culling Eardley
Eardley, Bart., situated six miles north of Peterborough. The Gospel was
introduced here about twenty years ago, by the Wesleyan Methodists; the
preaching services were then conducted in a room of the house now
occupied by the minister. In 1836 Sir Culling built a neat and spacious
building, which is used both as a daily school-room and Chapel. For
several years the preaching services were conducted by the master. A
congregation having been thus collected, and Sunday-schools opened, it
was considered to be a promising sphere for regular ministerial labour;
and accordingly, in 1843, Mr. D. Blellock was stationed here as a Home
Missionary. After the removal of Mr. Blellock in 1846, Mr. Alexander
Yuill was settled here, who, after a few months of acceptable and useful
labour, fell asleep in Jesus. In January, 1849, Mr. J. B. Bishop, the
present pastor, was invited to settle over the congregation worshipping
in this place and in Peakirk. Through Mr. Bishop's instrumentality a
Christian Church was formed, March 30th, 1849, numbering thirteen
members. The following places are connected with this station, viz.:
Peakirk, Crowland (Lincolnshire), Glinton, and New Borough. There are
now twenty-seven Church members, seventy-five Sabbath-school children,
and one Day-school.


3.--MIDDLETON.

In the year 1844, a neat and commodious village Chapel, capable of
seating near two hundred hearers, was erected here, at a cost of more
than L300; and this year (1852) school-rooms have been added, which have
cost nearly L100. It is supplied generally in the afternoon and evening
of the Sabbath, and there is in connexion with it a Sabbath-school
containing nearly one hundred children.




APPENDIX.


I.

The following statements will show the amount of money that has been
expended on the Chapels, School-rooms, Ministers' Houses, &c., in
connexion with the Independent denomination in Northamptonshire, during
little more than the last quarter of a century.

                                                         L.   _s._ _d._

  NORTHAMPTON--
  Castle Hill--New School-rooms and improvements
      in the Chapel, 1825-1852                          1,400   0   0

  King Street--New School-rooms                           336   6   5

  Commercial Street--New Chapel, galleries and
      organ, new School-rooms, 1829-1851                3,800   0   0

  ROWELL--Improvements in the Chapel, 1852                800   0   0

  KETTERING--New School-rooms and improvements
      in the Chapel, 1849.                              1,400   0   0

  HARBOROUGH--New Chapel and new School-room,
      1844-1850                                         3,230   0   0

  ASHLEY--Improvements in the Chapel and
      Minister's House, 1827-1832                         400   0   0

  WELLINGBOROUGH--
      Cheese Lane--New School-rooms, 1850                 300   0   0

      Salem Chapel--New School-rooms, 1850                300   0   0

  WEEDON BECK--New School-room,
      improvements in the Chapel                          235   0   0

  LONG BUCKBY--Chapel enlarged, new
      School-room, 1819-1825                              350   0   0

  POTTERSPURY--New School-rooms                            208 17   0

  POTTERSPURY--Yardley Gobion, new Chapel                  368  4  10-1/2

  YARDLEY HASTINGS--New School-rooms                       400  0   0

  BRIGSTOCK--Minister's House, improvements
      in the Chapel                                        456 12   9

  YELVERTOFT--Chapel enlarged, new
      School-rooms                                         226  0   0

  WOLLASTON--New vestry, improvements in
      the Chapel, Minister's House                         645  4   3
                                                       -----------------
  Carried forward                                      L14,856  5   3-1/2

                                                         L.     s.   d.
  Brought forward                                      14,856   5   3-1/2
  PETERBOROUGH--New School-room, galleries in the
      Chapel, 1834-1848                                   350   0   0

  TOWCESTER--New Chapel and School-rooms, 1846          1,134   3  10

  OLD--Improvements in the Chapel and premises, 1852       60   0   0

  BRACKLEY--New Chapel, 1836                              650   0   0

  PAULERSPURY--New Chapel, vestry, galleries, and
      School-rooms, 1826-1850                             606  12   0

  KING'S CLIFFE--New Chapel and School-room               500   0   0

  NASSINGTON--New Chapel                                  300   0   0

  CASTOR--New Chapel                                      260   0   0

  MIDDLETON--New Chapel, 1844; School-room, 1852          400   0   0

  BROUGHTON--New Chapel                                   100   0   0
                                                          --------------
                                                      L19,217   1  11-1/2


II.

THE NUMBER OF COMMUNICANTS AND SABBATH-SCHOOL CHILDREN.

                                 Communicants. Children.

  Northampton, Castle Hill          150          300
  Northampton, King's Street         72           95
  Northampton, Commercial Street    160          400
  Rowell                            130          320
  Kettering                         200          280
  Harborough                        163          260
  Ashley and Wilbarston              56           60
  Welford                            80          130
  Creaton                            60           80
  Daventry                           94          190
  Wellingborough, Cheese Lane        70          190
  Wellingborough, West End           37           84
  Wellingborough, Salem             100          200
  Oundle                             70          120
  Weedon Beck                        80          125
  Long Buckby                        50          100
  Potterspury                        65          130
  Yardley Hastings                  116          260
  Kilsby and Crick                   60  at Crick 35
                                   ----         ----
  Carried forward                 1,813        3,359

                              Communicants. Children.
            Brought forward       1,813        3,359
  Brigstock                          60          110
  Weldon and Corby                   27           75
  Yelvertoft                         80          130
  Wollaston                          41     about 50
  Peterborough                      120          200
  Towcester                          50          110
  Old                                26           25
  Everdon                                         30
  Brackley                           33           50
  Byfield                            33           30
  Paulerspury                        72          159
  King's Cliffe and Nassington       71          200
  Borough Fen                        27           75
  Middleton                                      100
                                  -----        -----
                                  2,453        4,703


III.

PROVIDENT SOCIETY.


There is a Society in connexion with the Independent Churches, bearing
the title of "The Provident Society for the Relief of Aged and Afflicted
Ministers and their Families in the County of Northampton and its
Connexions."

This Society was established in the year 1811: its funds at the present
time amount to about L6,400, and they are receiving a small increase by
annual collections and subscriptions, the interest of the funds being
applied to the relief of the claimants.

In the year 1817, about six years after its establishment, the first
claims were made; since that time, the sum of nearly L5,000 has been
distributed to ministers and to the families of ministers who were
members. The importance of this Society is amply proved by the extent of
relief that claimants have received from its funds. Its management is
conducted entirely free of expense, and it will be capable of rendering
efficient aid to all its members who, in accordance with its rules,
present their case for assistance at the annual meetings of its
members.


IV.

The following list contains the names of the villages in the County that
are supplied with Sabbath evening services, chiefly by the Independent
Churches. Some of the villages have an afternoon service on the Sabbath,
and some of them an occasional service on a week evening. The list is
not to be regarded as quite complete. In some instances, the
Independents unite with other denominations in supplying the villages in
their vicinity.

  Alderton.
  Barby.
  Bowden, Great.
  Bozeat.
  Broughton.
  Cold Ashby.
  Cransley.
  Doddington.
  Draughton.
  East Haddon.
  Farndon.
  Finedon.
  Floor.
  Geddington.
  Glapthorne.
  Glinton.
  Grafton Regis.
  Great Oakley.
  Lubenham.
  Loddington.
  Mears Ashby.
  Middleton.
  Newborough.
  Orlingbury.
  Oxendon.
  Peakirk.
  Rockingham.
  Scaldwell.
  South Kilworth.
  Sutton Bassett.
  Swinford.
  Tansor.
  Thorpe.
  Weston by Welland.
  Welham.
  Warkton.
  Wilby.
  Yardley Gobion.




INDEX.


  Academy at Mile End, 137

  Addington, Dr. Stephen, pastor at Harborough, 135

  Allen, Mr. Richard, ejected from Norton, 268

  Alsop, Mr., ejected from Wilby, 212

  Amos, Mr. G., Home Missionary, 377

  Anderson, Mr. John, minister at Wollaston, 350

  Andrews, Mr. Thomas, ejected from Wellingborough, 212

  Anecdotes of Mr. Edward Snape, 3;
    Dr. Owen, 55;
    Mr. R. Davis, 59;
    Mr. T. N. Toller, 113;
    Opposition to a Village Service, 153;
    Dr. Gibbons, 168;
    Mr. Mattock, 191;
    Mr. Grant, 233;
    Mr. Clark, 252;
    Mr. Heywood, 281;
    Mr. Raban, 294;
    Mr. Hoppus, 298

  Apperley, Mr. James, pastor at Long Buckby, 274

  Ashley and Wilbarston, 146

  Ashworth, Dr. Caleb, pastor and tutor at Daventry, 195

  Aston, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 183

  Atkinson, Mr., Puritan minister, 257


  Bacon, Mr., pastor at Ashley, 149

  Barber. Mr., pastor at Yelvertoft, 342

  Barnett, Mr. Andrew, pastor at Daventry, 189

  Bedworth, Dissenters from Welford travelled to, 162

  Bell, Mr., pastor at Wellingborough, 242

  Belsham, Mr., pastor and tutor at Daventry, 206

  Bennett, Mr. John, pastor at Northampton, 35

  Bennett, Mr., at Potterspury, 277

  Bettson, Mr. Robert, pastor at Wellingborough, 228

  Bevan, Mr., pastor at Wellingborough, 248

  Beverly, Mr. John, first pastor at Rowell, 46

  Bicknell, Mr. John, pastor at Welford, 173

  Blower, Mr. Samuel, pastor at Northampton, 10

  Bolton, Mr., Puritan minister, 117

  Boyce, Mr. Benjamin, pastor at Kettering, 100

  Boyce, Mrs., her death, 105

  Brackley, 369

  Bradbury, Mr. David, pastor at Wellingborough, 215

  Bradshaw, Mr. S. A., pastor at Weldon, 332

  Braybrook, Mr., pastor at Weedon, 264

  Brigstock, Church at, 314

  Broughton, Church at , 116

  Browning, Mr. John, pastor at Rowell, 49

  Buckingham, Mr., pastor at Paulerspury, 373

  Buckby Long, Church at, 268

  Bullock, Mr. G., pastor at Ashley, 150

  Bunn, Mr., pastor at Yardley, 302

  Bushnell, Mr., pastor at Potterspury, 278


  Cambden, Mr., pastor at Daventry, 190

  Cartwright, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Buckby, 269

  Carver, Mr. John, pastor at Wellingborough, 238

  Causby, Mr. Stephen, pastor at Towcester, 360

  Cauthorn, Mr. Edward, lecturer at Oundle, 255

  Chadwick, Mr. Joseph, pastor at Oundle, 260

  Church Covenant at Rowell, 47;
    Harborough, 126;
    Northampton, 11;
    Wellingborough, 247;
    Potterspury, 279;
    Brigstock, 316

  Clarke, Mr. Hugh, Puritan minister at Oundle, 252

  Clarke, Mr. Matthew, pastor at Harborough and Ashley, 121

  Clarke, Mr. Matthew, junior, 123

  Coleman, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Ashley, 152

  Commercial Street, Northampton, Church at, 42

  Cooke, Mr., pastor at Oundle, 260

  Creaton, Church at, 179

  Crick, Church at, 313

  Cuzens, Mr., pastor at Crick, 313


  Dale, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 180

  Dann, Mr. J., pastor at Nassington, 376

  Daventry, Church at, 186

  Davis, Mr. John, pastor at Daventry, 208

  Davis, Mr. P., pastor at Wellingborough, 247

  Davis, Mr. R., pastor at Rowell, 54

  Davis, Mr. Robert, pastor at Wellingborough, 248

  Deaconesses chosen in the Church at Rowell, 64

  Denham, Mr. Joshua, pastor at Towcester, 359

  Denny, Mr. R., pastor at Buckby, 269

  Dod, Mr. John, Puritan minister, 7

  Doddridge, Dr. Philip, pastor at Northampton, 13

  Drake, Mr. J., pastor at Yardley, 292


  Edwards, Mr. B. L., pastor at Northampton, 39

  Epitaph on Matthew Clarke, by Dr. Watts, 125

  Evans, Mr. Isaac, pastor at Weedon, 266

  Evans, Mr. F., pastor at Buckby, 274

  Everdon, Church at, 367


  Fawsley, the Puritan press at, 7

  Fenn, Mr. Humfrey, Puritan minister, 3

  Flavell, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Daventry, 190

  Fletcher, Mr. William, Puritan minister, 5

  Fowler, Mr., ejected from Crick, 304

  Floyd, Mr., pastor at Daventry, 195

  Forsyth, Mr., pastor at Oundle, 259

  French, Mr., pastor at Wellingborough, 215

  Fuller, Mr., pastor at John Kettering, 106


  Gallsworthy, Mr., pastor at Rowell, 78

  Gardiner, Mr. Thos., pastor at Kilsby, 142

  Gardner, Mr. Isaac, pastor at Potterspury, 288

  Gear, Mr., pastor at Harborough, 142

  Geddington, 116

  Gibson, Mr., pastor at Yelvertoft, 340

  Gilbert, Mr. R., pastor at Northampton, 29

  Gill, Mr. G., pastor at Harborough, 139

  Gill, Mr. Walter, pastor at Welford, 177

  Glascott, Mr., pastor at Peterborough, 352

  Goodrich, Mr. D. Oundle, 258

  Grant, Mr., pastor at Wellingborough, 231

  Gravestock, Mr. J., pastor at Old, 364

  Gregson, Mr. M., pastor at Rowell, 75

  Gronow, Mr. J., pastor at Weedon, 264

  Griffiths, Mr. D., pastor at Buckby, 272

  Griffin, Mr., pastor at Brigstock, 318

  Goode, Mr., pastor at Potterspury, 284


  Hall, Mr., pastor at Crick, 313

  Halford, Mr., assistant to Mr. Some, 133

  Harborough Market, Church at, 119

  Harris, Mr., pastor at Peterborough, 353

  Harrison, Mr. M., pastor at Potterspury, 275

  Harwood, Mr., pastor at Kilsby, 312

  Hawkins, Mr., pastor at Towcester, 359

  Hennell, Mr. D., pastor at Wollaston, 347

  Heywood, Mr., pastor at Potterspury, 278

  Hillyard, Mr., pastor at Brigstock, 317

  Hitchin, Mr., pastor at Towcester, 359

  Hextal, Mr., pastor at Northampton, 37

  Hobson, Mr. B., pastor at Welford, 174

  Hogg, Mr. R., pastor at Oundle, 259

  Hook, Mr., ejected from Creaton, 179

  Hoppus, Mr. J., pastor at Yardley, 297

  Horsey, Mr. J., pastor at Northampton, 30

  Howe, Mr., pastor at Weedon, 263

  Hunt, Mr. J., pastor at Northampton, 12

  Hyatt, Mr. C., pastor at Northampton  34


  Ironmonger, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 180

  Isaac, Mr., pastor at Peterborough, 354

  Islip, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Yelvertoft 341


  Jackson, Mr., pastor at Buckby 268

  Jackson, Mr. S., pastor at Old 362

  Jacomb, Mr. R., pastor at Wellingborough, 215

  James, Mr. T., pastor at Yelvertoft, 342

  Jelly, Mr., pastor at Daventry, 190

  Jeanes, Mr., pastor at Peterborough, 354

  Jocelyne, Mr., at Creaton, 184

  Johns, Mr. E., pastor at Welford, 173

  Jones, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Kilsby, 312

  Jones, Mr. Jas. Rees, pastor at Kilsby, 313


  Kettering, Church at, 80

  Kilsby and Crick, Church at, 304

  King, Mr. Samuel, pastor at Welford, 166

  King, Mr. Joseph, pastor at Oundle, 257

  King's Street Chapel, Northampton, 37

  Knight, Mr., pastor at Yelvertoft, 338

  Knightley, Sir Richard, favours the Puritan, 6


  Letters from Mr. Browning, when in prison, 51

  Letter of dismission from Rowell, 57

  Letter of Mr. Maidwell, 82

  Letter of Mr. Saunders, 96

  Letter of Mr. Shuttlewood, 157

  Lewis, Mr. J., ejected from Northampton, 9

  Longfield, Mr. J., pastor at Oundle 259

  Lord, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Brigstock, 324

  Lowry, Mr. Thomas, ejected from Harborough, 120


  Maidwell, Mr. T., pastor at Kettering, 81

  Mandeno, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 185

  Martin, Mr. G., ejected from Weedon, 262

  Martin, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 185

  Mason, Mr., pastor Daventry, 190

  Matthews, Mr. E., ejected from Wollaston, 344

  Matthews, Mr. J., at King's Cliffe, 376

  Mattock, Mr., pastor at Daventry, 191

  Meacock, Mr., pastor Everdon, 367

  Meeting House threatened, 89

  Merbury, Mr. F., Puritan minister, 2

  Milway, Mr. Thos., pastor at Kettering, 84

  Milway, Mr. Thos., junior, pastor at Kettering  87

  Mitchel, Mr., Brigstock 319

  Modern Question, 68

  Moody, Mr. T., pastor at Old, 365

  Moffatt, Mr., pastor at Weldon, 332

  Morgan, Mr., pastor at Kilsby, 312

  Morrell, Mr., pastor at Potterspury, 287

  Moseley, Mr., pastor at Buckby, 272


  Negus, Mr. S., lecturer at Oundle, 255

  Nettleship, Mr. G., pastor at Yelvertoft, 342

  Newth, Mr. A., pastor at Oundle, 261

  Newell, Mr. G., pastor at Potterspury, 275

  Nicholson, Mr. G., pastor at Northampton, 42

  Norris, Mr., pastor at Welford, 162

  Northampton, Churches at, 1

  Northend, Mr., pastor at Welford, 173

  Notcutt, Mr. W., pastor at Ashley, 151


  Offord, Mr., pastor at Weedon, 264

  Old, Church at, 361

  Orton, Mr., pastor at Wellingborough, 215

  Oundle, Church at, 250


  Paget, Mr. Eusebius, Puritan minister, 250

  Palmer, Mr. Wm., pastor at Peterborough, 355

  Paterson, Mr., pastor at Daventry, 206

  Penry, Mr., Puritan minister, 4

  Perne, Mr. Andre, minister 211

  Perry, Mr., pastor at Wollaston, 345

  Peterborough, Church at, 352

  Phares, Mr., pastor at Weedon, 264

  Philip, Mr. John, pastor at Weldon, 331

  Phillips, Mr. Maurice, pastor at Brigstock, 318

  Pickering, Mr. R., pastor at Brigstock, 319

  Pinkerton, Mr., pastor at Weedon, 266

  Porter, Mr., pastor at Northampton, 39

  Porter, Mr. Thos., pastor at Kilsby, 312

  Potterspury, Church at, 275

  Poulter, Mr. J. F., pastor at Wellingborough, 225

  Prandlove. Mr., Puritan minister, 6

  Prout, Mr. E., pastor at Oundle, 261

  Preston, Dr. John, a Puritan minister, 5

  Prust, Mr. E. T., pastor at Northampton, 43

  Puritans preach at Kettering, 81


  Raban, Mr. T., pastor at Yardley, 292

  Redsbury, Mr. R., ejected from Oundle, 253

  Renals, Mr. J., pastor at Wellingborough, 243

  Renfrew, Mr., pastor at Weedon, 264

  Robertson, Mr. James, pastor at Wellingborough, 220

  Robins, Mr., pastor and tutor at Daventry, 198

  Robins, Mr., character of, by Mr. Toller, 201

  Robinson, Mr. I., pastor at Potterspury, 277

  Rowell, Church at, 46

  Rowlet, Mr., ejected from Sudbury, 213

  Rowlatt, Wm., Esq, 333


  Sanderson, Mr. J., pastor at Rowell, 70

  Saunders, Mr. Julius, pastor at Bedworth, 161

  Saunders, Thomas, pastor at Kettering, 90

  Saunders, Thomas, character of, by Mr. Some, 91

  Scott, Mr. Walter, pastor at Rowell, 76

  Severn, Mr. W., pastor at Welford, 172

  Shepherd, Mr. Thos., pastor at Northampton, 11

  Shepherd, Mr., pastor at Oundle, 256

  Shuttlewood, Mr. John, pastor at Welford, 155

  Simpson, A. C., Dr., pastor at Oundle, 261

  Slye, Mr. J., pastor at Potterspury, 289

  Snape, Mr. Edward, Puritan minister, 2

  Some, Mr. David, pastor at Harborough, 127

  Some, Mr. David, junior, 127

  Spence, Mr. John, pastor at Old, 365

  Spencer, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Kilsby, 312

  Spong, Mr., pastor at Yardley, 302

  Stirmey, Mr., pastor at Everdon, 368

  Stone, Mr. Edward, Puritan minister, 357

  Stone, Mr. Thomas, Puritan minister, 115

  Strange, Mr. Thomas, pastor at Kilsby, 306

  Strange, Mrs. Thomas, 311

  Summers, Mr. H., pastor at Wellingborough, 216


  Taylor, Mr. S., pastor at Potterspury, 278

  Taylor, Mr. G., pastor at Wellingborough, 223

  Terry, Mr. Wm., pastor at Kettering, 86

  Thomas, Mr., pastor at Wellingborough, 215

  Thomas, Mr. Thos., pastor at Wellingborough, 248

  Thomas, Mr. Thos., pastor at Weldon, 332

  Thorpe, Mr., ejected from Barby, 305

  Thresher, Mr., pastor at Peterborough, 353

  Todman, Mr. William, pastor at Yardley, 302

  Toller, Mr. H., pastor at Harborough, 143

  Toller, Mr. T. N., pastor at Kettering, 107

  Toller, Mr. T., pastor at Kettering, 114

  Towcester, Church at, 357

  Tyte, Mr. C. C., pastor at Wellingborough, 245


  Unitarian letter of separation, 33


  Vaughan, Mr. I., pastor at Brigstock, 323

  Vowell, Mr. G., pastor at Potterspury, 287


  Walker, Mr. W., pastor at Buckby, 269

  Wake, Mr. A., Puritan minister, 5

  Warburton, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 182

  Washbourn, Mr. D., pastor at Wellingborough, 216

  Watson, Mr. G., pastor at Daventry, 207

  Weedon Beck, Church at, 262

  Weldon and Corby, 327

  Welford, Church at, 155

  Wellingborough, Churches in, 210

  West, Mr. J., pastor at Ashley, 148

  White, Mr. E., pastor at Potterspury, 287

  Whitefoot, Mr., pastor at Potterspury, 287

  Whitehead, Mr. J., pastor at Creaton, 182

  Whittenbury, Mr., pastor at Daventry, 208

  Wilby, 210

  Wild, Dr. Robert, pastor at Oundle, 254

  Wild, Mr. W., pastor at Harborough, 143

  Williams, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 184

  Wills, Mr. H., ejected from Loddington, 213

  Wills, Mr. John, pastor at Kettering, 86

  Wilson, Mr. Thomas, 42

  Wollaston, Church at, 344

  Wood, Mr., pastor at Creaton, 182

  Wood, Mr. J., pastor at Rowell, 75

  Woodward, Mr., pastor at Northampton, 41

  Worth, Mr., ejected from Kilsby, 304

  Wright, Mr., pastor at Oundle, 259


  Yardley Hastings, Church at, 291

  Yelvertoft, Church at, 335


  London: Printed for John Snow, 35, Paternoster Row.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Inconsistencies in spelling, hyphenation and punctuation have been
resolved in all cases where it was possible to divine the author's
intent with a reasonable degree of certainty.

Page 88 "...at a meeting this 26th of October, 1820, do hereby call and
desire you.." The transcriber has taken the liberty to change 1820 to
read 1720, as this appears to be a typographical error.

Again on page 91 "...and entered on his stated engagements there
September 14th, 1821" has been changed to read 1721.

On page 313 "Mr. Cuzens, the next pastor, commenced his ministry
in July of the same year, and left in October, 1831." 1831 is in error;
likely 1841. Has been changed to read 1841.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Memorials of the Independent Churches
in Northamptonshire, by Thomas Coleman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORIALS--INDEPENDENT CHURCHES ***

***** This file should be named 37730.txt or 37730.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/7/3/37730/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Julia Neufeld and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
