The Project Gutenberg EBook of Campaign of the First Troop Philadelphia
City Cavalry, by James Cooper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Campaign of the First Troop Philadelphia City Cavalry
       April 25-November 11, 1898

Author: James Cooper

Release Date: October 14, 2011 [EBook #37755]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPAIGN OF THE FIRST TROOP ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)






[Illustration: FIRST LIEUTENANT BROWNING CAPTAIN GROOME SECOND
LIEUTENANT MCFADDEN]




  CAMPAIGN

  OF THE

  First Troop

  Philadelphia City Cavalry

  APRIL 25--NOVEMBER 11

  1898


  JAMES COOPER


  PHILADELPHIA:

  HALLOWELL CO. LTD., PUBLISHERS

  14 SOUTH FIFTH STREET




_For all that is good in this little book acknowledgment is due to
Captain John C. Groome, Lieutenant J. Frank McFadden, Lieutenant J.
Willis Martin, Sergeant John Wagner, Jr., Sergeant Robert E.
Glendinning, F. B. Neilson, T. Wallis Huidekoper, Hugh Craig, Jr., and
the publisher. They have provided the photographs and practically all
the material used. Many passages are taken entirely from letters and
other writings of these Troopers. The writer's personal observations
merely covered the time of the Troop's stay at Mt. Gretna, Camp Alger
and Newport News._




CONTENTS.


  CHAP.                                PAGE

     I. THE CALL TO ARMS                  9

    II. THE TROOP AT MT. GRETNA          18

   III. DEPARTURE FOR CAMP ALGER         32

    IV. FIRST DAYS AT CAMP ALGER         37

     V. CAMP ALGER AND NEWPORT NEWS      46

    VI. LIFE ABOARD A TROOP SHIP         56

   VII. IN THE ENEMY'S COUNTRY           65

  VIII. THE FIGHT THAT FAILED            74

    IX. AFTER THE BATTLE                 83

     X. HOME AGAIN                       99




ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                 PAGE

  Captain Groome, Lieuts. Browning and McFadden,          _frontispiece_

  Troopers Camp at Mt. Gretna,                                        17

  Pistol Practice at Camp Hastings,                                   30

  A Lesson in Horse Throwing,                                         34

  Having Fun with "Hazel,"                                            39

  Glimpse into a Troop Ship,                                          58

  Cathedral Virgin del Carmen,                                        62

  Bivouac Outside Cathedral Virgin del Carmen,                        63

  Bringing the Horses Ashore at Ponce,                                65

  Camp at Arroyo,                                                     71

  En Route to the Battlefield.--Military Road from Guayama to Caney,  77

  "Camp Esperanca,"--Guayama in the Distance,                         85

  At the Beach near Guayama,                                          87

  Return Along the Road from Guayama to Ponce,                        93

  Hacienda Carmen,                                                    99

  Sergeant's Club at Guayama,                                        103




CHAPTER I.

THE CALL TO ARMS.


When the members of the First Troop of Philadelphia City Cavalry were
summoned to prepare for the annual inspection, on April 23rd, 1898,
there was but one great topic of conversation among the people of the
United States. Early in February, the U. S. Battleship Maine had been
destroyed by an explosion in Havana harbor, and two hundred and
forty-eight American sailors had lost their lives. A board of naval
officers, after daily sessions for seven weeks, had decided that the
destruction of the vessel was not due to an accident; confirming the
popular opinion that the blowing up of this vessel was an act of Spanish
treachery. Both branches of Congress were debating measures regarding
American intervention in the Cuban rebellion, which the natives of that
island had successfully carried on against Spanish rule for three years.
The question of the hour was whether war with Spain was at hand.

That the annual inspection of the Troop occurred just at this time was
merely a coincidence--six months before the plans had been made.
Nothing was changed by the exciting rumors of the day, for the Troopers
belonged to that conservative class of business men, which even at this
time, did not believe in the likelihood of a resort to arms over the
disputes pending between the United States and Spain.

In former years it had been the custom of the Troopers to drill Saturday
afternoons, throughout the spring, in Fairmount Park. This plan had
proven so troublesome that it had been decided to give up every
afternoon for one week previous to the annual inspection for manoeuvres
at Fort Side grounds and omit the Saturday drills in the Park. The
Wednesday before the date set for the first practice, some new horses
for the City Troopers were sent to Fort Washington, and rooms were
secured for the men at Fort Side Inn.

On Monday, April 18th, the Troop having assembled at Fort Side, in
service uniform, fully equipped and mounted, were formed in line
promptly at four o'clock, and at the command of Captain Groome trotted
off to their first drill, which was held in a fine broad meadow
bordering on the Wissahickon, opposite the Inn. After two hours of troop
and squad movements they returned to the Inn, where they learned that
while they had been drilling the House and Senate conferrees had agreed
to a joint resolution in regard to intervention. Throughout the week
the drills continued, and each afternoon showed a marked improvement,
both in the men and horses. The latter soon became accustomed to the
noise of the firing during the skirmish drill, and one hour each day was
spent in drilling in extended order and "as skirmishers." As each
twenty-four hours passed the reports from the nation's capitol showed
war to be closer at hand than upon the preceding day. On Wednesday
despatches from Washington were printed in all papers saying that the
National Guard would be called out within forty-eight hours and sent to
camp at Mt. Gretna, Pa. Captain Groome quietly passed word along the
line to make ready, and arrangements were completed with the
Pennsylvania Railroad to transport the Troopers to the State camp,
direct from Fort Washington, should need arise. In fact there was a
general hope among the men that in this way the dreaded farewells from
loved ones might be avoided. Thursday night the President signed the
resolutions of Congress, which stated that American troops would be sent
to Cuba at once to end the war. At the same time an ultimatum was sent
to Spain to withdraw her troops from the island quietly or prepare for
invasion. It was announced that Spain had been given forty-eight hours
in which to answer. Her only reply was to despatch her best fleet
westward.

On Saturday, the day of the Troopers inspection, President McKinley
issued a call for 125,000 volunteers. While this fact overshadowed all
others, the Troopers made a splendid showing that afternoon, and were
heartily congratulated upon their high state of efficiency by Major
Sweeney, Inspector of the First Brigade.

Sunday was the last day of rest at home that the Troopers were to enjoy
for months to come. On the following Monday, Governor Hastings ordered
the State Troops to mobilize at Mt. Gretna Thursday. President
McKinley's call had made no requisition for cavalry, but Captain Groome
received a personal telegram from Governor Hastings saying that the
Troop would be wanted without question, and the usual printed notices
were sent out, ordering the men to be at the armory ready to start at
five o'clock Thursday morning. As a matter of fact, a majority of the
Troopers spent the two preceding days there, helping pack the stores and
equipments, and getting everything in perfect condition.

Wednesday night all was in readiness, and the cavalrymen's spirits were
high as they read in the evening papers how Sampson's fleet was engaged
in bombarding Matanzas, and how the Spaniards were rushing work upon
their fortifications in Cuba and Porto Rico.

War had been begun without any formal declaration. Spain had refused to
answer the American ultimatum and had given Minister Woodford his
passports, thus breaking diplomatic relations. At once the United States
fleet, off the Cuban coast, began to capture Spanish vessels. Then, at
the request of the President, Congress passed a declaration to the
effect that a state of war had existed between the United States and
Spain since Monday, April 25th.

At this time Spain was credited with having two powerful fleets of a
strength almost equal to that of the United States Navy, and with
possessing an army in Cuba and Porto Rico of 150,000 well seasoned,
splendidly drilled men; war problems were admittedly assuming a graver
aspect each day.

All the forces of nature seemed combined, on Thursday morning, to deter
the City Troopers from their expressed intention of joining the
volunteer army. Faint-hearted men would surely have been terrified at
the first view presented of the hardships of a soldier's life. It was
freezing cold, yet a sort of rain was falling that at times became hail
and at times came down as snow. Whatever form the downfall took, it
soaked through all coverings and chilled to the bone those compelled to
endure its pelting attack. An icy wind was twisting and cutting through
the streets of the city.

When the Troopers stepped from their comfortable homes into the storm,
it was not yet five o'clock. Daylight was scarce as strong as the light
from the lamps still burning in the streets; deep slush covered the
streets and sidewalks. Singly, and by groups of two or threes, the
cavalrymen slipped and splashed their way to the old armory on
Twenty-first Street.

Roll call at five o'clock found, out of the sixty-six active members of
the Troop, the following present: Captain John C. Groome, First
Lieutenant Edward Browning, Assistant Surgeon Charles H. Frazier, Cornet
Richard Tilghman, First Sergeant J. Willis Martin, Quartermaster
Sergeant William C. Lott, Sergeants R. E. Glendinning, John Wagner, Jr.,
Frederick Thibault, C. Emory McMichael and William H. Hart; Corporals
William E. Bates, Charles H. Smith, John Houston Merrill and Francis A.
Thibault; Trumpeters Pugh and Singer; Privates A. Mercer Biddle, Frank
B. Bower, Ward Brinton, Thomas Cadwalader, Jay Cooke, 3d, Francis L.
Cramp, Herman A. Denckla, George L. Farnum, J. Edward Farnum, William I.
Forbes, Persifor Frazier, Jr., H. Percy Glendinning, Henry S. Godfrey,
Samuel Goodman, Francis E. Green, Robert E. Griffith, Guston A.
Heckscher, T. Wallis Huidekoper, Francis A. Janney, Charles K. Lennig,
George McFadden, Percy C. Madeira, Richard W. Meirs, Frederick B.
Neilson, Edward P. Rawle, Benjamin B. Reath, Samuel K. Reeves, J.
Ridgway Reilly, James M. Rhodes, Jr., Thomas Ridgway, Henry D. Riley,
Thomas Robb, Jr., Adolph G. Rosengarten, Mitchell G. Rosengarten, Jr.,
Edward K. Rowland, Reginald K. Shober, James Starr, J. C. Stevens,
Edward C. Taylor, Nelson B. Warden, William G. Warden, Bromley Wharton
and Alexander W. Wister, Jr. The absentees were: Second Lieutenant J.
Frank McFadden, who was coming to rejoin his command as fast as the
"Lucania" could bring him from Europe; George Thayer, who had cabled
from Ireland that he would return upon the first available vessel; H. C.
Butcher, who was in the mountains near Cripple Creek beyond the reach of
telegrams, and who at that time did not know war was talked of; W.
Goodman and S. Chew, who were in a similar condition of ignorance
somewhere in the Klondike regions of Alaska, and Corporal Borie, sick in
bed with typhoid fever.

Just at 5.50 the ringing notes of the bugle sounded assembly. At six
o'clock came "boots and saddles." Ten minutes later the men mounted and
rode out into the icy rain, each man wearing the service uniform, heavy
overcoat and poncho, and armed with saber, Springfield carbine (cal. 45)
and Colts' revolver (cal. 38), and with the blanket, mess outfit,
haversack and nose bag, and two days' rations securely strapped to the
saddle.

With bowed heads they slowly passed to the Reading siding at the corner
of Twenty-third and Arch Streets, where the long troop train was
waiting. Quartermaster Sergeant Lott and his detail having loaded all
the stores and camp equipage before the arrival of the Troop, there was
nothing for the men to do but load their horses on the cars. Inside of
half an hour the last horse had been loaded, and the Troop was ready to
start. For nearly an hour, however, they remained in the cars at the
siding, and "last" good-bys were said over again to the few remaining
friends who had braved the weather to see the cavalrymen off. Finally at
7.30 the engine gave a warning toot, and the train pulled slowly out
amid prolonged cheers.

Delays innumerable and inexplainable occurred on that journey, and a
trip which ordinarily requires less than three hours consumed, in the
Troopers' case, an entire day; so that the shades of evening were added
to the gloom which had prevailed all day when Camp Hastings was
reached. From the cars the Troopers tramped a half mile, up and down
hill, to a little valley which had been designated as their camp site.

[Illustration: TROOPERS CAMP AT MT. GRETNA.]

After the flood of the day the valley was ankle deep in mud, and a more
discouraging prospect than confronted the Troopers would be hard to
imagine. No shelter had been prepared for them, nor could any be
secured. By some mistake, on the part of others, their tents had not yet
arrived from the State Arsenal. All buildings about the camp grounds
were crowded with the constantly increasing throngs of infantrymen, each
troop train upon its arrival adding to the thousands of shelterless
soldiers.

A half dozen of the largest Troopers were sent out to forage, and while
they were gone arrangements were made, through the courtesy of Captain
Warburton, with the men of Battery A to share their tents for the night.
The battery had arrived the day before and was comfortably located. Of
course the doubling up of quarters caused crowding, but the grateful
Troopers, wet and tired as they were, were soon dreaming their first
soldier dreams, while the rain beat a mournful tattoo on the canvas
overhead.




CHAPTER II.

THE TROOP AT MT. GRETNA.


Had the Troopers not known from experience that Mt. Gretna was an ideal
spot for a camp, their impressions of the place, gained from
observations taken the morning after their arrival, would have been
disagreeable beyond expression. In the words of "Longfeller," as one
Trooper expressed it, in a letter to the _Press_,

  "We saw the tents of the others,
    Gleam through the rain and the mist,
  And a feeling of sadness came o'er us,
    That our hearts could not resist."

For, to the disgust of the Troopers, daylight brought no news of the
missing canvas, and visions of another night in the mess tents of the
Battery and Sheridan Troop began to disturb the men. Captain Groome and
his lieutenants had planned plenty of work for the men, however, and as
soon as their minds were once occupied they began to feel better.
Details were sent to relieve the guard that had been placed over the
baggage car, to secure wagons to haul the luggage to the camp grounds
and to do regular sentry duty.

While the spot selected for a camp by Captain Groome had its
disadvantages in rainy weather, it proved to be on the whole, the most
desirable spot on the entire grounds; one of its greatest advantages
being the nearness of Lake Conawago, where later in the season the men
enjoyed a daily bath. The Philadelphia infantry commands had been
assigned the worst quarters at Mt. Gretna. They occupied a deep basin,
fully a mile and a half from the station and telegraph office, and
during the entire time the First, Second, Third Regiments and Battalion
of State Fencibles remained there, the valley was a sea of red mud.
Every other regiment was encamped on rising ground, where the sandy soil
was well drained and kept comparatively dry despite the long continued
rains which set in.

In the afternoon the Troopers tents arrived, and went up with
astonishing rapidity. The men worked hard arranging wooden supports for
their straw-filled canvas bags, so they would not be obliged to sleep on
the wet turf. The horses had been well sheltered in the woods near the
camp, but men and beasts alike were glad when they saw the bright sun on
Saturday morning. These weather conditions quickly wrought a great
change throughout the miles of tented streets. Soldiers faces brightened
and the Troopers, who had kept up their pluck splendidly under a stress
of unfortunate circumstances such as no other organization had been
obliged to face, could not help showing their pleasure at the improved
prospects.

Sunday was spent for the most part in straightening up the camp. In the
afternoon there were a number of visitors on hand from Philadelphia,
although rainy weather had set in again. All kind of rumors were current
as to what would be done with the State organizations, and many feared
that the Troop would not be allowed to enlist as a whole, but that the
men would be called upon to enter the volunteer service as individuals.
These rumors soon died away, however, and on Monday when the men were
lined up and asked if they were willing to enter the service of the
United States there was but a single dissenting voice. One private
refused to volunteer, and he at once resigned from the Troop. As there
was no provision in the call for volunteers for an assistant surgeon,
with a troop of cavalry, Dr. Charles H. Frazier could not be mustered
in.

After the privates and non-commissioned officers had expressed their
willingness to volunteer, Colonel Morrell addressed the officers as
follows: "Is it your desire that I should request the Governor of
Pennsylvania to issue to you a commission for the same places you now
hold in the volunteer army of the United States?"

Captain Groome and Lieutenants Browning and McFadden signified their
desire to serve, and Governor Hastings at once responded that it would
give him great pleasure to have the commissions made out as requested.

After this inspection the men settled down to camp life with zest. On
the day they had signified their willingness to enlist, the great news
had come of Commodore Dewey's victory in the harbor of Manila. The
destruction of the entire Spanish fleet in the East, gave a new turn to
the war, and it was soon whispered that it would not be long before some
of the men encamped at Mt. Gretna would be on their way to these distant
islands in the Pacific. Daily drills were taken up with added interest.
Wednesday and Thursday were rainy. The brigade surgeons were being
examined, and all was put in readiness for the physical examination of
the soldiers, preliminary to their being mustered into the volunteer
service. Friday the City Troopers were examined and four men were
rejected by the surgeons, chiefly for defects in eyesight. Two of these
were afterward reinstated by direct orders from Washington.

Saturday, April 28th, the Troopers were marched down to division
headquarters to be mustered in. A heavy Scotch mist hung over the camp,
and objects at a short distance were invisible. The men were lined up
before a long wooden platform upon which stood Major William A.
Thompson, of the First U. S. Cavalry, the officer detailed by the War
Department to muster the Pennsylvania National Guard troops into the
Volunteer service of the United States; Governor Hastings and his staff,
and hundreds of spectators. As the roll was called, each Trooper stepped
forward and answered to his name. Then the mustering officer told the
men and officers to raise their right hand. Up went the hands and the
spectators removed their hats while Major Thompson repeated this oath:

"Do you solemnly swear that you will bear true faith and allegiance to
the United States of America, and will serve them faithfully against all
their enemies whomsoever, and that you will obey the orders of the
President of the United States and the orders of officers appointed over
you, according to the rules and articles of war?"

"I do!" shouted each man in the same breath, and as the hearty response
went up, the spectators applauded and the Third Regiment Band, sheltered
in a building near at hand, struck up "The Star Spangled Banner." The
officers' commissions were then filled in by the Governor and handed to
their owners. Back to their camp marched the Troopers, no longer their
own masters but servants of Uncle Sam, and as they filed past the
mustering stand, a company of infantrymen stepped up to go through the
same ceremony.

Noah is credited with being the only man who ever saw it rain for forty
days and forty nights, but the City Troopers ran him a close race in the
month that followed. The intervals between showers were almost too brief
to be noticed, and it became a popular jest that the weather man was
trying to break the men in for a campaign in Cuba during the rainy
season. The worst storm of the lot was reserved for the Sunday following
the muster-in of the Troopers. In regular cloud-bursts the floods
descended upon Camp Hastings. The camp of the Troopers was surrounded by
hills on three sides, and down these hills came innumerable streams, all
headed for the Troop street. Visitors in large numbers had come out from
the city on the long excursion trains, and many were half ferried, half
driven to camp in an old wagon which seemed especially designed to do
service as a boat. Bad as was the Troopers' lot, it was almost nothing
compared to what the Philadelphia infantrymen were compelled to endure.
The foot soldiers in the first place had not taken the same precautions
as the Troopers in raising their mattresses from the ground, and in some
cases they actually found their beds under water by nightfall. Mud in
the streets of every camp in the First Brigade was six inches deep, and
so sticky that to attempt to walk through it, invariably meant the loss
of a boot.

On Monday morning, drills were resumed by the Troopers, and upon Tuesday
they were called to bid farewell to the men of Battery A, who had been
ordered to Newport News for guard duty.

Although the rain spoiled all attempts at systematic drill, captains
throughout the camp were gradually getting their men in better shape,
and the work of mustering-in had proceeded uninterruptedly. On Friday,
the 13th, the last of the Pennsylvania Troops had entered the volunteer
army. There were at that time 10,860 in all, and a grand review by the
Governor was planned for the next afternoon. As if to compensate for
past sins and sins to come, the weather for that day was perfect, and by
three o'clock on Saturday afternoon the various troops and regiments
throughout the camp began wending their way from the tents to the parade
ground. The Troopers took up their stand on a little hill near their
camp, but the rising ground prevented their seeing the miles of blue
ranks, glittering with steel, that stretched away just beyond.

The Governor and his staff rode at full gallop along the lines, while a
little band, the only one in camp, kept blowing out the strains of "Hail
to the Chief." The lack of proper music was the only drawback to this
occasion. Then the order to march came; the many commands swung past the
reviewing party, and the finest display ever made by Pennsylvania troops
since the Civil War was at an end.

The second command of Philadelphia soldiers to leave Camp Hastings was
the Third Regiment. Colonel Ralston received his orders the Sunday
following the review, and attempted to get off that afternoon, but
railroad facilities were wanting and it was not until Monday evening
that the boys of the Third got away. Tampa was their destination.

The next day Captain Groome received an order to report to General
Merritt, of the Department of the East, and this order gave the
reporters of the various papers material for many scare stories, as it
became known the next day that General Merritt had been ordered to take
command of the expedition to the Philippines, and it was supposed by
some that he would take the Troopers with him. This rumor was in a
measure substantiated by the orders which came for the Tenth Regiment to
prepare to take a journey to the islands. For, like the Troopers, the
Tenth had just previously been ordered to report to General Merritt, and
when the orders came regarding the Philippines, the men of the Tenth had
struck tents preparatory to going to meet General Merritt in New York.
On this same Tuesday the First Regiment, made up of Philadelphia men,
left Mt. Gretna for Camp Thomas, Chickamauga, and the Ninth Regiment
started for the same camp.

From the movement of the infantry regiments it seemed probable that they
would soon be required for active service, but the cavalry troops were
detained at Mt. Gretna waiting for the issue of arms and equipments from
the Government. As the City Troop was fully armed with the carbine,
saber and pistol, uniformed, equipped and mounted, and owned all their
equipments and horses, Captain Groome offered to Governor Hastings, and
through him to the Secretary of War, to transfer immediately all the
horses and troop property of every description to the United States, to
be settled for at any time and price satisfactory to the Government. The
Troopers hoped by this offer to be enabled to take the field at once,
but unfortunately this was not accepted, although the spirit which
prompted it was warmly commended in the return message from the War
Department. After this there was nothing to do but wait for the
Government to provide new horses and equipments.

On the afternoon of Wednesday, the 19th, Captain Groome was called to
Washington and Lieutenant Browning remained in charge of the City
Troopers camp. He put the men through a long dismounted drill and
followed it up with another the next day. While the captain was away, a
report came from Washington, through the Associated Press despatches,
that the Pennsylvania Cavalry were to be ordered at once to Hempstead,
L. I., to camp there until wanted. Saturday noon Captain Groome
returned. He borrowed thirty horses belonging to the Sheridan Troop and
took one-half of the City Troopers out for drill. When they returned
Lieutenant Browning took out the other squad. In the evening there came
an inquiry from the War Department as to how many horses were needed by
the City Troop. This did not arouse any enthusiasm, however, as the same
request had been made two weeks before and nothing had come of it.

Sunday was a pleasant day, for a change, and the Troopers spent it
quietly. There were not many visitors on the grounds, as all the
regiments had departed except the Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Sixteenth and
Eighteenth. Most of these men came from distant parts of the State. In
the afternoon Sergeant Glendinning tried some experiments in kite flying
that were watched with interest, and others of the Troopers planned to
go into the kite manufacturing business to be ready for sport on the
next clear day.

There was a novelty in the way of drill in store for thirty of the
Troopers, on Monday, as they were sent out in search of tramps who had
settled in a nearby mountain, and were said to be moonshiners on a small
scale. The exercise was splendid, but no tramps were found. That night a
baby cyclone struck the camp. The wind got in its fine work about one
o'clock in the morning, and the Troopers had to jump out of bed and hold
their tents down. Some of the tents were sent flying before the alarm
was given, and as rain immediately followed the blow, there were many
men who passed an uncomfortable night.

At this time the order of the day, in camp, was as follows:

  5.55 A. M.    First call.
     6 A. M.    Reveille roll call.
  6.05 A. M.    Setting up exercises.
  6.20 A. M.    Mess.
     7 A. M.    Police camp.
      8 A. M.   Guard mount.
   8.30 A. M.   Drill.
  11.30 A. M.   Inspection of quarters.
     12 M.      Mess.
      3 P. M.   Drill.
   6.15 P. M.   Mess.
      7 P. M.   Retreat roll call.
   9.30 P. M.   Tattoo.
     10 P. M.   Taps.

All the men contributed to the mess from their pay, so that the meals
did not consist solely of salt pork and hard tack. In the mornings the
drill covered the manual of carbine or saber drills, and pistol practice
by squad or troop, also dismounted drill by the Troop; this drill lasted
as a rule two hours. The afternoon drill as a rule extended over three
hours, and was chiefly in outpost and skirmish work. One platoon would
start, under the command of an officer, telling the general direction it
would take, and having gone a certain distance would establish outposts
of an imaginary camp, twenty minutes later a second platoon would start
on a march through the country, throwing out flankers and advance guard.
The men of the two platoons wearing different colors on their hats so as
to distinguish them. Up hill and down dale the men would crawl their way
until the crack of the pistols would show that one platoon had been
unmasked. Then it was left to the officers to decide which side had the
best of the manoeuvres. While two platoons were thus engaged a third was
always left in charge of camp. Each morning half the Troop would be
taken over to the rifle range for pistol and carbine practice.

One piece of work had been done by the Troopers, during the early days
of their stay at Camp Hastings, that has not been referred to. It was a
squad of City Troopers that went over the triple muster rolls of the
entire quota of Pennsylvania volunteers, for Major Thompson, and their
quick, accurate work helped greatly in the rapid mustering-in of the
men. When he discharged these Troopers from further duty, Major Thompson
wrote a cordial letter to Captain Groome, giving the Troopers high
praise.

And so the days passed on. Sometimes the Troopers felt that their
peaceful camp life was pretty slow, but as the drills became harder day
by day they realized that it was not only a great school of experience,
but that each day's drill was part of a general plan of their officers,
that would gradually improve their physical condition and bring them to
a high state of efficiency as a Troop when they were needed for active
service. And so each night, when at the last note of "retreat" the
guidon was taken in, they felt they had not only earned a good
night's rest, but that they had learned something during the day.

[Illustration: PISTOL PRACTICE AT CAMP HASTINGS.]

On May 25th, President McKinley issued his second call for troops, and
it was announced that the men thus called for would be added to the
organizations already in the field. The City Troop was to be recruited
up to a complete war footing of one hundred men, and arrangements were
made to notify the men upon the waiting list of the opportunity that
would be thus offered. Two days later the Paymaster reached camp for the
first time. Three members of the Troop were sent to Harrisburg to secure
the cash, and that night the men had their first look at Government
money; for in their previous campaigns, as a troop, their pay had come
from the State. A Board was appointed, consisting of Major W. A.
Thompson, First U. S. Cavalry, and Captain Paxton, Sixth Infantry, U. S.
A., to purchase horses for the three troops of cavalry, and the last day
of May Captain Groome left camp to join them in New Castle, Pa.




CHAPTER III.

DEPARTURE FOR CAMP ALGER.


June first found Captain Groome back again, with the information that if
possible the horses for the City Troop would be grey. A large number of
that color had been found and accepted by the Board, and as grey was the
color best suited for service in tropical countries, the Captain had
bespoken the greys for his troop. On June 4th the Captain rejoined the
Horse Board, and the first animals purchased reached camp. The greys
were tied to the picket line, which was extended in front of the Troop's
long row of tents.

On the seventh of the month the City Troop received orders from
Major-General Graham, commanding the Second Army Corps, to proceed at
once to Camp Alger, and report as a part of that corps. To do this would
be to leave the camp with but a part of the Troop's horses and
equipments, so Captain Groome requested that the Troop be allowed to
remain until fully equipped, if possible. However, all arrangements were
made in compliance with the first order, and camp was broken on the
afternoon of June 9th. Some of the officers' wives, who had taken
cottages at Chautauqua, had dismissed their servants, and the Troopers
were ready to march to the train, when an order came granting the
Captain's request, and ordering the Troop to remain until fully
equipped.

Recruiting officers were at once sent to Philadelphia, and two days
later twelve new Troopers arrived, fully uniformed. Captain Groome was
too busy to remain with the Horse Board any longer, and Lieutenant
Browning went in his stead. The drills increased in length each day, and
the new recruits as fast as they arrived were sent out in squads to
learn the first principles, and then were given a turn with the entire
Troop. The officers had a class in tactics daily, and the men took up
the study of bugle calls. The recruits were given much guard duty to
perform, and wherever they went they carried their books of regulations,
learning the paragraphs by heart.

On June 24th, Samuel Chew arrived at camp, direct from the Klondike gold
regions, and took up his duties as if he had done nothing unusual, yet
he had made the long journey in record-breaking time simply to rejoin
his comrades. Twenty new tents arrived that day, affording
accommodations for the new men. On the 17th, the last of the regiments
of infantry left, and the Troopers were monarchs of all they surveyed.
While the infantrymen were good fellows, there were many reasons why
the Troopers were glad when they had gone. Some time previously the
Troopers had erected a rough shed in which they had placed shower baths,
but now that they had undisputed possession of the lake, they enjoyed
long daily swims.

Upon the departure of the last infantry regiment Captain Groome became
the commanding officer at Camp Hastings, by virtue of seniority, he
having been the first volunteer cavalry officer to be sworn into the
United States service. He at once formed the three troops, Governor's,
Sheridan and City Troop, into a squadron and assumed command. A change
in the camp routine at once went into effect. Squadron drills were held
daily, and other features of camp life, which interested all visitors,
were squadron guard mount and evening parade.

The new horses were utterly unused to cavalry exercises, in fact many of
them had never been ridden before, and the Troopers had lively times
training their steeds. One of the sights which visitors to the camp were
never tired of watching was the skill with which the Troopers "threw"
their horses, to accustom them to the exercise in which the horses are
supposed to lie down and afford forts for the riders. The throwing is
exciting sport. The left fore leg of a horse is strapped up so that
the animal stands upon three legs, a strap is attached to the other fore
leg and grasped by the rider, who suddenly turns the horse's head way
around to one side and pulls the other fore leg from the ground. The
animal is obliged to fall to his knees and is then coaxed over. When
once the horse realizes that the rider means him no harm, the work is
more than half done.

[Illustration: A LESSON IN HORSE THROWING]

On the 20th of June, Private Edward Carpenter was notified of his
appointment, by the President, as a second lieutenant in the regular
service. He had long been anxious to make the army his profession, and
was greatly pleased. The first Khaiki uniform in the Trooper's camp
appeared the next day upon Lieutenant McFadden, and was the subject of
much attention. Fifteen men from each troop were constantly on guard
duty over the camp grounds and railroad property. "Two hours on and four
hours off," was the rule with the men during their day's duty.

A blacksmith's forge was set up at the foot of the Trooper's camp, and
men were detailed each day to act as assistants. The horses had all been
unshod upon their arrival, and it was a long job getting them properly
fitted out.

June passed into July, and still the Troopers remained at Mt. Gretna.
By this time the Troop had practically its full number of horses, and
the men were drilled almost to the point of perfection. They were as fit
for service as soldiers could be, and the orders to move, which came
July 7th, were welcome indeed. The squadron was to go to Camp Alger, but
all the men felt that this was but a preliminary move, and that soon
they would be at the front. Tents were struck the same day. No
countermanding orders came this time, and all the camp luggage was
despatched to the station ahead of the cavalrymen.

The squadron at this time consisted of three troops and nine officers.
Each troop consisted of one hundred men and one hundred and six horses.
The men of the three commands had become well acquainted with one
another during their long wait at Camp Hastings, and upon their camp
sites left mementoes of their stay which will be seen for years to come.
Two of the Troops names are cut deeply upon great rocks, together with
the dates of their arrival and departure. The men of the Governor's
troop erected a huge monument of stones, held together with mud, and
great pride was taken by the Harrisburg Troopers in this "work of art."




CHAPTER IV.

FIRST DAYS AT CAMP ALGER.


From the little valley, in which the Troopers had pitched their tents
seventy-one days previous, they rode away late in the afternoon of
Thursday, July 8th, in the best condition of any command which had been
mustered in at Mt. Gretna. No comrades in arms remained to be drawn up
in line to give the cavalrymen a parting cheer, but fully two hundred
cottagers of the Chautauqua grounds were at the station to witness the
departure. The train was in waiting, made up in two sections; the
baggage, horses and horse detail were to go in the first, and the work
of loading was at once begun.

While the greys were being led aboard the cars, many friends of the
Philadelphia men gathered upon the railroad platform to say a last
good-by. Among those from whom the Troopers parted with sincere regret
were T. Dawson Coleman and William T. Smith, President of the Cornwall
and Lebanon road, both of whom had done much to contribute to the
pleasure of the men in camp during their long stay.

At seven o'clock the first section pulled out of the station, Stable
Sergeant Wagner and Troopers T. Cadwalader, Goodman, Pemberton and
Rogers being detailed to accompany the horses. An hour later the
remainder of the Troop was allowed to start.

The train arrangements were excellent, every man in the squadron having
a full seat to himself. It was interesting to note the various ways in
which the Troopers prepared for their night of travel. A trip through
the train showed all sorts of games in progress--cards, checkers,
dominoes and the like. The good story tellers of the various troops were
the centre of laughing groups; many of the business men had their heads
buried in the commercial page of the evening papers; some of the more
stolid warriors attempted to go to sleep the moment the train started;
in all it formed a picturesque grouping, and furnished rich material for
the students of human nature among the troops.

The discussions of the men regarding the general campaign were
interesting, as the war fever was then at its height. Four days before
the Atlantic Squadron, under Sampson and Schley, had destroyed the fleet
of Admiral Cervera during its attempt to escape from the harbor of
Santiago. General Shafter's men were then pressing upon Santiago, and
its surrender was hourly expected. Then it was believed that the word
would come "On to Havana," and many of the Troopers believed that their
command would surely have a part in this movement.

[Illustration: HAVING FUN WITH "HAZEL."]

So far the war had been one of surprises, scarcely an engagement having
taken place at a point where a few months before the military leaders
would have deemed it possible to expect one. Spain's navy had proven no
match for that of the United States, but her little army about Santiago
had made a good showing, and hard fights seemed probable before the main
army would be driven from Cuba.

The train first came to a stop in Harrisburg, in the midst of a mass of
enthusiastic men and women, assembled to greet the members of the
Governor's troop and Sheridan troop. The crowd rushed pell-mell through
the cars containing the troopers of the other organizations, knocking
down carbines and sabers, and upsetting things generally. But sentries
had thoughtfully been placed by Lieutenant Browning at the doors of the
City Troop cars, and this company's share in the demonstration was
conducted through the windows. "Hazel," the goat presented to the Troop
during its service at the time of the Hazelton riots, gravely surveyed
the scene from her outlook, and came in for a lion's share of attention.
Just as the train started an enthusiastic young woman, who had been
fighting her way toward the train, thrust a white kitten into the hands
of Corporal Wister, with instructions to be good to it. In all it was a
pleasant break in the monotony of a long ride.

By midnight the State line was passed, and at Baltimore the first
section of the train was overtaken. The Troopers, with the exception of
the officers, were in day coaches, and made a picturesque sight, asleep
in all conceivable attitudes. Enough were awake, however, to chat for a
time with the members of the horse detail. By half-past four the men
aroused, and thirty minutes later reached the station at Dunn Loring,
Va. A breakfast of milk and sandwiches was eaten on the train, and then
the unloading began. This work was speedily accomplished without a hitch
or accident, and by nine o'clock the canvas of the three troops began to
go up on the site of the camp formerly occupied by the Eighth Ohio
Infantry, commonly known as "The President's Own."

All day long the cavalrymen worked upon the sun-baked slope, and by
nightfall the grounds were in splendid order. In one regard the Troopers
were fortunate, an artesian well being within fifty feet of their camp.
This, however, supplied the wants of the men only, the horses, at first,
having to be led more than a mile for water. Shade was abundant near
the camp, the horses being better off in that respect than at Camp
Hastings.

After a good night's sleep the men were called upon for disagreeable
duty, which was at once cheerfully taken up. The "doughboys" who had
occupied the grounds previously had left the woods in the rear in such a
condition as to menace the health of the camp, and twenty men from each
troop were detailed by Captain Groome to police the woods, and at the
end of the second day the grounds were comparatively clean, and the men
were then called upon for their first drill at Camp Alger. There was a
great crowd around the parade grounds when the Troopers made their first
appearance, and the repeated cheers and applause of the spectators came
as an unexpected and pleasing surprise.

Upon return to camp Private J. Edward Farnum was notified of his
appointment, by the President, as an assistant commissary, with the rank
of captain. The new government carbines, saddles and spurs were also
received and distributed, but by some mistake no saddle blankets were
sent, so the Troopers continued to use their regular blankets.

Sunday the Khaiki uniforms arrived, and were at once donned by all the
men. The universal verdict seemed to be that the new uniforms were not
particularly adapted for cavalry service, and were as ugly as they well
could be.

Right from the moment of their appearance at Camp Alger the City
Troopers were in demand by the headquarters officers. Large details were
required each day for orderlies at Camp, Division and Brigade
headquarters, and for mounted patrol duty.

On July 10th quite an addition was made to the camp of the City Troop.
Eight government mules, with all the largeness of ears, friskiness of
feet and sweetness of voice, possessed by their race, were assigned to
Captain Groome's command. The men gathered about the new comers in an
admiring group, wondered how fast they could trot, what would happen if
a Trooper twisted one of their tails, and just what they were good for
anyway. Before the campaign was over mules had ceased to arouse any
admiration whatever, but the Troopers at Camp Alger could not see into
the future, with its endless mule train and trials, so they made the
most of their new possessions for the time being.

Besides the mules, two wagons and two teamsters were assigned to the
Troop, and these aids were greatly appreciated, as up to this time there
had been a constant struggle to find conveyances for troop supplies and
baggage between different points of the camps.

Although the mules were in a thriving condition, the Troopers had
troubles of their own with their greys. A majority of the horses had
contracted shipping colds, and incessant doctoring was the order of the
day and night.

All of the animals came through all right, however, with the exception
of the horse ridden by Sergeant Hart, which died the fifth day after the
Troop's arrival at the new camp.

The first detachment of mules was soon followed by another, until a full
score had been sent to the Troop. Other commands throughout the camp had
also received supplies of mules, and the animals showed a great fondness
for communicating with one another in the early morning. Far away on one
side of the camp a mule would raise his silvery voice to heaven;
somewhere from the headquarter's mules would come an answering bray, and
in a moment the chorus would resound throughout the camping grounds. At
first the novelty of these sounds appealed to the Troopers' sense of
humor, but the best jokes grow wearisome by repetition, and it was not
long before the men were mentally offering all sorts of rewards for the
man who could devise a plan to silence the long-eared singers.

On the morning of July 14th, Corporal Hecksher and Troopers Coulston,
Wheeler and Mills were sent by the Provost Marshal to escort back from
Washington fifteen foot soldiers who had overstayed their leave of
absence. The derelicts were turned over to the tender mercies of the
headquarters guard, to be dealt with as military regulations direct. A
private of a western regiment, who had evidently been in Washington,
returned to camp about eleven o'clock this night. After some parley with
the Troop's sentinel, then on guard on the main road back of Captain
Groome's headquarters, he proceeded to mix things up with the sentry,
and was promptly marched to the guard house, where he spent a repentant
night.

Since the arrival of the squadron at Camp Alger Captain Groome, who was
in command, had posted orders for Squadron Guard Mount every morning,
and for Troop Drill and Squadron Parade every evening. The number of
spectators upon these occasions kept increasing daily, and the
reputation for excellence in drill on the part of the squadron spread
rapidly. The officers of all the commands in the camp were attracted by
these reports, and the evolutions of the cavalrymen were frequently
watched with a critical eye by many of the best known officers of the
army. Though they came as critics they remained to praise, and many
admitted that they gained a vast amount of useful knowledge by an
inspection of the camp of the squadron.

The paymaster put in an appearance July 15th. The Troop lined up and
received their portions of hard-earned government money, and then
promptly turned the cash over to the Quartermaster. In the afternoon
General Butler honored the Troopers by riding out especially to watch
their drill, and he warmly commended Captain Groome for the fine showing
of the cavalry.




CHAPTER V.

CAMP ALGER AND NEWPORT NEWS.


At retreat roll call, on the evening of July 15th, an example was given
of the affectionate regard the rest of the Pennsylvania Militia feel and
show toward the Philadelphia horsemen. The battalion of State Fencibles,
which formed a portion of the Sixth Regiment, marching in fours, came
tramping into the Troop's street. Once there they halted and gave
repeated cheers for the cavalrymen. Then away they trudged, after being
assured that their compliment was appreciated by the Troopers. Two
members of the City Troop served on the Provost Guard the night of the
16th, and great was their amazement, when, amid the drunks and
disorderly prisoners turned over to their charge, they found a chaplain.
He was escorted to the guard house by a very disgusted squad.

That same night, Private Robert Fell returned to camp, after two weeks
confinement at his home with a kicked knee. His place on sick report was
taken by Private Rowland, who had been slightly ill for several days,
although he kept that information to himself until scarcely able to
stand upon his feet.

Inspection of arms and equipments of the Troopers came on Saturday, and,
as the arms just issued were uniformly dirty, a large number of the men
put in an hour or two of hard cleaning and polishing. In the evening a
dozen of the City Troopers attended the Camp Alger Theatre, the tent for
which had been pitched right at the foot of the company's street. The
price at that popular resort was twenty-five cents for all seats, and
the audience generally contained two rows of Troopers, who joined
heartily with the vaudeville performers in singing the choruses and
making things lively. Every feature was first-class in all respects, and
good temper always prevailed on and off the stage.

An incident occurred at the Theatre that night, which served to show the
frame of mind of the American volunteers. A portion of the performance
consisted of an exhibition of moving pictures. Finally a large flag was
thrown on the sheet, and the man in charge said:

"There's the flag you are fighting for, boys!"

Instantly a dry western voice called out from the audience: "I wish to
God we could get the chance!" and the immediate and tremendous cheer
which followed, showed how heartily his wish was echoed by all present.

On Monday and Tuesday several details were sent out to do some work upon
a site for a new camp nearer the station. Time began to hang heavy on
all hands, and a strong rumor that the Troop was soon to go to Puerto
Rico, failed to excite the interest that it would have a month before.
Not that the men were less anxious to get to the front, but simply that
they hated to let their hopes rise for fear of another disappointment.

On Tuesday night, while watching Corporal Chew throw his horse, in order
to put a bridle on the unruly animal, Private Wetherill received both
heels of the beast on his left thigh, the horse having succeeded for a
moment in getting away from the big corporal. The injuries were not of a
serious nature, however, and the bruised trooper refused to put in a
plea of sickness.

It was expected by the men that the camps would be shifted on the 20th,
and the failure to do so was regarded as lending color to the Puerto
Rico rumors. On this morning the Troop dismounted and drilled finely.
Their excellent work culminated when Lieutenant Browning rallied the
men. Standing in close order, they fired three volleys that produced
long cheering from the crowd. About two minutes later an orderly rode
over from General Graham and reported to Lieutenant Browning that the
commanding officer wished to know what company had fired those volleys.
The General expressed himself as delighted to hear that it was a troop
of cavalry dismounted.

Nearly every horse in camp at this time had distemper, and at night it
was decided to give each of the invalids a pretty stiff drink,
consisting of a pint of whiskey and sixty grains of quinine. The dose
was shot down the animals throats from a great syringe, and the stable
guard was advised to be on the lookout for any unusual hilarity; but no
behavior out of the ordinary was noticed.

J. L. Wetherill was granted sick leave on the 21st. He had been ill for
several days, and it was thought best for him to return home. Shortly
after he had done so his sickness took a serious turn, and he was unable
to rejoin the Troop until its return from Puerto Rico.

Squadron guard mount, drills and evening parade continued throughout the
Troop's stay, under orders of Acting Major Groome. The day before the
cavalry troops left Camp Alger, however, Captain Jones, of the Sheridan
Troop, was commissioned major. Captain Jones held the longest record of
any officer in the Pennsylvania State troops, and had served as a
captain in the Civil War. As his commission did not arrive until after
the squadron had left Camp Alger, his appointment made no difference in
the camp routine, and as the Sheridan and Governor's troops were left
behind at Newport News, the City Troopers were not affected in the least
by the change in the officer commanding the squadron.

The night of the 21st one more of the greys died, but the rest of the
animals were in splendid condition, and the men felt that they could
make a good showing, so far as their mounts were concerned, in the
foreign service soon to come.

There were many occurrences to make Friday, July 22d, an eventful day.
In the morning one hundred Krag-Jorgensen carbines arrived for the City
Troopers; there was an unusually interesting skirmish drill in the
afternoon, and late in the evening came the eagerly awaited orders for
the Troop to proceed forthwith to Newport News to take transports for
Puerto Rico. Needless to say the camp was at once thrown into a
thoroughly happy mood, and dozens of telegrams were sent notifying
Philadelphia friends of the good luck of the Troop in securing active
service, when fully 7,000 regular cavalrymen were fretting in camps of
mobilization. Post Quartermaster Hugh Craig, Jr., arrived the next day,
and announced his intention of staying with the Troop until it left for
the front. The men could not help feeling better when they saw his jolly
face in the camp.

Tents were struck at five o'clock Sunday morning, and an hour later the
squadron boarded a special train waiting to carry it to Newport News.
The journey occupied the entire day, it being nearly nine o'clock when
the cars reached their destination. Instead of trying to find a camping
ground that night, the men curled up in the cars and slept as best they
could. In a pleasant spot on the coast, about two miles outside the
city, the Troopers went into camp the next day. Even before the tents
went up there were several visitors from Philadelphia who had hurried
down to bid the Troopers "God-speed" upon their departure for the seat
of war.

An unexpected guest was Charles Wheeler, an old member of the
organization, but off the active list for years. He had just returned
from a trip through Japan. He was anxious to rejoin his old comrades,
and as there was one vacancy in the Troop it was promptly filled.

Tuesday morning Captain Groome received orders to have his men ready to
embark at four o'clock. Tents were struck at noon, the operation being
watched by scores of friends who had reached the camp by that time.
Promptly at the hour mentioned in the order the Captain marched his men
down to the wharf, where they found no transport awaiting them. Hour
after hour passed, and still no sign of a vessel. Night found the
Troopers still lounging about the dock.

During this long wait a full score of prominent Philadelphia ladies, who
had come down to say a last good-by to their relatives and friends in
the Troop, had an opportunity to show the traditional spirit of American
women. The ladies had stood around the camp all morning, had followed
the Troop into the city and to the wharf, where they had shared all the
discomforts of the situation. It began to rain, but they only laughed
and refused to seek shelter. Not a mouthful had they eaten since
breakfast, but tired, wet and hungry as they were, they smiled bravely
to keep up the spirits of the men; all unconsciously they afforded fine
illustrations of what the mothers, wives and sisters of American
soldiers have been in all hours of need.

When six o'clock came, and it was evident that the Troopers were in for
a tough time of it, the ladies went in a body to the nearest restaurant
and secured some sandwiches and coffee. Walking fearlessly through the
crowd upon the dock, dodging under horses' heads and around mule packs,
they brought the food to the cavalrymen, and even waited upon them. In
the language of one trooper whose young bride was among the number of
ladies upon the wharf, "there was only one regret at going to the front,
and that was the leaving behind of girls like those."

Until seven o'clock the City Troopers were kept upon the wharf. At that
hour Captain Groome was informed that no transport could then be
secured, and that he should return with the Troop to Newport News and
report to General Fred. Grant. Captain Groome ordered the Troop to
_bivouac_ in the grass in front of the hotel for the night. There was a
general rush for shelter. The ladies sought their rooms in the hotel,
from the windows of which they could see the cavalrymen lying in the
grass of a field opposite, rolled up in their blankets.

Captain Groome did not retire however. He returned to the wharf and
spent several hours arguing with various captains, in order to find a
speedy way in which to embark the Troop. It was not easy work to make
headway against the seemingly endless array of objections and red tape,
but perseverance won out, and the Captain was at last informed, that if
he would have his men on hand at four o'clock they would be taken
aboard.

This last _bivouac_ upon American soil was exceedingly picturesque to
the spectator, but hard upon the men. Every Trooper had been thoroughly
soaked by the rain while standing upon the wharf. In their wet clothes
they had been obliged to wrap their blankets about them and lay down to
slumber in the midst of a damp grass plot under a cloudy sky, which
threatened another downpour at any moment. With the exception of some
pretty tough sandwiches the men had been without food since morning, and
the easy way in which they accepted the situation spoke volumes for the
value of the training in camp life received at Mt. Gretna and Camp
Alger.

The Troop at this time consisted of three officers, one contract
surgeon, ninety-nine men, one hundred and four horses and twenty mules.
The Sheridan and Governor's Troop had not received orders to sail, and
the members of these commands were extremely disappointed. They remained
at Newport News under the command of Major Jones.

Captain Groome arranged for an early breakfast of coffee and sandwiches
for his men, and at 4.30 A. M. the next day the City Troopers were again
ordered to the wharf. This time there was no disappointment. The
transport "Massachusetts" was there taking on a great load of men,
horses and mules. All was bustle and confusion. Within a short time the
Troopers went aboard, and almost at once the vessel made ready to sail.
Last words to the faithful friends ashore were shouted, there was a
waving of hands and handkerchiefs, and a little after midday the
"Massachusetts" began ploughing her way toward the southern isle, where
General Brooke's army and the Spanish forces were reported to be already
face to face.




CHAPTER VI.

LIFE ABOARD A TROOP SHIP.


Life aboard a troop ship is not a round of pleasure at the best. Long
tales of woe, regarding the trials and hardships upon transports of
various infantry commands, quickly found their way into print within a
few weeks after active war operations commenced. Not one word, however,
regarding the discomforts of the City Troop on the trip to Puerto Rico
was written. Yet, if existence upon a transport ship, crowded with men
is disagreeable, what would the complaining infantrymen have said had
they found themselves in the Troop's plight, on a vessel containing more
animals than men.

Truly discouraging was the situation in which the cavalrymen were
placed. Their hammocks were swung between decks, and but eighteen inches
were allowed between the hammock of each man and the hammocks above and
on each side of him. Two feet is the regulation distance in the navy,
but circumstances alter cases, and what might be a fair allowance on a
carefully kept, well-ventilated war vessel, became a distinct hardship
aboard the "Massachusetts." Especially was this the case where several
of the tall, broad-shouldered men found their hammocks adjoining one
another--for the men's bodies touched at all times, and bumped together
vigorously at every lurch of the vessel.

The transport upon which the Troopers found themselves had been built to
carry about four hundred horses and an ordinary crew, yet when pressed
into government service seven hundred men and fourteen hundred horses
and mules were considered about her proper capacity. When the Troopers
first boarded the vessel their bundles of clothing and equipments were
scattered about in great confusion, and a good part of the first day was
spent by the men in collecting their belongings and bringing them into
some sort of order.

The weather during the first day at sea was exceedingly hot, although
fairly pleasant until toward evening, when the wind began to show itself
and the sky became cloudy. A majority of the men prepared to sleep upon
deck, but as the vessel came off Cape Hatteras about midnight she struck
a regular squall. The air became cold, the "Massachusetts" began to
pitch about violently and then rain came rushing down in great volumes,
driving the men below in a hurry. There they found many of their fellow
passengers with their dreams of glory swallowed up in seasickness. The
horses, too, succumbed to the complaint in large numbers, and required
much care.

Aboard the "Massachusetts" there were, in all, seven hundred horses and
a like number of mules. Hundreds of the mules were fastened just below
the deck to which the Troopers had been driven by the squall, while
above could be heard the constant stamping of horses. Between these two
layers of animals the cavalrymen passed a restless night. But if their
first attempt at sleep was disturbed, the conditions prevailing the
second night can better be imagined than described. Despite the best
efforts to keep the quarters of the animals clean, the odor which arose
from the hundreds of horses and mules was sickening, and a majority of
the Philadelphia men found sleeping in the hammocks impossible.

Early the next morning Captain Groome took the matter in hand, and
secured permission for his men to sleep upon the baled hay, which was
piled high on the main deck. There, under the stars, swept by refreshing
sea breezes, the Troopers slept well--if not comfortably--the remaining
nights aboard. Special sentries were appointed to see that no tired
Trooper rolled from his hay mattress into the sea.

But the greatest hardship of the voyage to Puerto



Rico was the lack of drinking water. Dirty, yellowish fluid was all that
could be had. This would not have troubled the men a particle had it
been cool enough to be refreshing. But the water was warm; sometimes it
was positively hot, and always insipid and filthy looking. A skirmish by
the commissary brought to light a case of beer, although there was no
ice to make it palatable. The beer lasted but a day, and to keep alive
the water had to be accepted and made the best of. Worse came to worst
on Sunday. The pumps of the "Massachusetts" broke down, and the Troopers
were obliged to go into the hold of the offensively fragrant vessel and
bring up water bucketful by bucketful for the animals under their
charge.

[Illustration: GLIMPSE INTO A TROOP SHIP.]

Sergeant Martin and Corporal Wagner, stripped to the waist, were at the
bottom of what looked like a deep well. The atmosphere was stifling, and
in order to enable the men at the bottom to stand the heat, their
comrades kept pouring water down upon their heads and bodies. As fast as
pails could be filled from the bottom they were passed up along a long
line of men composed of details from the various commands aboard.

It was exhausting labor, but of all the men on board the City Troopers
stood the work best. The water thus brought up was of a kind absolutely
dangerous for a human being to drink, and all through the day's trying
struggle the Troopers silently endured the added pangs of thirst. There
was more real suffering for twenty-four hours than any man in the Troop
will admit, but when the pumps resumed operations in the morning, the
thankful air with which the formerly despised yellowish warm water was
accepted spoke volumes.

The days passed along slowly. No extremely rough weather was
encountered, but on several occasions the old transport reeled
sufficiently to send a few of the Troopers to their hammocks with slight
attacks of _mal de mer_.

The motion of the vessel was sufficient, however, to completely
disarrange each night the outfit of the Troopers, and it was their duty
each morning to gather together their equipments for inspection, the
same as though they were in camp. This constant readiness was in marked
contrast with the arrangements among other commands aboard.

Many of the Troopers will never forget the first time the alarm of fire
was given aboard the ship. It was the third morning out that a guard
discovered smoke slowly curling from between the crevices of the baled
hay piled high on deck. The guard was startled, and his call for the
corporal and statement of the discovery of the fire was given in a loud
tone, which instantly caused the alarm to spread throughout the ship. It
was no pleasant thought for the men, who knew so well the inflammable
nature of the cargo and the crowded condition aboard, and there was a
rush for the point from which the alarm had come. Fortunately the blaze
was a trivial affair easily extinguished, and the excitement was
speedily at an end. Three other times, however, during the trip the same
alarm was given, but the careful watch kept prevented the fire, in a
single instance, from gaining any headway.

Although the "Massachusetts" was supposed to be one of the fastest
transports, she found the entire flotilla, which had left Newport News
about the same time she did, awaiting her arrival off Guayama. A
despatch boat came puffing down to meet her, flying the signal, "Follow
me," and Troopers in the bow saw a man armed with a megaphone mount the
bridge of the despatch boat and shout: "'The Massachusetts' will lead the
way, landing at Ponce."

These instructions as to the exact landing place were somewhat contrary
to those before given Captain Pitcher, who was in charge of the
transport, so he shouted back, "By whose authority do you give those
orders?" and the reply promptly came, "By the authority of Major General
Nelson A. Miles, commanding."

This was at three o'clock, and the "Massachusetts" at once went ahead.
At 4.30 the harbor of Ponce was sighted, and several of the Philadelphia
cavalrymen in the bow saw that the transport was steering directly into
shoal water, at the bottom of which a coral reef could be plainly seen.
They shouted to the man at the wheel, but too late--the great transport
drove bow on into the reef, and at last, on the afternoon of August 4th,
the Troopers were upon hostile soil, hard and fast.

Instantly upon the stoppage of the "Massachusetts," a period of
suffering began for the Troopers, in comparison with which all former
experiences went as nothing. Deprived of all breeze, exposed to a torrid
sun, half stifled by the fumes from the hundreds of horses and mules
aboard, without water, the situation was well nigh unbearable. Up to the
moment of grounding not an animal aboard had died. Within two hours
after the motion of the vessel had stopped three horses perished, and
two more died before they could be taken off. Fortunately none of these
belonged to City Troopers. This suffering among the animals shows
slightly what the men had to contend with.

[Illustration: CATHEDRAL VIRGIN DEL CARMEN.]

[Illustration: BIVOUAC OUTSIDE CATHEDRAL VIRGIN DEL CARMEN.]

Captain Groome secured permission to send Lieutenant Browning ashore to
select a camp site, and report. He made quick work of it, choosing a
spot beside the Cathedral de la Carmen, and returning with an order from
General Miles that the First Troop Philadelphia City Cavalry, should
land at once. This order amazed the New York cavalrymen, who had been
heard to boast frequently that they would surely be given the preference
in all military arrangements.

The orders were received with great joy by the Philadelphians, who were
ready to disbark in short order, owing to the constant readiness in
which they had kept. A rope tied about their outfit was all that was
necessary, and the men were only too eager to leave the grounded vessel
and its disagreeable quarters.

The Troopers were rescued by the little lighter "Whitney," sent by
General Miles to bring the Philadelphia men ashore. As soon as the
Troopers reached land themselves they set to work to bring their horses
off the transport. The air was full of rumors that the cavalry were
needed in a hurry for active service, and the men went at the task of
unshipping horses with a will. Some amusing attempts at interference on
the part of the men of C Troop, Brooklyn, were simply ignored.

At three o'clock the next morning sixty-one of the one hundred and seven
horses belonging to the Troop had been landed. The men not on duty had
gone into the camp selected by Lieutenant Browning the day before, on
the flagstones outside of the little cathedral. All day rain came down
in torrents, introducing the Troopers to the duckings which were to be
their lot several times each day during their stay upon the island.

[Illustration: BRINGING THE HORSES ASHORE AT PONCE.]




CHAPTER VII.

IN THE ENEMY'S COUNTRY.


The morning of August 5th broke clear, however, and the day was one of
the few without rain that the Troopers enjoyed while in Puerto Rico. A
fine breeze was blowing, and the cavalrymen's ideas of the country began
to take on a roseate hue. Everywhere their eyes met deep green tropical
foliage and the cute little yellow houses without windows; strange old
churches and curious natives made the entire scene appear more like a
theatrical setting than a reality.

In the morning before five o'clock the blaring of trumpets announced a
hurry call. As soon as the men came to their senses they heard the
non-commissioned officers shouting: "Fall in without arms." The Troop
never appeared to better advantage. The guard, the fourth platoon,
tumbled out fully armed, and were standing in place in two minutes, and
one minute later the entire Troop, in column of fours, with the captain
in command, was double-quicking toward the dock. When the men got there,
ten or fifteen minutes ahead of anyone else except the regulars, who
arrived shortly after the Troop, they found that a lighter loaded with
five thousand rifles for the infantry was sinking close to shore.

No example of the discipline, which always prevails in the City Troop,
could be more striking than the one then witnessed by a score of other
commands, which came rushing, all disorganized, to the scene. While the
men in other companies were hesitating and wondering what to do, the
City Troop broke into regular squads, under the command of the
non-commissioned officers, and began methodical relief work. Every rifle
was saved. Regular army officers on the spot warmly complimented Captain
Groome upon the showing made by his men.

That afternoon Captain Groome, with Major Flagler and Major McMichael,
of General Wilson's staff, rode out from Ponce into the country looking
for a suitable camp site. The heat was intense, the dust thick, and a
place which would fulfill all requirements was not easily found. The
officers kept at it, however, until satisfied; although they were in a
state of complete exhaustion upon their return. Indeed, all the men's
faces for the first few days in Puerto Rico showed plainly the
enervating influence of the climate, to which they could not easily get
accustomed. Their tasks done, the Troopers would throw themselves down
upon bales of hay, piles of boards or even the pavements, too weary to
care where they were or how they looked. Men famed for their strength
and endurance at home, would sit by the hour with their heads in their
hands, rendered listless and weak by the heat and moisture.

That night again the men spread their blankets on the stones outside the
cathedral. A citizen placed his front porch at the disposal of the Troop
as a guard house. This furnished protection for the sentries on duty
from the heavy showers which invariably occurred about midnight.

On Saturday morning more horses were unloaded, and in the afternoon all
the men who had mounts rode out beyond Ponce, on the highway which leads
to Barros, to the camp selected by Captain Groome. While riding along
the Troopers excited great interest among the natives because of the
size of the American horses. In Puerto Rico all the horses are small,
mere ponies in fact, less than fourteen hands high, and the islanders
never failed to stare with open mouth at the City Troops handsome greys.
The size of the Troopers themselves also caused many expressions of
amazement, and as some of the broad-shouldered men in the second and
third platoons passed, the spectators would make admiring signs with
their hands, indicating the men's height and breadth.

The first trial of the horses proved that the sea voyage had done them
good in one respect. Many were suffering from distemper when they left
Newport News, but there was not a case noticed after the animals landed.
They were thin, stiff and sore, however, so that they were led over most
of the six miles leading to the new camp.

Those Troopers still without horses remained aboard the "Massachusetts"
unloading the seemingly endless string of horses and mules, and their
energetic efforts were crowned with success late Saturday night, when
the last of the animals were landed. Sunday morning was cool, but
cloudy--and as the last detail of City Troopers were packing and
saddling their horses, they heard the voice of a priest conducting early
mass in the tiny cathedral close by. The cavalrymen walked with their
horses' bridles over their arms. As they passed through Ponce they
encountered many scowling faces, but once in the country a majority of
the natives shouted a welcome. By noon they reached the spot chosen for
a camp; the Troopers were together again in a magnificent bit of
country, blue mountains everywhere, and brilliant, luxurious foliage on
all sides. "Hazel" manifested a striking fondness for all things Puerto
Rican, and had to be tied in a rather barren spot to prevent
overfeeding.

Reveille sounded at four o'clock Monday morning, and the packing of
saddles began at once. At seven o'clock the order came to join with H
Troop as escort to a train of one thousand mules, headquarter horses,
signal and ambulance corps, and as quickly as possible to join General
Brooke's command at Guayama. Mounted for the first time, off the Troop
went, retracing its steps through a glorious stretch of country to
Ponce, where on the main southern road the long supply train for General
Brooke's army was overtaken. Thus hampered, the march became slow. It
was terrifically hot, and the dust blew about in clouds. At one o'clock
the cavalrymen passed through Santa Isabella, where a half hours stop
was made to bring up the stragglers of the mule train, and to take a
turn at the hard tack and dried beef.

Then the march began through the enemy's country, the City Troop acting
as advance guard, and H Troop, of the Sixth Regular Cavalry, acting as
rear guard. Flankers were sent out, and the advance guard was frequently
informed by natives that quite a large number of Spaniards were
retreating a short distance ahead. The City Troopers came upon many
signs of the enemy's presence along the road, and at four o'clock the
Troops went into camp at the Hacienda Fortuna, a rich sugar plantation.
An outpost of City Troopers was immediately established, and all barns
and outbuildings were thoroughly searched before night.

Just before midnight a hurry call sent six City Troopers and six H
Troopers, under Captain Groome and Lieutenant Ryan, scouring a
neighboring cane brake for Spaniards, spies having reported their
presence there in force. No lurking Dons were found, however, and at
four o'clock the next morning camp was broken and the march resumed in
dead earnest. The City Troopers acted as rear guard to the train. No
American troops had passed through this part of the island before, and
as it was said to be a Spanish stronghold, great watchfulness was
observed. On both sides of the ragged road were cane breaks and great
growths of underbrush, and it was a tiresome ride and no small task
looking out for Spaniards, stubborn mules and foolish drivers.

Late that afternoon a camp was reached at the foot of the Caney
mountains, on the Hacienda Magdelane, an English estate. There the two
cavalry troops and the tremendous mule train went into camp again.
They had passed through Selinas in the early afternoon.

[Illustration: CAMP AT ARROYO.]

In the blackness of Wednesday morning the roll was called at 3.30, and
an hour later saw the march resumed, with the City Troopers acting as
advance guard. Lieutenant McFadden commanded the advance guard and
Corporal Merrill commanded the point. Reports of native spies left no
doubt as to the serious character of the situation, and the march was of
necessity slow. Every two or three miles the sight of small bands of
armed Spaniards would cause a halt, while out the skirmishers would go
to report.

About nine o'clock the point came to a twelve-foot bridge, freshly torn
up. This was quickly replaced and on the column moved. About 10.30 a few
shots were heard, which fact was at once reported to Captain Groome, who
gave orders for the Troop to advance at a gallop. In a few minutes the
point came in sight, talking with armed men, and like a flash the word
came back through the chain of advance supports that the Troop had at
last reached General Brooke's outposts, the Fourth Illinois.

Orders were given Captain Groome to proceed through Guayama, toward
Arroyo, one mile from which place the Troop went into camp. A few hours
later H Troop came up and camped alongside.

Thursday, August 11th, was a day of wild rumors. All sorts of movements
were about to take place, according to report, and a majority of the
plans had some Trooper, who believed in them. From the Philadelphia
men's camp a Spanish blockhouse could be seen on the mountains two miles
away. Several batteries, encamped near the Troop, wheeled into position
in the morning and indulged in target practice. Many of the Troopers
witnessed this stirring sight, and returned to camp with the
announcement that the practice was superb. The daily rain was unusually
heavy, and the men turned in early to fight the bugs, mosquitoes and
stifling heat.

All conditions were unfavorable to comfort at Arroyo. Great clouds would
come drifting in from the sea toward the mountains, and rain and wind
would beat in at one side of the Troop's shelter tents. Within an hour
the clouds would come rolling back to the sea, and the wind and rain
would besiege the opposite side of the tents. Thursday night the
Troopers slept in soaking blankets, inches deep in rain and mud. Nothing
but good-natured chaffing over the discomforts was heard however.

Friday afternoon the Troopers went in a body to the beach, about a mile
away, and took a dip in the Caribbean Sea. Rumors of an engagement close
at hand kept growing in force, and when a careful inspection of carbines
took place upon their return from bathing, the Troopers were fully
prepared for the orders which came to them at retreat that evening, to
be ready to move in heavy marching order at 5.30 in the morning. This
was formal notice that a battle would take place on the morrow, and
members of the City and H Troops offered mutual congratulations.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE FIGHT THAT FAILED.


Much has been written and more said about "the night before the battle."
Then it is, that sentiment is supposed to seize upon a soldier; thoughts
and talks of home, wife and mother are proper, and in fact necessary,
according to all writers of fiction. But even in the face of this
traditional outline of a soldier's last hours before an engagement, it
must be written that the City Troopers retained their characteristic
coolness. On that Friday evening a close observer of the Troopers' camp
would have supposed that the men were upon familiar ground, and that a
battle was months in the future, instead of being as sure to take place
on the morrow as anything could be in human foresight.

All down the line the saddle packing went on amid jests and laughter.
Had the Troopers been preparing for a homeward journey they could not
have seemed more light-hearted. Few men spoke of the coming battle at
all, yet it was in every heart, and many men felt a lump rise in their
throats as the popular First Sergeant blurted out these words: "In a
scrap like this the cavalry is sure to be heavily engaged. A good many
of us are bound to be stopped, and, good God! just think of digging a
hole to chuck one of this outfit in."

Captain Groome paced in front of company headquarters for nearly an
hour, with only his inevitable cigar as a companion. Dozens of the men
watched him, and speculated as to his meditations. Lieutenants Browning
and McFadden passed through the camp several times, speaking with the
men on minor matters, and avoiding absolutely all talk of the coming
day. Later in the evening they wrote letters.

Within an hour after taps the heavy rumbling of artillery began to be
heard. Five batteries, numbering thirty guns, passed near the camp
during the hours between midnight and four o'clock, and many a sleepless
Trooper listened anxiously to the bumping, thumping and rattling as the
guns, caissons and ammunition wagons kept rolling by.

When the Troopers tumbled out at four o'clock it was pitch dark, and the
everlasting rain was descending in torrents. A few feeble glimmering
lanterns supplied just enough light to show the rain-filled plates, in
which bacon and potatoes floated unconcernedly about. Coffee was
consumed in quantities that only Troopers know how to master; and then,
in the midst of the darkness and flood, feeding, saddling and loading
of ox carts was accomplished. On this morning of battle little attention
had been paid to uniforming. Some men wore Khaiki breeches, others the
old familiar blue. Hats and caps of all varieties were seen, several men
wearing broad straw hats secured from the natives. All wore blue shirts
of various ages and conditions of cleanliness. Sleeves were rolled up,
and scarcely two men appeared in the same kind of boots. The closest
friends of the Troopers would never have recognized the rain-bedraggled
warriors as the same men who so often had shone resplendent in the
streets of Philadelphia as the guard of honor of The President or
distinguished soldiers.

At last the command came, "Prepare to mount," and a moment later the
cavalrymen had swung into the saddle, where they found themselves seated
in good-sized puddles. The City Troop mounted ninety-five men and three
officers, the only absentees being Privates Wetherill and Rowland, on
sick report in Philadelphia; Brooke, in the Red Cross Hospital at Ponce,
and Trumpeter Brossman, in a hospital at Guayama.

Captain Groome, in a blue silk shirt, Khaiki breeches, rode at the head
of the column, while on his left rode Lieutenant Browning, in full
Khaiki, and Lieutenant Ryan, commander of H Troop of the Sixth regular
cavalry. Behind them came H Troop's trumpeter and the City Troop's
faithful trumpeter, Dick Singer. Then the head of the column, Sergeant
Wagner, with the guidon, and Sergeant Thibault and Private Bower leading
the long line of two's. Each saddle had a poncho strapped upon it, the
carbine swung from the off side, saber opposite to the carbine; each man
wore a belt of one hundred Krag-Jorgensen cartridges, with his revolver
strung in his belt. On the cantle behind, each man carried his blanket
wrapped in his half of a shelter tent.

[Illustration: EN ROUTE TO THE BATTLEFIELD. MILITARY ROAD FROM GUAYAMA
TO CANEY.]

Without warning the sun came out in all its fury, and then occurred the
phenomena, often witnessed there, of rain falling from an apparently
clear sky. The hot sun made the rain come down much like steam, but it
ceased to fall after a few minutes.

At six o'clock the two troops were in Guayama, and halted by the Custom
House, while Captain Groome reported to General Brooke for orders. Half
an hour was spent by the Troopers watching the passing of artillery,
infantry, hospital and signal corps men. Sometime before seven o'clock
Captain Groome returned with orders to go into line of battle and cover
the left flank of the Americans. Simultaneous with the movement of the
cavalry the entire brigade of four regiments, consisting of the Third
Ohio, Third Illinois, Fourth Pennsylvania and Sixth Illinois, were also
off. As the Troop passed along the road at a trot it overtook the Sixth
Illinois and Fourth Pennsylvania. The infantry received orders to let
the cavalry through, and the mass of soldiers parted. Away at a trot,
between this friendly gauntlet of cheering infantrymen, the Troopers
rode amid all sorts of shouts. The foot soldiers thought the cavalry was
going in to deploy as skirmishers and start the fight, so they gave the
Troopers a good, hearty American cheer, and from each company came
encouraging yells, such as: "Give them bullets, boys!" "We will follow
you!" And the Fourth Pennsylvania gave three times three for the City
Troop and Old Pennsylvania. All in all it was a moment that the
Philadelphia riders will not soon forget.

The Spanish earthworks, as nearly as could be made out by the Troopers,
were something in the form of an S. After a two-mile ride the fresh dirt
on these trenches was plainly visible, and it seemed that a few minutes
more riding would bring the Troop within the range of the Spaniards.
Suddenly the course turned abruptly to the left and the Troop came upon
Major General Brooke and his staff, standing on a little hill to the
right of the road, waiting for the artillery to get into position.
Captain Groome reported to General Brooke, and received orders to take
the two troops of cavalry into an adjoining field, to dismount the men
and unsaddle the horses. There, surrounded by beautiful tropical flowers
and heavy foliage, the men awaited the boom of the cannon, which had
been agreed upon as the signal for opening the battle.

Strangely out of place looked the grim weapons and warlike trappings in
that garden spot. Beneath the towering palm and rubber trees, amid
hundreds of crimson blossoms the Philadelphia men gathered in groups to
discuss the outlook, while their horses grazed at their feet.

It began to rain again about eleven o'clock, a dark, steaming drizzle.
In the midst of it Mr. Davies, of the New York _Sun_, came over to
inspect the cavalry. He informed Captain Groome that Major Redmond, in
charge of the artillery, had just announced that he would open fire in a
half hour.

A look down the line of the City Troopers at this crucial moment
revealed still an absolutely amazing indifference to the conflict now
all but upon them--most of their men were asleep. The three officers
were sitting by the roadside chatting together a couple of hundred feet
away from the remainder of the Troop. At the head of the column, with
his arm through his bridle rein, lay Sergeant Wagner asleep. Sergeant
Martin and Private Robb were entertaining a dozen or so of the men with
an argument as to the relative charms of a Philadelphia girl and a
native girl, "fat, black and greasy, with a cigar stuck in her face." A
little farther back, sitting on the ground, was Harry Riley, holding the
big bay mule he had been riding since reaching the island; he was quiet,
but the mule was not. Next came a group composed of Billy Bates, whose
beautiful little grey was lying at his feet like a faithful dog, Charlie
Smith, Hecksher, Cliff Pemberton, Harry Godfrey, Bromley Wharton, the
two Warden boys, Fred Neilson and "Doug" Jacobs. Charlie Smith was
inviting them all to lunch with him on the mountain where the Spaniards
were encamped. Coulston and Woodman were talking Spanish to each other,
and Mills and Wheeler were asleep. Way in front were Jim Starr and Frank
Bower, standing on a knoll and trying to see the batteries get into
position, while Carroll Smyth, George McFadden and Charlie Brinton went
about among the different groups distributing crackers.

In a nearby field a corps of field telegraph operators could be seen
stringing their wires from tree to tree, and at times making use of the
wire fences for continuing their lines.

About one o'clock Lieutenant Reynolds rode into camp at a furious rate
and gave an order to General Brooke, who was standing in the road about
three hundred yards to the right of the Troopers camp. At once the
assembly sounded, and with many a sternly muttered, "At last," the City
Troopers mounted and took their places.

Lieutenant Browning rode up, and all ears were strained to catch the
order to advance. The lieutenant looked as if he was thoroughly
disgusted with life, as in a calm tone he said: "The men will fall in
and ride back to camp; General Miles has ordered all military operations
to cease."

"Oh, hell!" exclaimed a Trooper near the lieutenant, throwing down his
carbine as the pent up disappointment and suspense in his heart sought
expression almost involuntarily. This forcible exclamation, and more
particularly the tone in which it was uttered, seemed to represent the
feelings of the entire Troop.

Listlessly the men mounted, grumbled "one, two, three, four," and sought
a new camping ground at Hacienda De Placida. A more downcast lot of men
than turned in that Saturday night, of August 13th, would be hard to
find. By night it was told through camp how a messenger, on a played-out
horse, had reached General Brooke with the order from General Miles,
just as the gunners of Battery B, of Pittsburgh, had their hands on the
lanyards awaiting General Brooke's orders to pull and give the signal
for attack. Mr. Davies, of the New York _Sun_, afterward told Captain
Groome that General Brooke had given the messenger a scanty welcome, and
had remarked that he might have spared his horse a little, although his
haste undoubtedly saved many lives.




CHAPTER IX.

AFTER THE BATTLE.


Sunday morning Captain Scott brought an order to Captain Groome to send
a commissioned officer, a sergeant and six privates to establish an
outpost two miles beyond the farthest infantry outpost, and to maintain
a flag of truce. This outpost was necessary because of the general fear
of Spanish treachery. The Spaniards had a white flag flying over their
blockhouse, but there was no telling at what moment they might pull it
down and charge into the American ranks; so the watchers at the outpost
were entrusted with an important duty. The detail first selected was in
charge of Lieutenant Browning, who took with him Sergeant Glendinning,
Corporal Thayer and Privates S. and W. Goodman, Strawbridge, Wheeler,
Mills and Ridgeway. Captains Scott and Groome accompanied the detail to
select the ground for the outpost.

As the men were about to start, it was found that they had nothing to
serve as a flag of truce. Captain Groome informed Captain Scott that the
Troop was just out of such articles, and for a moment the officers were
at a loss to know what to do. A handkerchief was too small and too
frail, but suddenly Lieutenant Browning had an inspiration. His wife had
supplied the officers' mess with some fine, large napkins. One of these
was therefore pressed into service as a flag of truce, and the
detachment rode forth. It was early morning, and the rain was pelting
down as usual.

On through the town, along the road the troops had tramped ready for the
fray, around the mountain side, past the place Rodney had planted his
batteries, past the pickets, past the last infantry outpost, under a
ridge dotted with Spanish sentries, the detachment, with the now
historic napkin, went on until, coming around a sharp turn in the road,
they saw a mile and a half across the valley the Spanish outpost with
its flag of truce already up.

Then the little band of Troopers halted and chopped down a stout
sapling. To this they lashed the flag of truce for the American army,
and set up the pole in a little clearing. Two Troopers were left on
guard, while the rest retired a couple of hundred yards around a bend in
the road and put up the little dog tents, beginning at once the routine
work of a vidette outpost. The flag was pitched squarely upon the top of
the mountain, so that it rained there continually, but the
discomforts were swallowed up in a sense of the responsibility felt by
all on duty there.

[Illustration: "CAMP ESPERANCA." GUAYAMA IN THE DISTANCE.]

The six men were divided in pairs, and each pair stood guard by the
fluttering flag as vidette for two hours and then rested four,
throughout the day and night. Through field glasses the Spanish troops
could be plainly seen standing on guard or idling about the trenches.

Thirty minutes after the flag first went up a group of Spanish officers
were seen approaching. As they came nearer it was plain that the party
consisted of a general and six aids. Captain Scott advanced to meet the
Spaniards, and was informed that the general carried a message for
General Brooke. The Spaniard declined to entrust the message to Captain
Scott. Captain Groome was informed of the difficulty, and at once
galloped back to the American camp, returning in a short time with
General Sheridan and others of General Brooke's staff. After much
formality the Spanish general delivered his message to General Sheridan
and ceremoniously retired.

At eight o'clock the next day Lieutenant Ryan and a like detachment from
H Troop relieved Lieutenant Browning. The next day Lieutenant McFadden,
with Sergeant Bates, Corporal Butcher and Privates Green, Newbold,
Wilson, Fell, Woodman and Armstrong relieved the H men. The day
following, at eight o'clock, Lieutenant Heiberg and his detachment of
regulars, and relieving them on the morrow went Lieutenant Browning,
Sergeant Smith, Corporal Thibault and Privates Jacobs, Wharton, Neilson,
Barclay, Cramp and Shober. Thus, as in all cavalry work for General
Brooke's army at Guayama, H Troop and the City Troop took share and
share alike.

Meantime the Troopers, in camp near Guayama, had little besides routine
duty to keep them occupied. The rainy season was on hand with a
vengeance. Day and night, with but slight intervals of clear weather, it
rained and poured. Good-sized creeks would be formed in a half hour by
the floods of rain, and these little streams seemed always aimed
straight at the Troopers' camp. To change clothing was useless, and at
times it was impossible to obtain dry garments. Flannel shirts would be
spread out in the hot sun to dry at eleven o'clock, and at half-past
they would be lying in pools of water, getting more thoroughly drenched
each minute.

Since leaving the United States, a wonderful change had taken place in
the appearance of the City Troopers. At the time of sailing from Newport
News, all the cavalrymen were bronzed and weather beaten. After but
little more than two weeks in southern Puerto Rico, exposed daily to
natural steam baths and kept in a constant state of perspiration, the
men were bleached out. Faces once ruddy became as white as paper, and
all the men had lost rapidly in weight.

[Illustration: AT THE BEACH NEAR GUAYAMA.]

The horses, too, showed the effect of the tropical climate. When herded
together there was not one head that did not droop, and their eyes were
without spirit. The change in men and beasts had come quickly, but until
after it was known that hostilities were over the Troopers had been too
busy to notice the change in one another.

Each day the horses had to be herded, and the tidings that an animal had
broken away and must be pursued was always hailed with delight, as the
chase was a welcome break in the slow camp life.

As there was a splendid beach about three miles from the camp at
Guayama, and about the same distance from Arroyo, Captain Groome issued
orders to the City Troopers for one platoon to bathe in the morning,
each day, and a second platoon in the afternoon. At the beach the trees
and foliage extended clear to the water's edge. In some places the water
was deep right from the tree line, but there were three or four sand
bars that extended way out, so that a bather could walk as far out in
the water at some points as at Atlantic City. There was always a heavy
surf at the beach, that made bathing a good sport.

It was also great fun to take the horses into the surf. At first the
greys did not take kindly to surf bathing, but under the wise guidance
of their riders they soon were taught that waves would not hurt them,
and in some of the deep water places they quickly learned to take long
swims with the Troopers.

In all their manoeuvres in Puerto Rico, the City Troopers were divided
into four platoons. No drills were held, but, as a matter of record, the
Roster of the Troop at this period of the campaign is here given,
passing from right to left in the line:

    Captain, John C. Groome.

    First Lieutenant, Edward Browning.

    Second Lieutenant, J. Frank McFadden.

    FIRST PLATOON.

    _Right Squad._--Sergeant, Frederic Thibault; Privates, Frank Bower,
    Alfred Pardee, Alfred Bright, Thomas Cadwalader, H. Percy
    Glendinning, Thomas Robb, Jr., Henry J. Wetherill, T. Wallis
    Huidekoper, Edward Gregg; Corporal, J. Houston Merrill.

    _Left Squad._--Privates, Edward E. Stetson, Charles Wheeler, Edward
    Rawle, William I. Forbes, William West, Williams Biddle Cadwalader,
    Charles C. Brinton, Frank A. Janney, James De Kay, Edward Cann;
    Corporal, Adolph G. Rosengarten.


    SECOND PLATOON.

    _Right Squad._--Sergeant, William H. Hart; Privates, Robert Fell,
    William Farr, Samuel K. Reeves, Thomas J. Orbison, Samuel Goodman,
    Jr., Henry S. Godfrey, Clifford Pemberton, Jr., Maitland Armstrong,
    George Wilson; Corporal, Gustav A. Heckscher.

    _Left Squad._--Privates, N. B. Warden, Stuart Wheeler, M. G.
    Rosengarten, J. Warren Coulston, Jr., Charles Coates, James M.
    Rhodes, Jr., Francis C. Green, John Conygham Stevens, John
    Zimmerman, Norman Risley; Corporal, Samuel Chew.


    THIRD PLATOON.

    _Right Squad._--Sergeant, William E. Bates; Privates, Edward Lord,
    Henry G. Woodman, C. King Lennig, Trenchard Newbold, Thomas Ridgway,
    Benjamin B. Reath, Carroll Smyth, James Starr, Edward Brooke;
    Corporal, George C. Thayer.

    _Left Squad._--Privates, John Strawbridge, William E. Goodman, Jr.,
    William G. Warden, Jr., George L. Farnum, J. Clifford Rosengarten;
    Hospital Steward, William H. Cornell; Privates, S. Frederick Mills,
    Francis Rawle, Edward B. Cornell; Corporal, Henry C. Butcher, Jr.


    FOURTH PLATOON.

    _Right Squad._--Sergeant, Charles H. Smith; Privates, George H.
    McFadden, Jr., Harry C. Barclay, Reginald H. Shober, Francis L.
    Cramp, Carroll Hodge, H. Austin Smith, Ward Brinton, Edward Rogers,
    Charles B. Lewis; Corporal, Francis A. Thibault.

    _Left Squad._--Privates, Herman A. Denckla, Henry Drinker Riley,
    Edward C. Taylor, W. B. Duncan Smith, Bromley Wharton, Lightner
    Witmer, Frederick B. Neilson, Douglas H. Jacobs; Commissary
    Corporal, A. Mercer Biddle; Corporal, Alexander W. Wister, Jr.

       Private Ranson, Farrier.
       Private Newlin, Cook.
       Private Kirk, Cook.
       Private Gibbons, Saddler.
       Private Halbustadt, Wagoner.
       Private Nilon, Blacksmith.
       Trumpeter, Brossman.
       Trumpeter, R. Singer.
       Stable Sergeant, John Wagner, Jr.
       Ordnance Sergeant, Robert E. Glendinning.
       Quartermaster-Sergeant, Dr. William C. Lott.
       First Sergeant, J. Willis Martin.

While the Troopers were in camp at Guayama, under orders from General
Brooke, they changed their old style of camp life a little by using a
number of large hospital tents, loaned by General Brooke's headquarters,
which were occupied by six or seven men each, instead of the little dog
tents intended for two men. The larger tents made life more bearable
during the heavy rains, and were greatly appreciated by all.

Although each duty was taken up with uniform cheerfulness, and nothing
was slighted, it soon became evident that for the first time there was a
unanimous desire on the part of the City Troopers, now that peace was
assured, to get home as quickly as possible. So there was great
rejoicing when, on Thursday morning, August 25th, Captain Groome
received orders to proceed at once to Ponce with the Troop, there to
take passage for New York. Just before this order came, a detachment of
Troopers had gone from camp on a hunt after Spanish guerrillas. They
were promptly recalled by General Brooke's command.

The packing of saddles and stowing away of tents was attended to with a
will, and on Friday morning the march of thirty-seven miles to Ponce was
begun. This distance was to be made in two stages, as marching was slow
at the best with skirmishers out, and the weather was so sultry that for
most of the distance the men trudged along on foot, leading their
horses.

Although buoyed up by the prospect of soon seeing home and friends
again, the Troopers found the first day's march the hardest work they
had undertaken since enlistment. Spaniards could be seen in the hills
all about, and a close outlook had to be kept. The march led through
deep cuts in the road, where there was not a breath of air stirring,
where the terrific heat seemed determined to beat to the ground all
living things that ventured to brave its fury. Rain--hot, steam-like
rain--alternated with the blazing sun, and uniforms were one hour
drenched with rain, the next hour dried by the sun, and a few moments
later soaking wet with perspiration.

At midday a halt was made at the same plantation visited on the way out.
There was a grove of what the Troopers styled "United States trees," and
in its shade they lay around and ate canned stuff and dried their
clothes. Then the tramp was resumed with all its fatigue, and at night a
camp fire was built on another sugar plantation. Three of the men living
there spoke English, and the first use of it they made was to notify
Captain Groome that a number of the laborers were sick with small pox,
and that the spot selected for a camp was particularly infected.

The Captain had quite a consultation with various people before
selecting the final camping ground, and the weary Troopers had no sooner
attended to their horses than they dropped off to sleep. Like dead men
they lay in their blankets, totally oblivious of the swarms of
mosquitoes which gathered about them, or of the land crabs, little
snakes and other queer creatures that all night long crawled over their
bodies in a familiarly inquiring manner.

[Illustration: RETURN ALONG THE ROAD FROM GUAYAMA TO PONCE.]

The second day began with a cool shower, which left the atmosphere in
a splendid condition, and the advance was more rapid. While all the men
had been supplied with Khaiki uniforms, it was noticeable that on this
last day's march in the enemy's country a majority clung to the blue. A
short rest was taken at midday. Late in the afternoon the heavens began
to let loose a flood of rain, and streams sprang up beneath the feet of
the cavalrymen. Twenty minutes after the Troopers passed the bridge
leading to Playa de Ponce, the structure was swept away by a raging
torrent one hundred feet wide. At nightfall the City Troopers had just
put up their small tents and gone into camp for the night, when, at 9.30
P. M., the signal service sent word to Captain Groome that the tents
would have to come up and the men get away quickly, as a river would
soon be rolling over the spot where the Troopers were preparing to turn
in. Indeed, by the time the warning came, trickling streams innumerable
were sweeping through the field below the camp. Assembly was sounded,
and in forty-five minutes tents were struck, bags packed, horses
saddled, four wagons loaded, and the Troop moved out. When the tents
were first pitched, it was the intention of the Troopers to name the
camp after Hugh Craig, Jr., but this idea was given up after the
message from the signal corps, and the name "_Mala Aqua_"--wicked
water--substituted. Mr. Craig's name was afterward bestowed upon the
last camp occupied by the Troopers on foreign soil.

No sheltered spot could be found that night after the retreat from the
oncoming river, so the Troopers philosophically wrapped themselves in
their blankets and lay down in the streets of Playa, unmindful of the
beating rain. Despite the downpour there were soon a number of fires
burning about the camp, for the Philadelphia men had become experts in
the art of getting a cheery blaze out of wet wood, and damp matches no
longer possessed any terrors.

While the men slept on the pavement, their horses were tied to logs
along the curb. Some of the Troopers induced their mounts to lie down
and be used as pillows. It was a strange sight, more picturesque than it
was comfortable for the men who made up the tableau. If any one incident
in the campaign could be said to illustrate better than another the
clean grit which actuated every move of the Troopers, this night spent
in the streets of Playa, amid drenching rain, would probably be selected
by a historian.

In the morning Captain Groome marched the Troopers into "Dolorales"
lumber yard, where the sheds, roofed over with galvanized iron, looked
extremely inviting to the rain-soaked men. Blankets were spread on the
top of lumber piles, under the roof, and perched up there the Troopers
were sheltered from the alternate sun and showers.

For one week there was a hard struggle to kill time. There was nothing
to do but look after the horses, and no place to go. Several times
members of the Troop took carriage rides about the city, and had all the
points of interest explained by guides. Hope was high in the hearts of
officers and men alike that a start for Philadelphia could be made by
September 1st, but the first came and still no orders. Relief was close
at hand, however, for on Friday, September 2d, orders came to turn the
Troop's horses and equipments over to the headquarter officers at Ponce,
and to embark the Troopers upon the transport "Mississippi," which was
lying a half mile out in the harbor.

Before turning over the horses to other hands, the old greys were given
a careful rub down, and then a thorough cleaning was bestowed upon
halters, bridles, carbines, scabbards, sabers, pistols and holsters. The
Troopers were complimented upon the condition of their mounts, for they
came out of the campaign much the best of any other horses, although
admittedly they had been given the hardest work to do.

While there was naturally much regret expressed by the cavalrymen at
parting with the horses and equipments, which had formed so close a part
of their lives during the summer, yet there was a bright side to the
matter, inasmuch as the Troopers on their homeward trip were saved most
of their hard work. No longer were they obliged to feed and water their
horses twice a day, and do stable duty each morning; they were also rid
of all the tugging on and off of lighters, transports and trains of
saddles and equipments, and they were through spending their spare
moments polishing up the numerous small belongings of a Trooper. In the
turning over of all these things there was a great relief.

All day Friday A and C Troops, of New York; the Governor's and Sheridan
Troops, of Pennsylvania; and Pennsylvania A Battery, loaded the
transport with their horses. Finally at six o'clock in the afternoon,
the City Troop, their canvas and commissary having been lightered to the
ship, fell in and marched to the dock. At eight o'clock Captain Groome
ordered them on a big lighter, and drawn by the tug "Sarah," of
Philadelphia, they went out in the harbor to the "Mississippi." There,
with blanket rolls over one shoulder, and haversacks and saddlebags
over the other, they tumbled up the ladder to the deck of the slow, but
comparatively commodious transport. Not until midnight did General
Wilson's headquarter horses get aboard, and the vessel was soon
afterward steering for New York. No demonstration was made during the
embarking of the troops. The cavalrymen were too tired to do any
cheering themselves, even at the thought of home. The natives about the
dock did some cheering, but as they were always ready to hurrah over
anything, their yells did not particularly inspire the departing
soldiers.

The City Troop had its quarters forward on the "Mississippi," with A
Battery alongside and A Troop on the deck below. This was pleasant all
around, as the New York and Philadelphia Troopers were the best of
friends, and in addition the Troopers had many friends in the
Philadelphia battery.

For this ocean trip of one thousand, three hundred and ninety miles the
City Troopers were better prepared than on their voyage to Ponce. Of
course, there were great hardships to be endured, but the commissary had
laid in a supply of ice, so that the drinking water could be kept at a
reasonable temperature, and the men had gained enough experience to
hustle for good sleeping places on deck and not bother with the
hammocks.

The old transport averaged about two hundred miles a day, which seemed
particularly slow to the impatient Troopers. At the time the
"Mississippi" had been forty-eight hours out, it became clear that the
sea voyage was doing all the cavalrymen a vast deal of good; the
unhealthy pallor, induced by tropical weather, began to wear off, and
the men felt that they would be in good condition to receive the welcome
which they knew was awaiting them.

Daily routine aboard ship was established as follows: Reveille at 6
o'clock, stables at 6.30, mess at 7, sick at 8, fatigue at 8.30, guard
mount at 9, mess at 12, and again at 6, tattoo at 9, and taps at 9.30.

Fair weather remained with the "Mississippi" throughout the entire trip.
Guidons of each troop aboard were affixed to the foremast head.

[Illustration: HACIENDA CARMEN.]




CHAPTER X.

HOME AGAIN.


From the time the Jersey coast was sighted the Troopers began to realize
how glad they really were to get back home. Early on the morning of
Saturday, September 10th, the "Mississippi" passed Sandy Hook, and was
soon cleaving the waters of New York Bay. It was rather misty, and
objects at any great distance were very obscure. The Philadelphia
cavalrymen were often obliged to smile at the airs which some of the
members of the New York and Brooklyn troops assumed as they found
themselves in familiar waters. The men of Gotham boasted much of the
fine reception which they felt sure was in store for them, and looked
rather pityingly upon the Philadelphia cavalrymen. When, through the
mist, a tug was made out, with flags flying, approaching the
"Mississippi" at full speed, several of the New Yorkers pointed to it
and said to the Quaker City men, "Here comes the advance guard of our
escort."

While the tug was still too much surrounded by mist to make out her
identity, there came floating from her deck the ringing notes of a
bugle. At the first sound the Philadelphia Troopers became all
attention, and a moment later the air of the Troop march--strains known
to City Troopers for two generations--could be clearly distinguished.

"It's our friends," shouted the City Troopers with glee, while the New
York riders did not attempt to conceal their surprise at the fact that
citizens of their city had been out-generaled by the Philadelphia
visitors in the effort to give the first greeting to the returning
Troopers.

But while the later recruits among the Troopers shouted "It's our
friends," the older members cried out, "It's Ellis Pugh," for they knew
almost by instinct from whose lips had come the welcoming blast. Dick
Singer was upon the deck with his bugle in a twinkling, and tooted back
a response. Nearer and nearer the two vessels approached, until at last
the two buglers joined together in the long final note.

Then other tugs appeared--six in all--five of which were filled with
enthusiastic Philadelphians. The Troopers crowded to the rail and
occupied all points of vantage in the rigging. Up the bay the transport
and her shrieking escort continued their course. From the whistle of
every vessel met there came a welcome, until the din became almost
deafening.

While the health officer boarded the transport, friends on the tugs and
troop ship yelled greetings back and forth. A port hole in the
"Mississippi" was opened, and an avalanche of boxes and bottles poured
into the hands of the soldiers aboard. The moment quarantine was raised,
there was a general scramble of male visitors onto the deck of the
transport, followed by a whirlwind of affectionate greetings. Fathers
proudly hugged their brawny, dirt-stained sons; chums and brothers shook
each others' hands off.

Soon there came along another tug, and Governor Hastings and Major
Richardson clambered over the rail amid loud cheers of the
Pennsylvanians. And so the big reception went on until the "Mississippi"
pulled into dock at Jersey City. There the cavalrymen looked down from
the high decks upon a sea of men and women, the great majority of whom
were Philadelphians. The hospital train was run in on a siding right
under the ship, and the sick were unloaded with but little delay.

Meanwhile, Captain Groome had accepted an invitation from the
Philadelphia Councils Committee, to participate in a public reception
upon the Troop's arrival home, and word to that effect was telegraphed
to Mayor Warwick. The Troopers partook of a light lunch before
unloading their camp equipage, and after two hours hard work the last
piece of canvas was loaded on the cars, and late in the afternoon they
finally found themselves rolling rapidly homeward.

In the New York _Sun_, the day after the City Troop's arrival, there
appeared the following paragraph by a reporter of reputation, who had
been in Puerto Rico during the campaign:

    "In commissariat, general intelligence and knowledge of tactics, the
    First City Troop of Philadelphia outranked any volunteers I saw at
    the front. They were the only company to take a water filter with
    them, so were the only men to drink pure water. They were the only
    soldiers with forethought enough to provide salt, mustard and the
    other little things that help make army rations palatable. Then they
    knew how to cook. They kept their camp clean. They kept their horses
    in good condition, in fact they neglected nothing, and shirked no
    duty, no matter how disagreeable. So much for the dude soldier."

It was eight o'clock when the train bearing the City Troopers, every man
ready and fit for duty, came puffing into the Broad Street Station.
Outside the building and along Broad, Chestnut and Market Streets, the
route over which it had been planned to have the cavalrymen march, dense
throngs packed the sidewalks, and were only kept from the streets by
ropes in charge of hundreds of policemen.

[Illustration: SERGEANT'S CLUB AT GUAYAMA.]

Captain Groome was the first man to alight from the cars, and he was at
once requested by General Morrell and Director Riter to permit a street
parade of the command before going to Horticultural Hall, where a
banquet had been prepared. The Captain said his men would be pleased to
do anything the Reception Committee wished, and the line was immediately
formed for parade. Police horses had been secured and were on hand for
the Troopers.

The procession was led by a file of mounted policemen and carriages
containing the Citizen's Reception Committee, which had gone to New York
to meet the Troop. Following them came the Third Regiment Band and the
Second City Troop. Last of all came the veterans in their Khaiki
uniforms, and cheer after cheer went up everywhere as they came into
view, mingled with enthusiastic shouts of "Here comes the Rough Riders!"

Up Broad Street, through an endless multitude, the procession moved,
through brilliant displays of fireworks and past brightly illuminated
residences. On Chestnut Street the scene was repeated with the added
effect of booming cannon from the roof of the Union Republican Club.
Down Chestnut to Eighth, and up Eighth to Market, and thence to the
City Hall, the Troop passed, and when Horticultural Hall was reached the
riders had the satisfaction of knowing that they had participated in the
greatest parade ever given by the Troop in its century and a quarter of
existence.

As the Troop drew up in front of the hall, amid wild cheering, the men
dismounted and turned the horses over to the mounted police. The men
then filed into the banquet room between lines of the Battery A men, who
stood at "Present arms." While standing at their designated seats Mayor
Warwick addressed the Troopers as follows:

"Welcome home! We are here to-night to greet you with all our hearts.
God bless you, and God keep you. The Republic is proud of you, and the
city thrown open to you."

While the cavalrymen were eating, their relations and friends crowded in
upon them. There was much laughing and much hand-shaking. The men had
all been granted a sixty-day furlough, and they took their time about
punishing the good things, leaving the hall at a late hour in groups of
two's and three's--home at last.

Within a short time after their return, and before their muster-out, the
Troopers participated in a number of interesting events. Several
receptions and dinners were given in their honor by individuals and
clubs, and the one hundred and twenty-fourth anniversary of the Troop's
organization was celebrated. The cavalrymen took a leading part in the
military parade, on the second day of the Jubilee Celebration, October
27th. President McKinley reviewed the parade, and as the tradition of
the Troop required that its members should act as the President's escort
while in the city, the following Honorary members of the Troop were
appointed to act in that capacity: Captain General E. Burd Grubb,
Captain Joseph Lapsley Wilson, Captain Edmund H. McCullough, First
Lieutenant James Rawle, Second Lieutenant Major J. Edward Carpenter,
Second Lieutenant Frank E. Patterson, Second Lieutenant Edward K.
Bispham, Cornet Charles E. Kelly, Cornet Richard Tilghman, Surgeon J.
William White, Surgeon John B. Shober, Surgeon Charles H. Frazier,
Quartermaster Hugh Craig, Jr.

All of these occurrences were joyous occasions, but one day in October
the Troopers were called upon to perform a duty which saddened every
heart. On that day, for the first time since the outbreak of
hostilities, there was a voice missing at roll call which would never
respond again. Stuart Wheeler had fallen a victim to typhoid fever,
contracted while in Puerto Rico, and to the grave of this lost comrade
the Troopers marched in silent sorrow to pay the last military respects.

Mr. Wheeler had seemed in good health upon his arrival in the United
States after the campaign, and, with several friends, had gone upon a
hunting trip in the Maine woods. There the fever seized him, and he died
a few days after his removal to a Boston hospital.

Of the departed young hero, the Troopers will ever speak with affection
and praise. In college he was an unusually earnest student, on the
athletic fields he won laurels that will long remain green, at home he
was a loving son and brother, with the Troop he showed the mettle of a
gallant soldier. He died for his country--as surely as though his body
had been found on a Puerto Rican battlefield, pierced with a Spanish
bullet.

At noon on the eleventh day of November, the City Troopers gathered at
their armory to bid farewell to the United States Volunteer service.
Their sixty-day furlough had expired, and while there was not one who
would have hesitated to re-enlist should need arise, it is safe to say
that none were sorry that the moment for ending their terms as warriors
had arrived. Six men were unable to be present because of sickness.

Lieutenant B. F. Hughes, of the Tenth U. S. Cavalry, was on hand to
muster-out the men, all of whom were first obliged to report to Doctors
Spelissy and Brinton for physical examinations.

For a week preceding Captain Groome had made every preparation
calculated to expedite the work, and before the men were drawn up for
roll call, all the muster-out rolls, the descriptive lists and discharge
papers had been prepared for the mustering officer. Even the
computations of pay for each man had been figured out. As soon as each
Trooper had received his physical examination he was dismissed until the
following Monday. On the morning of that day discharge papers and pay
were ready for all the Troopers, and so far as they were concerned the
war was over.

It was not until twenty days later that the Spanish Commissioners, in
Paris, agreed to accept the American terms, and surrendered to the
United States 240,110 square miles of territory, with a population
estimated at 9,500,000. A treaty of peace between the nations was then
prepared. Practically, however, peace had existed since that day in
August when but a few minutes separated the City Troopers' _bivouac_,
in a field of flowers, from a charge which would have made desolate
hundreds of homes.

[Illustration: Decoration]


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes: Typographical errors silently corrected except
those listed below. Spelling has been made consistent throughout where
the author's preference could be ascertained.

Page 16 "less than three hours consumed, in the Troopers case," added
apostrophe "in the Troopers' case".

Page 43 "from the headquarters mules would come an answering bray," added
apostrophe "headquarter's mules."

Page 43 "these sounds appealed to the Troopers sense of humor" added
apostrophe "Troopers' sense".

Page 53 "dodging under horses heads" added apostrophe "horses' heads".

Page 68 "with their horses bridles over their arms" added apostrophe
"horses' bridles".

Page 68 "indicating the mens heighth and breadth" changed to "men's
height".

Page 101 "brothers shook each others hands" added apostrophe "each
others' hands".






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Campaign of the First Troop
Philadelphia City Cavalry, by James Cooper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPAIGN OF THE FIRST TROOP ***

***** This file should be named 37755.txt or 37755.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/7/5/37755/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
