The Project Gutenberg EBook of Considerations on Religion and Public
Education, by Hannah More

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Considerations on Religion and Public Education

Author: Hannah More

Release Date: October 17, 2011 [EBook #37774]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONSIDERATIONS ON RELIGION ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Carla Foust, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





    CONSIDERATIONS
    ON
    RELIGION AND PUBLIC EDUCATION,
    WITH
    REMARKS
    ON THE _SPEECH_ OF
    _M. DUPONT_,
    DELIVERED IN THE
    NATIONAL CONVENTION
    OF
    FRANCE.
    TOGETHER WITH
    AN ADDRESS TO THE LADIES, &c.
    OF
    _GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND_.

    [Decoration]

    BY HANNAH MORE.

    FIRST _AMERICAN_ EDITION.

    PRINTED AT _BOSTON_,
    BY WELD AND GREENOUGH.
    SOLD at the MAGAZINE OFFICE, No. 49, State Street.
    MDCCXCIV.




[Decoration]

A PREFATORY ADDRESS TO THE LADIES, &c. of GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, IN
BEHALF OF THE FRENCH EMIGRANT CLERGY.

[Decoration]


If it be allowed that there may arise occasions so extraordinary, that
all the lesser motives of delicacy ought to vanish before them; it is
presumed that the present emergency will in some measure justify the
hardiness of an Address from a private individual, who, stimulated by
the urgency of the case, sacrifices inferior considerations to the
ardent desire of raising further supplies towards relieving a distress
as pressing as it is unexampled.

We are informed by public advertisement, that the large sums already so
liberally subscribed for the Emigrant Clergy, are almost exhausted.
Authentic information adds, that multitudes of distressed Exiles in the
island of Jersey, are on the point of wanting bread.

Very many to whom this address is made have already contributed. O let
them not be weary in well-doing! Many are making generous exertions for
the just and natural claims of the widows and children of our brave
seamen and soldiers. Let it not be said, that the present is an
_interfering_ claim. Those to whom I write, have bread enough, and to
spare. You, who fare sumptuously every day, and yet complain you have
little to bestow, let not this bounty be subtracted from another bounty,
but rather from some superfluous expense.

The beneficent and right minded want no arguments to be pressed upon
them; but I write to those of every description. Luxurious habits of
living, which really furnish the distressed with the fairest grounds for
application, are too often urged as a motive for withholding assistance,
and produced as a plea for having little to spare. Let her who indulges
such habits, and pleads such excuses in consequence, reflect, that by
retrenching _one_ costly dish from her abundant table, the superfluities
of _one_ expensive desert, _one_ evening's public amusement, she may
furnish at least a week's subsistence to more than one person,[A] as
liberally bred perhaps as herself, and who, in his own country, may have
often tasted how much more blessed it is to give than to receive--to a
minister of God, who has been long accustomed to bestow the necessaries
he is now reduced to solicit.

Even your young daughters, whom maternal prudence has not yet furnished
with the means of bestowing, may be cheaply taught the first rudiments
of charity, together with an important lesson of economy: They may be
taught to sacrifice a feather, a set of ribbons, an expensive ornament,
an idle diversion. And if they are thus instructed, that there is no
true charity without self denial, they will _gain_ more than they are
called upon to _give_: For the suppression of one luxury for a
charitable purpose, is the exercise of two virtues, and this without any
pecuniary expense.

Let the sick and afflicted remember how dreadful it must be, to be
exposed to sufferings, without one of the alleviations which mitigate
_their_ affliction. How dreadful it is to be without comforts, without
necessaries, without a home--_without a country_! While the gay and
prosperous would do well to recollect, how suddenly and terribly those
for whom we plead, were, by the surprising vicissitudes of life, thrown
from equal heights of gaiety and prosperity. And let those who have
husbands, fathers, sons, brothers, or friends, reflect on the
uncertainties of war, and the revolution of human affairs. It is only by
imagining the possibility of those who are dear to us being placed in
the same calamitous circumstances, that we can obtain an adequate
feeling of the woes we are called upon to commiserate.

In a distress so wide and comprehensive, many are prevented from giving
by that common excuse--"That it is but a drop of water in the ocean."
But let them reflect, that if all the individual drops were withheld,
there would be no ocean at all; and the inability to give much ought
not, on any occasion, to be converted into an excuse for giving nothing.
Even moderate circumstances need not plead an exemption. The industrious
tradesman will not, even in a political view, be eventually a loser by
his small contribution. The money raised is neither carried out of our
country, nor dissipated in luxuries, but returns again to the community;
to our shops and to our markets, to procure the bare necessaries of
life.

Some have objected to the difference of _religion_ of those for whom we
solicit. Such an objection hardly deserves a serious answer. Surely if
the superstitious Tartar hopes to become possessed of the courage and
talents of the enemy he slays, the Christian is not afraid of catching,
or of propagating the error of the sufferer he relieves.--Christian
charity is of no party. We plead not for their faith, but for their
wants. And let the more scrupulous, who look for desert as well as
distress in the objects of their bounty, bear in mind, that if these men
could have sacrificed their conscience to their convenience, they had
not now been in this country. Let us shew them the purity of _our_
religion, by the beneficence of our actions.

If you will permit me to press upon you such high motives (and it were
to be wished that in every action we were to be influenced by the
highest) perhaps no act of bounty to which you may be called out, can
ever come so immediately under that solemn and affecting description,
which will be recorded in the great day of account--_I was a stranger
and ye took me in_.----




[Decoration]

_The following is an exact Translation from a_ SPEECH _made in the
National Convention at Paris, on Friday the 14th of December, 1792, in a
Debate on the Subject of establishing Public Schools for the Education
of Youth, by Citizen_ DUPONT, _a Member of considerable Weight; and as
the Doctrines contained in it were received with unanimous Applause,
except from two or three of the Clergy, it may be fairly considered as
an Exposition of the Creed of that Enlightened Assembly. Translated
from_ Le Moniteur _of Sunday the 16th of December, 1792_.

[Decoration]

What! Thrones are overturned! Sceptres broken! Kings expire! And yet the
Altars of GOD remain! (Here there is a murmur from some Members; and the
Abbe ICHON demands that the person speaking may be called to order.)
Tyrants, in outrage to nature, continue to burn an impious incense on
those Altars! (Some murmurs arise, but they are lost in the applauses
from the majority of the Assembly.) The Thrones that have been reversed,
have left these Altars naked, unsupported, and tottering. A single
breath of enlightened reason will now be sufficient to make them
disappear; and if humanity is under obligations to the French nation for
the first of these benefits, the fall of Kings, can it be doubted but
that the French people, now sovereign, will be wise enough, in like
manner, to overthrow those Altars and _those Idols_ to which those Kings
have hitherto made them subject? _Nature_ and _Reason_, these ought to
be the gods of men! These are my gods! (Here the Abbe AUDREIN cried out,
"There is no bearing this;" and rushed out of the Assembly.--A great
laugh.) Admire _nature_--cultivate _reason_. And you, Legislators, if
you desire that the French people should be happy, make haste to
propagate these principles, and to teach them in your primary schools,
instead of those fanatical principles which have hitherto been taught.
The tyranny of Kings was confined to make their people miserable in this
life--but those other tyrants, the Priests, extend their dominion into
another, of which they have no other idea than of eternal punishments; a
doctrine which some men have hitherto had the good nature to believe.
But the moment of the catastrophe is come--all these prejudices must
fall at the same time. _We must destroy them, or they will destroy
us._--For myself, I honestly avow to the Convention, _I am an atheist_!
(Here there is some noise and tumult. But a great number of members cry
out, "What is that to us--you are an honest man!") But I defy a single
individual, among the twenty-four millions of Frenchmen, to make against
me any well grounded reproach. I doubt whether the Christians, or the
Catholics, of which the last speaker, and those of his opinion, have
been talking to us, can make the same challenge.--(Great applauses.)
There is another consideration--Paris has had great losses. It has been
deprived of the commerce of luxury; of that factitious splendour which
was found at courts, and invited strangers hither. Well! We must repair
these losses.--Let me then represent to you the times, that are fast
approaching, when our philosophers, whose names are celebrated
throughout Europe, PETION, SYEYES, CONDORCET, and others--surrounded in
our Pantheon, as the Greek philosophers where at Athens, with a crowd of
disciples coming from all parts of Europe, walking like the
Peripatetics, and teaching--this man, the system of the universe, and
developing the progress of all human knowledge; that, perfectioning the
social system, and shewing in our decree of the 17th of June, 1789, the
seeds of the insurrections of the 14th of July and the 10th of August,
and of all those insurrections which are spreading with such rapidity
throughout Europe--So that these young strangers, on their return to
their respective countries, may spread the same lights, and may operate,
_for the happiness of Mankind_, similar revolutions throughout the
world.

(Numberless applauses arose, almost throughout the whole Assembly, and
in the Galleries.)

[Decoration]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: Mr. Bowdler's letter states, that about Six Shillings a
week included the expenses of each Priest at Winchester.]




[Decoration]

REMARKS

ON THE

SPEECH of Mr. DUPONT,

ON THE SUBJECTS OF

Religion and Public Education.

[Decoration]


It is presumed that it may not be thought unseasonable at this critical
time to offer to the Public, and especially to the more religious part
of it, a few slight observations, occasioned by the late famous Speech
of Mr. Dupont, which exhibits the Confession of Faith of a considerable
Member of the French National Convention. Though the Speech itself has
been pretty generally read, yet it was thought necessary to perfix it to
these Remarks, lest such as have not already perused it, might, from an
honest reluctance to credit the existence of such principles, dispute
its authenticity, and accuse the remarks, if unaccompanied by the
Speech, of a spirit of invective and unfair exaggeration. At the same
time it must be confessed, that its impiety is so monstrous, that many
good men were of opinion it ought not to be made familiar to the minds
of Englishmen; for there are crimes with which even the imagination
should never come in contact.

But as an ancient nation intoxicated their slaves, and then exposed them
before their children, in order to increase their horror of
intemperance; so it is hoped that this piece of impiety may be placed in
such a light before the eyes of the Christian reader, that, in
proportion as his detestation is raised, his faith, instead of being
shaken, will be only so much the more strengthened.

This celebrated Speech, though delivered in an assembly of Politicians,
is not on a question of politics, but on one as superior as the soul is
to the body, and eternity to time. The object here, is not to dethrone
kings, but HIM by whom kings reign. It does not here excite the cry of
indignation that _Louis_ reigns, but that _the Lord God omnipotent
reigneth_.

Nor is this the declaration of some obscure and anonymous person, but an
exposition of the Creed of a public Leader. It is not a sentiment hinted
in a journal, hazarded in a pamphlet, or thrown out at a disputing club:
but it is the implied faith of the rulers of a great nation.

Little notice would have been due to this famous Speech, if it had
conveyed the sentiments of only _one_ vain orator; but it should be
observed, that it was heard, received, _applauded_, with two or three
exceptions only--a fact, which you, who have scarcely believed in the
existence of atheism, will hardly credit, and which, for the honour of
the eighteenth century, it is hoped that our posterity, being still more
unacquainted with such corrupt opinions, will reject as totally
incredible.

A love of liberty, generous in its principle, inclines some good men
still to savour the proceedings of the National Convention of France.
They do not yet perceive that the licentious wildness which has been
excited in that country, is destructive of all true happiness, and no
more resemble liberty, than the tumultuous joys of the drunkard,
resemble the cheerfulness of a sober and well regulated mind.

To those who do not know of what strange inconsistences man is made up;
who have not considered how some persons, having at first been hastily
and heedlessly drawn in as approvers, by a sort of natural progression,
soon become principals;--to those who have never observed by what a
variety of strange associations in the mind, opinions that seem the most
irreconcileable meet at some unsuspected turning, and come to be united
in the same man;--to all such it may appear quite incredible, that well
meaning and even pious people should continue to applaud the principles
of a set of men who have publicly made known their intention of
abolishing Christianity, as far as the demolition of altars, priests,
temples, and institutions, _can_ abolish it; and as to the religion
itself, this also they may traduce, and for their own part reject, but
we know, from the comfortable promise of an authority still sacred in
this country at least, that _the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it_.

Let me not be misunderstood by those to whom these slight remarks are
principally addressed; that class of well intentioned people, who favour
at least, if they do not adopt, the prevailing sentiments of the new
Republic. You are not here accused of being the wilful abetters of
infidelity. God forbid! "we are persuaded better things of you, and
things which accompany salvation." But this _ignis fatuus_ of liberty
and universal brotherhood, which the French are madly pursuing, with the
insignia of freedom in one hand, and the bloody bayonet in the other,
has bewitched your senses, and is in danger of misleading your steps.
You are gazing at a meteor raised by the vapours of vanity, which these
wild and infatuated wanderers are pursuing to their destruction; and
though for a moment you mistake it for a heaven-born light, which leads
to the perfection of human freedom, you will, should you join in the mad
pursuit, soon discover that it will conduct you over dreary wilds and
sinking bogs, only to plunge you in deep and inevitable ruin.

Much, very much is to be said in vindication of your favouring in the
first instance their political projects. The cause they took in hand
seemed to be the great cause of human kind. Its very name insured its
popularity. What English heart did not exult at the demolition of the
Bastile? What lover of his species did not triumph in the warm hope,
that one of the finest countries in the world would soon be one of the
most free? Popery and despotism, though chained by the gentle influence
of Louis XVIth, had actually slain their thousands. Little was it then
imagined, that anarchy and atheism, the monsters who were about to
succeed them, would soon slay their ten thousands. If we cannot regret
the defeat of the two former tyrants, what must they be who can triumph
in the mischiefs of the two latter? Who, I say, that had a head to
reason, or a heart to feel, did not glow with hope, that from the ruins
of tyranny, and the rubbish of popery, a beautiful and finely framed
edifice would in time have been constructed, and that ours would not
have been the only country in which the patriot's fair idea of well
understood liberty, and of the most pure and reasonable, as well as the
most sublime and exalted Christianity might be realized?

But, alas! it frequently happens that the wise and good are not the most
adventurous in attacking the mischiefs which they perceive and lament.
With a timidity in some respects virtuous, they fear attempting any
thing which may possible aggravate the evils they deplore, or put to
hazard the blessings they already enjoy. They dread plucking up the
wheat with the tares, and are rather apt, with a spirit of hopeless
resignation,

    "To bear the ills they have,
    "Than fly to others that they know not of."

While sober minded and considerate men, therefore, sat mourning over
this complicated mass of error, and waited till God, in his own good
time, should open the blind eyes; the vast scheme of reformation was
left to that set of rash and presumptuous adventurers, who are generally
watching how they may convert public grievances to their own personal
account. It was undertaken, not upon the broad basis of a wise and well
digested scheme, of which all the parts should contribute to the
perfection of one consistent whole: It was carried on, not by those
steady measures, founded on rational deliberation, which are calculated
to accomplish so important an end; not with a temperance which indicated
a sober love of law, or a sacred regard for religion; but with the most
extravagant lust of power, and the most inordinate vanity which perhaps
ever instigated human measures; a lust of power which threatens to
extend its desolating influence over the whole globe; a vanity of the
same destructive species with that which stimulated the celebrated
incendiary of Ephesus, who being weary of his native obscurity and
insignificance, and prefering infamy to oblivion, could contrive no
other road to fame and immortality, than that of setting fire to the
exquisite Temple of Diana. He was remembered indeed, as he desired to
be, but only to be execrated; while the seventh wonder of the world lay
prostrate through his crime.

It is the same over ruling vanity which operates in their politics, and
in their religion, which makes Kersaint[B] boast of carrying his
destructive projects from the Tagus to the Brazils, and from Mexico to
the shores of the Ganges; which makes him menace to outstrip the
enterprises of the most extravagant hero of romance, and almost
undertake with the marvelous celerity of the nimbly footed Puck,

    "To put a girdle round about the earth
    "In forty minutes."----

It is the same vanity, still the master passion in the bosom of a
Frenchman, which leads Dupont and Manuel to undertake in their orations
to abolish the Sabbath, exterminate the Priesthood, erect a Pantheon for
the World, restore the Peripatetic Philosophy, and in short revive every
thing of ancient Greece, except the pure taste, the wisdom, the love of
virtue, the veneration of the laws, and that degree of reverence which
even virtuous Pagans professed for the Deity.

It is surely to be charged to the inadequate and wretched hands into
which the work of reformation fell, and not to the impossibility of
amending the civil and religious institutions of France, that all has
succeeded so ill. It cannot be denied, perhaps, that a reforming spirit
was wanted in that country; their government was not more despotic, than
their church was superstitious and corrupt.

But though this is readily granted, and though it may be unfair to blame
those who in the _first outset_ of the French Revolution, rejoiced even
on religious motives; yet it is astonishing, how any pious person, even
with all the blinding power of prejudice, can think without horror of
the _present_ state of France. It is no less wonderful how any rational
man could, even in the beginning of the Revolution; transfer that
reasoning, however just it might be, when applied to France, to the case
of England. For what can be more unreasonable, than to draw from
different, and even opposite premises, the same conclusion? Must a
revolution be equally necessary in the case of two sorts of Government,
and two sorts of Religion, which are the very reverse of each other?
opposite in their genius, unlike in their fundamental principles, and
widely different in each of their component parts.

That despotism, priestcraft, intolerance, and superstition, are terrible
evils, no candid Christian it is presumed will deny; but, blessed be
God, though these mischiefs are not yet entirely banished from the face
of the earth, they have scarcely any existence in this country.

To guard against a real danger, and to cure actual abuses, of which the
existence has been first plainly proved, by the application of a
suitable remedy, requires diligence as well as courage; observation as
well as genius; patience and temperance as well as zeal and spirit. It
requires the union of that clear head and sound heart which constitute
the true patriot. But to conjure up fancied evils, or even greatly to
aggravate real ones, and then to exhaust our labour in combating them,
is the characteristic of a distempered imagination and an ungoverned
spirit.

Romantic crusades, the ordeal trial, drowning of witches, the torture,
and the Inquisition, have been justly reprobated as the foulest stain of
the respective periods, in which, to the disgrace of human reason, they
existed; but would any man be rationally employed, who should now stand
up gravely to declaim against these as the predominating mischiefs of
the present century? Even the whimsical Knight of La Mancha himself,
would not fight wind mills that were pulled down; yet I will venture to
say, that the above named evils are at present little more chimerical
than some of those now so bitterly complained of among us. It is not, as
Dryden said, when one of his works was unmercifully abused, that the
piece has not faults enough in it, but the critics have not had the wit
to fix upon the right ones.

It is allowed that, as a nation, we have faults enough, but our
political critics err in the objects of their censure. They say little
of those real and pressing evils resulting from our own corruption,
which constitute the actual miseries of life; while they gloomily
speculate upon a thousand imaginary political grievances, and fancy that
the reformation of our rulers and our legislators is all that is wanting
to make us a happy people.

The principles of just and equitable government were, perhaps, never
more fully established, nor public justice more exactly administered.
Pure and undefiled religion was never laid more open to all, than at
this day. I wish I could say we were a religious people; but this at
least may be safely asserted, that the great truths of religion were
never better understood; that Christianity was never more completely
stripped from all its incumbrances and disguises, or more thoroughly
purged from human infusions, and whatever is debasing in human
institutions.

Let us in this yet happy country, learn at least one great and important
truth, from the errors of this distracted people. Their conduct has
awfully illustrated a position, which is not the less sound for having
been often controverted, That no degree of wit and learning; no progress
in commerce; no advances in the knowledge of nature, or in the
embellishments of art, can ever thoroughly tame that savage, the natural
human heart, without RELIGION. The arts of social life may give a
sweetness to the manners and language, and induce, in some degree, a
love of justice, truth, and humanity; but attainments derived from such
inferior causes are no more than the semblance and the shadow of the
qualities derived from pure Christianity. Varnish is an extraneous
ornament, but true polish is a proof of the solidity of the body; it
depends greatly on the nature of the substance, is not superinduced by
accidental causes, but in a good measure proceeding from internal
soundness.

The poets of that country, whose style, sentiments, manners, and
religion the French so affectedly labour to imitate, have left keen and
biting satires on the Roman vices. Against the late proceedings in
France, no satirist need employ his pen; that of the historian will be
quite sufficient. Fact will put fable out of countenance; and the crimes
which are usually held up to our abhorrence in works of invention, will
be regarded as flat and feeble by those who shall peruse the records of
the tenth of August, of the second and third of September, and of the
twenty first of January.

If the same astonishing degeneracy in taste, principle, and practice,
should ever come to flourish among us, Britons may still live to exult
in the desolation of her cities, and in the destruction of her finest
monuments of art; she may triumph in the peopling of the fortresses of
her rocks and her forests; may exult in being once more restored to that
glorious state of _liberty and equality_, when all subsisted by rapine
and the chace; when all, O enviable privilege! were equally savage,
equally indigent, and equally naked; may extol it as the restoration of
reason, and the triumph of nature, that they are again brought to feed
on acorns, instead of bread. Groves of consecrated misletoe may happily
succeed to useless corn fields; and Thor and Woden may hope once more to
be invested with all their bloody honours.

Let not any serious readers feel indignation, as if pains were
ungenerously taken to involve their religious, with their political
opinions. Far be it from me to wound, unnecessarily, the feelings of
people whom I so sincerely esteem; but it is much to be suspected, that
certain opinions in politics have a tendency to lead to certain opinions
in religion. Where so much is at stake, they will do well to keep their
consciences tender, in order to do which they should try to keep their
discernment acute. They will do well to observe, that the same restless
spirit of innovation is busily operating under various, though seemingly
unconnected forms. To observe, that the same impatience of restraint,
the same contempt of order, peace, and subordination, which makes men
bad citizens, makes them bad Christians; and that to this secret, but
almost infallible connexion between religious and political sentiment,
does France owe her present unparalleled anarchy and impiety.

There are doubtless in that unhappy country multitudes of virtuous and
reasonable men, who rather silently acquiesce in the authority of their
present turbulent government, than embrace its principles or promote
its projects from the sober conviction of their own judgment. These,
together with those conscientious exiles whom this nation so honourably
protects, may yet live to rejoice in the restoration of true liberty and
solid peace to their native country, when light and order shall spring
from the present darkness and confusion, and the reign of chaos shall be
no more.

May I be permitted a short digression on the subject of those exiles? It
shall only be to remark, that all the boasted conquests of our Edwards
and our Henrys over the French nation, do not confer such substantial
glory on our own country, as she derives from having received,
protected, and supported, among multitudes of other sufferers, at a time
and under circumstances so peculiarly disadvantageous to herself, _three
thousand priests_, of a nation habitually her enemy, and of a religion
intolerant and hostile to her own. This is the solid triumph of true
Christianity; and it is worth remarking, that the deeds which poets and
historians celebrate as rare and splendid actions, and sublime instances
of greatness of soul, in the heroes of the Pagan world, are but the
ordinary and habitual virtues which occur in the common course of action
among Christians; quietly performed without effort or exertion, and with
no view to renown; but resulting naturally and necessarily from the
religion they profess.

So predominating is the power of an example we have once admired, and
set up as a standard of imitation, and so fascinating has been the
ascendency of the Convention over the minds of those whose approbation
of French politics commenced in the earlier periods of the Revolution,
that it extends to the most trivial circumstances. I cannot forbear to
notice this in an instance, which, though inconsiderable in itself, yet
ceases to be so when we view it in the light of a symptom of the
reigning disease.

While the fantastic phraseology of the new Republic is such, as to be
almost as disgusting to sound taste, as their doctrines are to sound
morals, it is curious to observe how deeply the addresses, which have
been sent to it from the Clubs[C] in this country, have been infected
with it, as far at least as phrases and terms are objects of imitation.
In other respects, it is but justice to the French Convention to
confess, that they are hitherto without rivals and without imitators;
for who can aspire to emulate that compound of anarchy and atheism which
in their debates is mixed up with the pedantry of school boys, the
jargon of a cabal, and the vulgarity and ill-breeding of a mob? One
instance of the prevailing cant may suffice, where an hundred might be
adduced; and it is not the most exceptionable.--To demolish every
existing law and establishment; to destroy the fortunes and ruin the
principles of every country into which they are carrying their
destructive arms and their frantic doctrines; to untie or cut asunder
every bond which holds society together; to impose their own arbitrary
shackles where they succeed, and to demolish every thing where they
fail.--This desolating system, by a most unaccountable perversion of
language, they are pleased to call by the endearing name of
_fraternization_; and fraternization is one of the favourite terms which
their admirers have adopted. Little would a simple stranger, uninitiated
in this new and surprising dialect, imagine that the peaceful terms of
fellow-citizen and of brother, the winning offer of freedom and
happiness, and the warm embrace of fraternity, were only watch-words by
which they in effect,

                  Cry havoc,
    And let slip the dogs of war.

In numberless other instances, the fashionable language of France at
this day would be as unintelligible to the correct writers of the age of
Louis the XIVth, as their fashionable notions of liberty would be
irreconcileable with those of the true Revolution Patriots of his great
contemporary and victorious rival, William the Third.

Such is indeed their puerile rage for novelty in the invention of new
words, and the perversion of their taste in the use of old ones, that
the celebrated Vossius, whom Christine of Sweden oddly complimented by
saying, that he was so learned as not only to know whence all words
came, but whither they were going, would, _were he admitted to the
honours of a sitting_, be obliged to confess, that he was equally
puzzled to tell the one, or to foretel the other.

If it shall please the Almighty in his anger to let loose this
infatuated people, as a scourge for the iniquities of the human race; if
they are delegated by infinite justice to act, as storm and tempest
fulfilling his word; if they are commissioned to perform the errand of
the destroying lightning or the avenging thunder-bolt, let us try at
least to extract personal benefit from national calamity; let every one
of us, high and low, rich and poor, enter upon this serious and humbling
inquiry, how much his own individual offences have contributed to that
awful aggregate of public guilt, which has required such a visitation.
Let us carefully examine in what proportion we have separately added to
that common stock of abounding iniquity, the description of which formed
the character of an ancient nation, and is so peculiarly applicable to
our own--_Pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness_. Let every
one of us humbly inquire, in the self-suspecting language of the
disciples to their Divine Master--_Lord, is it I?_ Let us learn to fear
the fleets and armies of the enemy, much less than those iniquities at
home which this alarming dispensation may be intended to chastize.

The war which the French have declared against us, is of a kind
altogether unexampled in every respect; insomuch that human wisdom is
baffled when it would pretend to conjecture what may be the event. But
this at least we may safely say, that it is not so much the force of
French bayonets, as the contamination of French principles, that ought
to excite our apprehensions. We trust, that through the blessing of GOD
we shall be defended from their open hostilities, by the temperate
wisdom of our Rulers, and the bravery of our fleets and armies; but the
domestic danger arising from licentious and irreligious principles among
ourselves, can only be guarded against by the personal care and
vigilance of every one of us who values religion and the good order of
society.

GOD grant that those who go forth to fight our battles, instead of being
intimidated by the number of their enemies, may bear in mind, that
"there is no restraint with GOD to save by many or by few." And let the
meanest of us who remains at home remember also, that even he may
contribute to the internal safety of his country, by the integrity of
his private life, and to the success of her defenders, by following them
with his fervent prayers. And in what war can the sincere Christian ever
have stronger inducements to pray for the success of his country, than
in this? Without entering far into any political principles, the
discussion of which would be in a great measure foreign to the design of
this little tract, it may be remarked, that the unchristian principle of
revenge is not our motive to this war; conquest is not our object; nor
have we had recourse to hostility, in order to effect a change in the
internal government of France[D]. The present war is undoubtedly
undertaken entirely on defensive principles. It is in defence of our
King, our Constitution, our Religion, our Laws, and consequently our
_Liberty_, in the sound and rational sense of that term. It is to defend
ourselves from the savage violence of a crusade, made against all
Religion, as well as all Government. If ever therefore a war was
undertaken on the ground of self-defence and necessity--if ever men
might be literally said to fight _pro_ ARIS _et focis_, this seems to
be the occasion.

The ambition of conquerors has been the source of great and extensive
evils: Religious fanaticism of still greater. But little as I am
disposed to become the apologist of either the one principle or the
other, there is no extravagance in asserting, that they have seemed
incapable of producing, even in ages, that extent of mischief, that
comprehensive desolation, which _philosophy, falsely so called_, has
produced in three years.

Christians! it is not a small thing--it is _your life_. The pestilence
of irreligion which you detest, will insinuate itself imperceptibly with
those manners, phrases, and principles which you admire and adopt. It is
the humble wisdom of a Christian, to shrink from the most distant
approaches to sin, to abstain from the very appearance of evil. If we
would fly from the deadly contagion of Atheism, let us fly from those
seemingly remote, but not very indirect paths which lead to it. Let
France choose this day whom she will serve; _but, as for us and our
houses, we will serve the Lord_.

And, O gracious and long suffering God! before that awful period
arrives, which shall exhibit the dreadful effects of such an education
as the French nation are instituting; before a race of men can be
trained up, not only without the knowledge of THEE, but in the contempt
of THY most holy law, do THOU, in great mercy, change the heart of this
people as the heart of one man. Give them not finally over to their own
corrupt imaginations, to their own heart's lusts. But after having made
them a fearful example to all the nations of the earth, what a people
_can_ do, who have cast off the fear of THEE, do THOU graciously bring
them back to a sense of that law which they have violated, and to
participation of that mercy which they have abused; so that they may
happily find, while the discovery can be attended with consolation, that
_doubtless there is a reward for the righteous; verify, there is a_ GOD
_who judgeth the earth_.


THE END.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote B: See his Speech, enumerating their intended projects.]

[Footnote C: See the Collection of Addresses from England, &c.
Published by Mr. Mc. KENZIE, _College Green_, DUBLIN.]

[Footnote D: See the Report of Mr. Pitt's Speech in the House of
Commons on Feb. 12, 1793.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note


Printer errors have been changed and are listed below. All other
inconsistencies are as in the original.

Characters that could not be displayed directly in Latin-1 are
transcribed as follows:

_ - italics


The following changes have been made to the text:

Page 18: Changed "involve their religous" to "involve their religious".

Page 18: Changed "in order to which they" to "in order to do which
they".







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Considerations on Religion and Public
Education, by Hannah More

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONSIDERATIONS ON RELIGION ***

***** This file should be named 37774.txt or 37774.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/7/7/37774/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Carla Foust, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
