Project Gutenberg's The Influence of the Organ in History, by Dudley Buck

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Influence of the Organ in History
       Inaugural Lecture of the Department of the Organ in the
       College of Music of Boston University

Author: Dudley Buck

Release Date: October 18, 2011 [EBook #37786]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Hunter Monroe, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











  THE INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN
  IN HISTORY.

  [Illustration: PNEUMATIC ORGAN FROM A MS. PSALTER OF EADWINE IN THE
  LIBRARY OF TRINITY COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE.]




  THE
  INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN
  IN HISTORY.


  Inaugural Lecture of the Department of the
  Organ in the College of Music
  of Boston University


  BY

  DUDLEY BUCK.
  PROFESSOR AND LECTURER OF THE DEPARTMENT.


  _New Edition, with Illustrations._


  LONDON:
  W. REEVES, 83, CHARING CROSS ROAD, W.C.
  Office of "The Musical Standard."




  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

   I.--PNEUMATIC-ORGAN FROM A MS. PSALTER OF EADWINE
       IN THE LIBRARY OF TRINITY COLLEGE,
       CAMBRIDGE                                       (_Frontispiece_).

  II.--PERUVIAN PAN'S PIPES, DOUBLE SET. FROM A
       TOMB IN AFRICA                                                 10

 III.--EARLY FORM OF THE REGALS. FROM LUCINIUS'
       MUSURGIA, SEN PRAXIS MUSICAE, 1536                              19

  IV.--FROM GORI'S THESAURUS DIPTYCHORUM. SAID
       TO BE FROM AN ANCIENT MS. OF THE TIME OF
       CHARLEMAGNE                                                    22

   V.--A POSITIVE ORGAN. FROM AMBROSIUS WILPHLINGSEDER'S
       EROTEMATA, MUSICES PRATICAE,
       NUREMBERG, 1563                                                31

  VI.--A CURIOUS ENGRAVING SHOWING AN ORGANIST
       PERFORMING UPON AN INSTRUMENT WITH BROAD
       KEYS. FROM FRANCHINUS GAFFURIUS' THEORICA
       MUSICA, 1492                                                   34

 VII.--THE ANCIENT MODE OF ORGAN BLOWING. FROM
       PRAETORIUS' THEATRUM INSTRUMENTORUM,
       1620                                                           46

VIII.--TERRA-COTTA MODEL OF HYDRAULIC ORGAN.
       CIR. 150 A.D. CARTHAGE MUSEUM. FROM HERMANN
       SMITH'S "THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE
       ORGAN AND IN THE ORCHESTRA"                                    47

  IX.--REV. F. W. GALPIN'S WORKING REPRODUCTION
       OF THE ROMAN HYDRAULUS. FROM HERMANN
       SMITH'S "THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN
       AND IN THE ORCHESTRA"                                          48




SECTION I.

[Illustration: PERUVIAN PAN'S PIPES, DOUBLE SET. FROM A TOMB IN
AFRICA.]




THE INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN IN HISTORY.


SECTION I.


Ladies and Gentlemen:--

It having become my duty to deliver this, the inaugural lecture of the
organ department attached to this institution, I have found myself
considerably embarrassed as to choice of subjects.

The trouble lay in the quantity of material at hand, and not in any lack
of it.

The history of the Organ runs back so far into the centuries, that no
matter what point one might select for examination, it can scarcely be
brought into the scope of a lecture except in a very empty and skeleton
form. You will bear with me, then, for the superficial manner in which I
shall be forced to treat many important points. As many of those present
do not propose to make a study of the organ, I shall avoid treating of
the instrument itself in any technical sense, and would offer a few
thoughts on the subject of


THE INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN IN HISTORY,

with a glance at the "schools of playing" thus created.

The Organ is called the "king of instruments."

This phrase has been used so often that it has become decidedly well
worn and trite. None the less, however, is the expression full of
significance; and to what an extent (especially in a historical sense)
is known to but comparatively few persons, among whom I fear far too few
organists would be found.

To bring up some of these neglected facts; to examine them in their
historical and theoretical bearing, as well as in practice; to thus
create a greater love for and appreciation of the instrument on the part
of its students,--to do this, I say, is, if I apprehend it aright, one
of the principal objects which the Boston University has had in view in
founding this department.

The organ, then, is called the "king of instruments."

If we look at the phrase a little closer, it will be perceived that the
simile is a striking one. A king, in the so-called "good old times of
yore," if he were a man of any force of character, generally possessed,
along with the divine right theoretical, any quantity of the human power
practical. The day of more or less ornamental constitutional
figure-heads had not yet arrived.

In other words, the live kings of the past, of the feudal time, moulded
to their own tastes and characters their age, their people, or only
their court, according to the innate ability they might possess. In turn
they were themselves affected, to a degree, by their surroundings, but
to a far lesser extent than is the case at this day, the balance of
influence remaining largely in their favour.

I will endeavour to show that among musical instruments this "kingship,"
as regards the organ, held good in a parallel way,--that by its own
nature as to construction, by its very faults and weaknesses, by the
mission it was called upon to fulfil, it did, in very fact, long reign
supreme as king of instruments.

Absolute power, as represented by a monarch, became narrowed down, in
the lapse of centuries, by external forces working out their own
independence, thus checking and limiting this absolutism. Here, too, I
will endeavour to draw a parallel, and show that as years rolled on, the
influence of the organ upon music in the abstract diminished. The
process became inverted, and music began to affect the organ, rather
than the organ it. To this we owe the vast improvements in the
construction of the instrument, the many additions of new qualities of
tone, and numberless new inventions of value still going on in our day,
with a rapidity difficult to keep pace with. To fairly appreciate this
past or present relation of things, it becomes necessary to take a hasty
and necessarily superficial glance backward at the origin of the
organ,--its invention and development.

All writers attribute the origin of the organ to that simplest as well
as most ancient of musical instruments, called by the Greeks the "pipes
of Pan,"--Pan, in the ancient mythology, being the god of the woods and
groves. It consisted of a few hollow reeds of various lengths, securely
bound together, and blown by the lips. We still occasionally see and
hear this instrument in our streets, performed upon by those nomadic
"sons of art," the organ-grinders. The performer being obliged to move
his head continually from side to side, an unpleasant and fatiguing
operation, soon led to an attempt to blow these tubes artificially. From
this resulted the placing of the pipes upon a small wind-chest, and the
addition of a primitive bellows, the whole being easily carried and
operated by one performer. Of particular value in the establishment of
this historical fact was the discovery, in Syria, among some ancient
ruins, of a sculptured figure playing on such an instrument. Although
much mutilated, all the more important parts were still intact. This
interesting relic was brought to England about the year 1853.

It should be mentioned here, that the word "organ," not unfrequently
found in the Bible, should not be supposed to refer to any such
instrument as the name would suggest to our minds. Both with
the Greeks and Romans the term translated "organ" simply meant an
"instrument,"--and that of any kind, but with usage apparently favouring
its application to musical instruments.

Upon the application of the bellows to supply wind, instead of the human
lungs, the fingers were used to stop the pipes, and thus prevent their
sounding all at once, which it is evident they would have done, standing
on a simple wind-chest, which was filled by the bellows. As the number
of pipes was gradually increased, the difficulty of managing them by
hand of course became greater and greater. This in time led to the
invention of the pallet, or valve, to control the admission of wind to
each pipe, and by the close of the eleventh century we find it
chronicled that there existed at Magdeburg an organ with a _key-board_
comprising sixteen keys. From this time the name of the instrument
begins to correspond with our modern idea of the same; its invention was
a realized fact, although but a germ of that development which has since
raised organ-building to its artistic importance. It must be borne in
mind that the pedal organ, with its keys for the feet, was a much later
invention. Meantime, the first keys made use of measured from three to
five inches and a half wide. Consequently, the title of the performer on
this instrument, in the eleventh century, was not that of
organ-_player_, but organ-_beater_, the keys being struck by the fist,
which was protected by a heavy glove. There was, it must be remembered,
but one rank of pipes, and these could seldom, if ever, have been in
tune, from the fact that they had no means of regulating the wind
pressure; while in organs of later date, and at the present day, an even
wind is secured principally by weights placed upon the bellows, and the
creation of a reservoir of compressed air. At this early time the wind
supply was furnished by the common bellows as used by blacksmiths. Thus
the supply and consequent pressure of the wind would necessarily be in
direct proportion to the muscle or activity of the blowers.

While the various discoveries and improvements in organs of the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries were slowly progressing, almost the only vocal
music the world knew were the Gregorian tones, or plain song of the
Early Church. Harmony was entirely unknown, and indeed remained so for
many a long year in anything like our modern significance. It is not my
purpose here to enter into even a partial examination of the parallel
progress of melody and harmony at this age of the world. You have
already heard it treated by an abler pen than mine; nor does it properly
belong to this department, except in so far as it becomes necessary to
note any decided influence exerted by the one upon the other. This
influence, as exerted by the organ upon Church music, did not begin as
early as might be supposed. Rimbault, in his work on the "History of the
Organ" (which I shall have occasion frequently to quote), states that
"even in the thirteenth century, the priests of both the Greek and Roman
Churches thought the use of organs in divine service scandalous and
profane. They preferred rendering divine worship as simple as possible,
in order to distinguish it from that of the Jews and Pagans. Even to
this day the Greek Church does not tolerate the use of organs in their
public services. Notwithstanding these opinions, the use of organs, and
even other instruments, gradually became almost universal, not only in
great churches, but in those of monasteries, convents, and small towns.
The historians of this era celebrate several monks distinguished for the
art of playing on the organ. For some time, however, organs were not
used in the ordinary celebration of the offices, but only on great
feasts and solemn occasions. These first monastic and conventual organs
were very small, being only used to play the melody of the plain song in
unison with the voices."

In spite of the disrepute into which the whole monastic system fell,
there is no question but that the monks and friars were the great
conservators and preservers of all the fine arts, and even mechanics,
during the troubled times of the Middle Ages. As the prejudice against
the employment of instrumental music in the church services began to
disappear, nothing was more natural than that the monks, having both the
leisure and pecuniary means, and containing among their number the best
educated men of the day, should turn their attention to organ-building,
animated by the same spirit which led them to decorate and ornament
their churches and monasteries. Thus we find that it is to them we owe
the improvement of the hitherto clumsy key-board, extending its compass
both upward and downward to the extent of some three octaves, and so
reduced both fall and breadth of the keys that they could be pressed
down by the fingers, instead of struck by the fist; certainly no small
improvement. The first organ possessing keys to give the chromatic tones
or semitones was built by a priest--Nicholas Faber by name--about 1360.

It now behoves us to glance for a moment at the influence which the
organ already began to exert upon music, or the art composition, and to
show how the instrument became to show proofs of that right to the
title, "king of instruments," in the sense I have adopted. It must be
kept in mind that the veriest twilight dawn of the knowledge of harmony
had scarcely begun. Yet what can be conceived more natural, than that
the organist of that day, even, should stumble on the fact that
different tones in conjunction were more agreeable to the ear than the
bare unison, which was at first the only accompaniment of the choral
song? This being noted, the next logical step was to try and produce the
same approved effect with the voices themselves. In the "_History of the
Modern Music of Western Europe_," by _Kiesewetter_, the following
passage occurs. He is not speaking of the organ, but of the origin and
development of the science of harmony.

He says: "The union of different human voices which now occurred to
their thoughts (the early harmonists), was an imitation not altogether
happy, perhaps, of that which in various instances _they had discovered
with the organ_!" Here the fact that the organ was even then beginning
to assert itself, to mould the minds of the early writers, in fact, to
claim its royal dues, is pretty conclusively shown.

Time would altogether fail me in the scope that this lecture must
necessarily occupy, to trace down this influence, once established,
through the long cycle of years that followed; the theoretic science and
practical application keeping pace with the mechanical development,
until it found its full culmination and glory in the new-born science of
Counterpoint. This science, which has given polish to the mightiest
thoughts of the greatest masters of our art (and in totally different
departments than mere organ-playing),--a science, without a satisfactory
knowledge of which no man can call himself a thoroughly educated
musician,--sprang from just this source.

How often we hear the remark that contrapuntal treatment is best suited
to the organ! True; but how many reflect that the organ, so to speak,
first _dictated_ counterpoint to the world? An influence, which (the
free forms being derived from the stricter) is carried clear down into
the realm of Italian opera, _i.e._, when it is good of its kind. Is not,
then, this influence, which the organ has indisputably exerted upon not
merely its own literature, but the musical literature at large, an
all-sufficient proof of its right to the royal title? It must be borne
in mind that this absolutism, as in matters political (to carry out the
simile), was possible at this stage of the world in matters musical,
because not even the harpsichord, clavichord, spinet, or any of those
presentiments of the modern pianoforte, by whatever name they were
called, had as yet made their appearance. The organ was, for the time,
the sole keyed instrument.

In view of these facts, it seems to me that it may be justly claimed
that the title "king of instruments" should be based on far nobler and
more historic grounds than is usually done, and that we should not
content ourselves with explaining this phrase as arising from the
circumstances that it is the instrument which can, of its own resources,
make the loudest noise!

[Illustration: EARLY FORM OF THE REGALS. FROM LUCINIUS' MUSURGIA, SEN
PRAXIS MUSICAE. 1536.]




SECTION II.

[Illustration: FROM GORI'S THESAURUS DIPTYCHORUM.

SAID TO BE FROM AN ANCIENT MS. OF THE TIME OF CHARLEMAGNE.]




SECTION II.


The organ nomenclature has, as is the way of the world, changed somewhat
from age to age. In accounts of the old English organ, we frequently
find this and that church being referred to as possessing a "payre of
organs." This has been variously interpreted, some supposing it to refer
to organs of two manuals, which explanation seems natural enough; but
the best authorities explain it as meaning an organ which possesses more
than one rank of pipes, or more than one stop. Rimbault, who takes this
view, says the expression is to be regarded as a phrase of nearly
obsolete English, and to be taken in the same sense as we still
sometimes say "a pair of stairs," instead of a "flight of stairs." One
proof of this interpretation that he cites is interesting. During the
great Cromwellian rebellion, and the rule of the Roundheads in England,
a great many organs were destroyed by the soldiery, who considered them
a relic of Popery. At this time, a certain Mr. Pepys, whose diary is
still extant, travelled about considerably and interested himself in the
organ, as well as some other matters, as will be seen from the following
extract from the aforesaid diary. The point to us (although by no means
the only one to him) lies in the fact that he uses the words "the
organ" and the "pair of organs" as evidently, synonymous. He writes as
follows:--

     April 5, 1667. "_To Hackney: where good beef tongue, and things to
     eat and drink, and very merry, the weather being mighty pleasant;
     and here I was told, that at their church they have a fair PAIR OF
     ORGANS, which play while the people sing, which I am mighty glad of
     wishing the like at our church at London, and would give L50
     towards it._"

     April 21, 1667. "_To Hackney church, where very full, and found
     much difficulty to get pews. I offered the sexton money, and he
     could not help me.... That which I chiefly went to see was the
     young ladies of the schools, whereof there is great store, very
     pretty" (you see how history repeats itself); "and ALSO the ORGAN,
     which is handsome and tunes the psalms, and plays with the people;
     which is mighty pretty, and makes me mighty earnest to have a pair
     at our church, I having almost a mind to give them a pair, if they
     would settle a maintenance on them for it._"

Mr. Pepys' heart was evidently in the right place, and the thought of
having the church provide a fund for the proper tuning and repair of the
organ, not only sensible, but, to quote his own words, "a mighty pretty"
idea.

The invention of the pedal key-board, that most important and
characteristic part of the organ, seems to have occurred about the
beginning of the fourteenth century. There is no reliable account of who
first made this addition, it being claimed by various parties. The
sixteenth century was the period when the arts of sculpture, painting,
and architecture had gained what might almost be termed a modern
artistic polish, in not a few instances, indeed, surpassing all that the
moderns have accomplished. The early school of church painters had
become modified. Grace and relative refinement had largely taken the
place of the early stiffness of design and execution, and in sculpture
and architecture were witnessed many of the results which are still the
wonder of the world. With this refinement came a taste for luxury and a
love of ornament which in the seventeenth and early part of the
eighteenth century had extended to and affected organ-building, at least
externally.

Seidel, in his work on the organ, gives this excellent account of the
tendency referred to:--

"At this time, great industry and expense was bestowed upon the external
decoration of the organ. The entire case was ornamented with statues,
heads of angels, vases, foliage, and even figures of animals. Sometimes
the front pipes were painted with grotesque figures, and the lips of the
pipes made to resemble lions' jaws. They went further, and threw away
the money, which might have been expended in a worthier manner, on the
display of the most tasteless and absurd tricks of art, degrading
thereby--doubtless unintentionally--a noble instrument, intended for
sacred purposes, into a _raree-show_. Among these ornaments, the figures
of angels played a very conspicuous part; trumpets were placed in their
hands, which by means of mechanism could be moved to and from the mouth.
Carillons (bells) too, and kettle-drums, were performed upon by the
movable arms of angels." (Think of an angel playing upon a
kettle-drum!). "In the midst of this heavenly host, sometimes a gigantic
angel would be exhibited hovering in a 'glory' over the organ, beating
time with his baton as conductor of this super-earthly orchestra!

"Under such circumstances, the firmament, of course, could not be
dispensed with. So we had wandering suns and moons, and jingling stars
in motion. Even the animal kingdom was summoned to activity. Cuckoos,
nightingales, and every species of bird, singing, or rather chirping,
glorified the festival of Christmas, and announced to the assembled
congregation the birth of the Redeemer. Eagles flapped their wings, or
flew towards an artificial sun. The climax, however, of all these
rarities, was the _fox-tail_. It was intended to frighten away from the
organ all such inquisitive persons as had no business near it. Thus,
when they pulled out this draw-stop, suddenly a large fox-tail flew into
their faces! It is clear that by such absurd practices, curiosity was
much rather excited than stopped, and that all this host of moving
figures, and their ridiculous jingling, disturbed meditation, excited
the curiosity of the congregation, and thus disparaged the sublimity of
divine service."

Of course all this nonsense in due time brought its own cure with it.
The money expended was diverted towards its worthy and legitimate
object, and to-day, in Europe, but few such relics of the past can be
found, and those generally in out-of-the-way places. I have myself seen
but one organ containing any of these absurdities. That was in a small
town of Camin, on the Baltic sea-coast of North Prussia, and I was
informed by the old organist (as Seidel says) that these things were
_reserved for Christmas and Easter_!

While the power, compass, and variety of organ tone, as well as the
mechanism of the instrument, made steady progress throughout the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the science of harmony in the largest
sense kept even pace with it, and, perhaps, received even a greater
relative development. Meantime, the orchestral instruments of the day
had received a fair share of improvement. The harpsichord had been
invented, and sufficiently perfected to be worthy of the powers of such
a master as Sebastian Bach. With the appearance of this great man the
art of counterpoint reached its culmination, never surpassed, if even
equalled in isolated instances, by any subsequent writer. His organ
compositions cover every resource, both in design and execution,
possible to the organ of his day; and yet, I do not think it too much to
say that, had Bach never written a single organ piece, his claims for
recognition as a great composer would remain substantially the same. His
greatest works are to be found among his vocal and orchestral writings.
Let us examine for a moment the reason for this, and of the influence of
the "king of instruments" upon musical composition at this time.

We have seen that contrapuntal treatment, so-called, owed its origin to
the nature of the organ. Vocal music, at the time of which we speak,
felt the same influence and followed the same form. Now, if we open one
of the vocal and orchestral scores of Bach, we shall see that while he
gives the instruments more freedom than his predecessors, in consequence
of their largely increased powers and the proportional increased ability
of the executants of his day, yet the contrapuntal influence is
everywhere visible. It was the period of strict form. As we count back
such cycles, it was but a relatively short time since music had been
"without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep,"
artistically speaking. Music was a serious matter. They revelled in
fugue, and even danced contrapuntally. Although not a direct influence,
perhaps, is not this state of things, after all, a sufficient proof of
the absolutism of the organ in a derived manner,--the regal sway of the
king of instruments at this period? Bach breathed new life into these
dry and purely scientific forms, and it is his greatest glory that in
many, if not all, of his profoundest works, his genius enabled him to
unite the emotional and aesthetic element with the purely intellectual
and scientific.

While the improvement of the organ, as respects both tone, mechanism and
general capabilities, continued, and still continues at the present day,
it is noteworthy that from the time of Bach, of all others, the
influence of the organ upon music at large began to diminish. From this
point we have to consider the decline of this influence, showing that
music began to emancipate itself, each instrument claiming and receiving
its own especial rights and treatment, long before a similar dawn of
liberty began in the political world. Two reasons conduced to this
change.

First, the requirements of music, which found no prototype in the organ
of that day. As the instruments were then built, they possessed but
little variety of tone, the swelling or diminishing of which was an
impossibility; nor had the organist any mechanical assistance whatever
to enable him to vary the combinations of stops.

Second, the invention of the harpsichord. This instrument, the
_avant-courier_ of the pianoforte, to which we have already referred,
had already become sufficiently popular to make its own peculiar
influence felt. This consisted in the power of crescendo and diminuendo
according to the force exerted by the player, and a light touch which
offered no impediment to rapid execution, besides certain other effects
through its characteristic tone impossible upon the organ.

The light touch of the harpsichord, as compared with the heavy and
fatiguing action of the organs of that day, was necessarily a source of
great attraction; and the instrument itself, although far from finding a
home in every household, as the piano has in our time, yet possessed the
merit of being portable.

It was not long before the transition period began,--that period in
which musicians and composers tested and decided upon that which was
best and most fitting in the treatment of these respective instruments.
Nowhere can we find more evident signs of this time of experiment, this
gradually leaving old landmarks and seeking a new form of expression,
than in the works of Bach himself.

In the "Well-Tempered Clavier" we find preludes and fugues impossible to
properly interpret on any other instrument except the piano, placed side
by side with those whose real significance can only be developed upon
the organ. In a portion of the pieces written especially for the organ,
we find, on the other hand, passages which to modern ears are only fit
for and tolerable on the piano. The dividing lines of effect, not to say
possibility, had not as yet been fully marked out. The organ was no more
disposed to give up its long sway, and be narrowed to its own particular
sphere, than any other sovereign, when the limiting influences of modern
times first began to make themselves felt. Like them, however, it was
obliged to yield. Little by little the piano emancipated itself from the
_strict_ contrapuntal chain which bound it to the organ, until, in the
sonatas of Mozart and Beethoven, it emerged into a new life.

Here it was strengthened by the _free_ contrapuntal treatment it
received, like the fruits of early education showing themselves in new
and original forms,--speaking a language founded indeed on the past, but
new, fresh, and sparkling; or, when adopting the strict style, taking it
up as a matter of choice, but not of compulsion. Such results followed
the invention of the harpsichord,--the early piano,--and here we must
leave it. It would, however, be an interesting subject to trace this
development down to Chopin, Liszt, and the modern Titans of the piano,
showing how gradually the mutual treatment of piano and organ
disappeared and what was substituted in their place. It could, however,
only be satisfactorily done by musical examples.

Meanwhile the orchestra blossomed into a new significance. To us moderns
who read its history, or look back into the scores which antedate this
time, it does not seem so much a period to be described, as that of
progress, as that of a veritable new birth itself, a new creation. And
this is, indeed, the fact; for no improvements in ancient instruments,
although they took place, nor addition of new ones, can account for the
change which now occurred in the orchestra. Here it was _the man_, not
the instrument; and the name of Joseph Haydn will always be quoted as
"Father of the Modern Orchestra."

The organ lost nothing of real value to itself by this increased
significance of other branches of instrumental music. Its sphere became
defined, and in Germany quite limited, as to this day it is but rarely
employed there in the way of accompaniment beyond supporting the choral
song of the congregation. In France and England it has been different,
the organ having been employed to accompany many anthems and other
extended pieces of music, which in Germany (at least in the larger
cities) would be given with the orchestra. It should be noticed that to
England we owe one great improvement, which, especially for the _role_
the organ is called upon to fill in this country, can scarcely be
overrated. I refer to the invention of the swell, and the great variety
of effects we are enabled to achieve by its means in both accompaniment
and solo playing.

[Illustration: A POSITIVE ORGAN. FROM AMBROSIUS WELPHLINGSEDER'S
EROTEMATA MUSICES PRACTIAE. NUREMBERG, 1563.]




SECTION III.

[Illustration: A CURIOUS ENGRAVING SHOWING AN ORGANIST PERFORMING UPON
AN INSTRUMENT WITH BROAD KEYS. FROM FRANCHINUS GAFFURIUS' THEORICA
MUSICA. 1492.]




SECTION III.


In the London "Spectator" of Feb. 8, 1712, is the following
announcement:--

"Whereas, Mr. Abraham Jordan, senior and junior, have, with their own
hands, joynery excepted, made and erected a very large organ in St.
Magnus' church, at the foot of London bridge, consisting of four sets of
keys, one of which is adapted to the art of emitting the sounds by
swelling the notes, _which was never in any organ before_; this
instrument will be publicly opened on Sunday next, the performance by
Mr. John Robinson. The above said Abraham Jordan gives notice to all
masters and performers, that he will attend every day next week at the
said church, to accommodate all those gentlemen who shall have a
curiosity to hear it."

Very little is known of this Mr. Jordan, except that his invention
pleased greatly, and was found of such practical use, that not only were
all new organs in England (virtually from this date) furnished with
swells, but himself and son found much occupation in adapting and adding
their invention to the older London organs. The lack of a swell is the
weakest point of the great majority of German organs. Even Dr. Burney,
fifty years after swells had become common in England, expresses, in
his famous work entitled _The Present State of Music in Germany, the
Netherlands and United Provinces_, two volumes, also _The Present State
of Music in France and Italy_, his great surprise to find them utterly
unknown upon the Continent. His remarks would hold true at the present
day with but little modification, as far as Germany is concerned, few
instruments outside the larger ones of recent date possessing this great
improvement. The reason of this is to be found, partly in the extremely
conservative character of their organ-builders, almost a national trait,
and still more in the fact that but little use would be found for a
swell organ outside solo playing. With us, nearly the reverse is true,
the swell being most indispensable in accompanying choirs as here
constituted. Notwithstanding this neglect of what seems to us an
indispensable addition to the instrument, the glory of the invention and
perfection of the organ justly belongs to Germany. Modern organ-building
requires the most profound study of the laws both of mechanics and
acoustics, and the German mind was constitutionally fitted, by a natural
depth and thoroughness of thought, together with the truly artistic
quality of patience, to be successful in solving this great
problem,--the creation of the most complex instrument known.

France, too, has produced her great organs and organ-builders. If often
lacking the sublimity and solidity of tone characteristic of many of the
famous German organs, they interest (particularly the American taste) by
a greater variety of the so-called "fancy," or solo stops. This
difference, too, has grown out of the nature of the duties demanded of
the organ and the organist in the service of the Roman Catholic church,
and it is these differences of usage which in process of time, combining
with further differences of national taste, led to that varied style and
treatment which we denominate "Schools of Playing."

We divide these schools into the German, French, and English.

The first of these, the German school, is especially characterized by
the importance given to the use of the pedals, the feet being called
upon to execute passages of equal melodic value with that assigned to
the fingers. This renders it the school of schools for those who would
really attain a mastery of the instrument, and gain that independence of
foot and finger so difficult to acquire. In fact, it is only possible by
a thorough study of the great masters in this school of playing, to
destroy that sympathy which exists between the left hand and the feet.
This sympathy lies in the fact that should a pedal passage _ascending_
occur in conjunction with a left-hand passage _descending_, the natural
inclination of the left hand is to follow the pedal, instead of
executing its own independent part. Of course the same trouble is
experienced if the conditions, as just stated, should be reversed. This
is the great difficulty of the _obbligato_, or independent mode of
treating the pedals, to conquer which may fairly be termed a life-study.
For this reason the earnest student should always begin his studies in
this school, and not deviate therefrom until such time as a reasonable
degree of skill has been attained, and the sympathy between hands and
feet, before alluded to, measurably overcome. And here let me say that
far too many of those who feel themselves drawn towards the study of the
organ, approach such study unprepared. The organ, as a keyed instrument,
has all the main points of technique in common with the piano. All the
varied forms of scales, arpeggios, &c., together with the necessary
independence of finger requisite to play in the _legato_ style, should
first be learned upon the piano, where, by the way, it can be more
speedily acquired. Pupils who, having accomplished this, proceed to the
study of the organ, can at once begin with the peculiarities and
characteristic difficulties of the instrument, and as far as the pedal
is concerned, will make far more rapid progress if fair manual players.
They are thus enabled to concentrate their attention upon that which is
new and strange to them. Such would undoubtedly be the testimony of all
those who have had experience in this branch of teaching.

Without questioning the pre-eminence of the German school in all matters
of technique and pure science, although educated in that school myself,
I would not claim for it, as do some, that it is the Alpha and Omega of
all true organ playing. Viewed in relation to the modern organ as it
exists to-day, especially in France, England, and America, it seems to
me that the instrument is in advance of the school, or that the school
is weak in the two following points:--

First: It does not make a sufficient employ of registration within the
limits of one and the same composition. Beauties of contrast, to be
obtained by this means, are too frequently regarded as a matter of less
than secondary importance. This, I am aware, arises from the fact that
the majority of German organs are incapable of producing such variety,
being built with a single eye to accompanying the congregation. In the
direction of the grand and sublime, this school is unequalled; but
surely there are many effects possible to-day which lay no claim to
profundity, and yet are pleasing and worthy of employment by a true
artist.

Second: Ignoring the emotional element in organ music to a great extent,
and substituting the purely intellectual and technical. In their
melodies we recognize the true inspiration of the great composers. The
scientific setting they may give them, the technical dress in which they
may clothe them, thus often greatly enhancing their beauty, is, after
all, a matter of pure science acquired through schooling and dignified
by talent. This appeals to the intellect, and is a most desirable object
of study; but the melodic inspiration itself appeals to the heart, and,
as the God-given quality, is the higher of the two. Now the German
writers for the organ, from Bach to this day, have, as a rule (to which
I am aware there are some marked exceptions), apparently avoiding giving
to the organ that _melodious_ element which their great composers have
so beautifully done, not only in their symphonic writings, but also in
their smallest works for the piano or other instruments. The mere lack
of means for expression (by means of the swell or other mechanical
appliances) is hardly a sufficient explanation of this, nor do I see
anything in the character of the organ to account for it. That the great
German writers following Bach (Mendelssohn excepted), but more
especially the masters of the more recent so-called Romantic School,
have contributed little or nothing towards the literature of the organ,
is really explained by the following remark of Berlioz, in his treatise
on "Modern Instrumentation." Speaking of writing properly for the organ,
he says: "The special resources are here so vast and numerous, that the
composer will never be well acquainted with them, as it appears to me,
unless he be himself an accomplished organist."

The French school of organ playing is usually light, sensational, often
pleasing, but too often frivolous and unworthy of the instrument. Yet in
a certain direction they have had their great men. No one who has had
the opportunity of hearing Lefebure Wely extemporize on that great organ
at the church of Saint Sulpice, in Paris, but must acknowledge that the
performance was masterly, although widely different from the German
school. In fact, these extempore performances of Wely's were far better
than his published compositions. The prevailing tone of the French
organ-playing is dramatic, and, as before said, too often sensational.
As might be expected from the national character, it forms a great
contrast to the German style. The use of the pedal for melodic phrases
is rare, it being more generally employed simply to give the fundamental
support of the harmonies and passages executed upon the manuals. On the
other hand, much attention is paid to registration, and frequently much
talent displayed in this direction; besides, their organs are built in a
manner calculated to assist the player in this respect. Of course the
Romish ceremonial, the universally dominant religion in France, gives
much opportunity for display of this kind. To judge any of these
varieties of organ-playing, it will be seen that the standpoint of use
to which the instrument is to be put must be carefully borne in mind.
Although this school is by no means devoid of excellencies, it is not to
be recommended to the American student who is seeking a solid foundation
in organ-playing. Still it may be employed to advantage, both in the way
of recreation, general culture, and especially as studies in
registration, after the "weightier matters of the law" have received due
attention.

The English school, as a _distinctive_ method of treatment, can hardly
be said to exist. It forms a sort of middle ground between the two
schools of which I have just spoken, and their organs may be described
in the same manner as to characteristics of building. In America, of
late years, we have followed suit, copying Germany in the voicing of
most of our open and stopped pipes, both metal and wood; copying France
in the main characteristics of their reed voicing (in which they were
long pre-eminent), and copying England in the general plan of our
organs, together with their conveniences of mechanism and effects of
combination.

In spite of the fact, then, that England has no distinctive _national_
school of the instrument, still there is probably no country where so
much interest is taken in organs and organ-playing as in the England of
to-day. Her prominent organists are solidly founded on the German
school; but while they execute these great works in a masterly manner,
their _repertoire_ extends over a far wider range and variety of
compositions than the German school alone can supply. This seems to me
to be praiseworthy, for although the practice of this theory may be
carried too far, and it is certain that _everything_ cannot even
approximately be played upon the organ; yet, in view of the vast
improvements of the last twenty years, all tending to assist the players
in producing effects impossible heretofore, why should the use of these
means be ignored? The English organists, to this end, have made a vast
number of arrangements and adaptations from works not originally
composed for the organ. Very many of these are just as effective as if
originally composed for the instrument, and so far form a welcome
addition to organ literature; inasmuch as they generally embody the use
of the new improvements and facilities referred to. On the other hand,
many of these go too far, and attempt transcriptions of compositions
totally opposed to the genius of the organ. The careful student will,
however, easily be able to recognize and avoid such, if he has had the
proper foundation laid before attempting works of this class.

There are those, however (and their opinions are entitled to respect),
who claim that such free treatment of the organ is improper. These
persons would, with little or no exception, limit the _repertoire_ to
such works as have been originally written for the organ; and when they
got outside fugue or canon, would still remain carefully within the
limits of purely contrapuntal orthodoxy. Any other treatment is styled
"_illegitimate_." I had hoped to avoid this terrible word,--the great
bugbear among conscientious students of the organ,--nor do I propose to
enter into any analysis of what the "legitimate" may or may not consist
in. The fact is, we should all retain our original opinions very much
according to our early education, natural tastes, and impressions. There
has been much controversy on this point, and I do not think it necessary
to contribute to that. In any case, where the subject under discussion
cannot be considered as a _positive_ right or wrong, but largely as a
matter of taste or preference, there will always be a difference of
opinion.

Froude, the historian, says in one of his published lectures:
"Controversy has kept alive a certain quantity of bitterness; and that,
I suspect, is all that it would accomplish if continued till the day of
judgment.... Each polemic writes for his _own partisans_, and makes no
impression on his adversary." So it would be in this case.

The inference which I draw from this superficial glance at the main
characteristics of these three schools, is this:--

The American student who would excel as an organist, must first be
thoroughly educated in the German school of playing. Here alone can he
gain the solid technique which will fit him for the execution of any
tasks he may propose to himself. Only from that mine of musical wealth,
the German school, especially as represented by Bach, can the suitable
foundation-stones for the desired structure be derived. But with this
foundation broadly and deeply laid, as the building progresses upward,
the best of architects may, without fear, add many things that simply
please the eye, but bear no relation whatever to the strength or
durability of the edifice. So with the education of the organ student;
first the broad foundation, and then a judicious liberalism. His
auditors will always remain the great public, and that public to the end
of time will never be so versed in musical science that it can
appreciate the stricter forms of organ music. But very many among the
public _can_ appreciate, or at least enjoy; and this number is
increasing from year to year. I am by no means arguing that the organist
should avoid these stricter forms on this account; quite the contrary;
but simply that the judicious liberalism above referred to should
provide as great a variety of musical food as will suit and satisfy the
musical appetite within the means of the instrument as it now exists.
Nor should the "milk for babes" be despised. The workings of this
principle will surely attract rather than repel, and maturer musical
strength will instinctively call for heartier food. We have to deal with
men as we find them, and tastes vary. A programme intended for a
miscellaneous audience is, after all, only a musical bill of fare. Real
musical hunger can only be satisfied with solids; but if we first quiet
the deeper cravings with roast beef, I know of no moral obligation why
we should not finish with ice-cream, if inclination should point that
way. To invert the order would be manifestly unsound.

To my mind, then, the duty of the American organist of to-day is to be
eclectic. He has no "call" to tie himself up exclusively and strictly to
any one particular school; nor, if he pursues the right course, need his
education, technical or aesthetic, suffer on this account. But he must
justify this argument by being thorough in what he undertakes. The skill
with which a thing is done goes far to justify it, if there is any
question at all about the matter. Not that I suppose that many can be
found, who, with all talent and due diligence, can equally excel in all
styles; still the effect of liberalism in this respect cannot but have a
good effect upon the general culture, and aid not a little towards the
accomplishment of that great problem, professional success.

I cannot close without a congratulatory word respecting the standing,
present and prospective, of the profession in America to-day. I am proud
that we begin to be able to point to so many musicians (even if the
number is still relatively few) who, both from their own scientific
standpoint, and from that of general culture, are deemed worthy of being
placed side by side with the other learned professions. Is not the
creation of this college as a branch of a university course, proof of
this comparatively new but happily increasing appreciation? Of what
importance, then, to keep this present status intact, to secure it, to
increase it, by upholding the dignity of our profession! Let such as
propose to devote their lives to it, both feel and practise the idea so
beautifully expressed by Schiller in his "Ode to the Artists"--

    "O, Sons of Art! man's dignity to you is given,
                    Preserve it, then!
    It falls with you; with you ascends to heaven."

         *       *       *       *       *

    "While you her thousand paths are tracing,
    Press onward, keeping truth in sight!
    Come, all together, stand embracing
          Before the throne where paths unite!"

_Printed by the New Temple Press, Grant Road, Croydon._

[Illustration: THE ANCIENT MODE OF ORGAN BLOWING. FROM PRAETORIUS'
THEATRUM INSTRUMENTORUM. 1620.]

[Illustration: TERRA-COTTA MODEL OF HYDRAULIC ORGAN. CIR. 150 A.D.
CARTHAGE MUSEUM. FROM HERMANN SMITH'S _The Making of Sound in the Organ
and in the Orchestra._]

[Illustration: REV. F. W. GALPIN'S WORKING REPRODUCTION OF THE ROMAN
HYDRAULUS. FROM HERMANN SMITH'S _The Making of Sound in the Organ and in
the Orchestra._]




CATALOGUE B

LIST OF BOOKS ON MUSIC


Literature covering every branch of Music, Biographical and Critical
Studies of Composers, Histories of Musical Instruments, also valuable
Textbooks and Tutors for Teachers and Students of the Piano, Organ,
Violin, Cello, Theory, Singing, etc.

_All prices are net and postage extra_

              WILLIAM REEVES Bookseller Limited
             1a Norbury Crescent, London, S.W.16

                     Phone POLlards 2108

HISTORICAL, DESCRIPTIVE AND ANALYTICAL ACCOUNT OF THE ENTIRE WORKS OF
BRAHMS

BY

EDWIN EVANS (SENIOR)

The works are treated in the order of their opus number, and =every=
single composition is dealt with =exhaustively=. No other work with such
a wealth of detail exists in any language. The whole, being adequately
indexed, forms a complete reference book for pianist, student and
concert-goer, and may be described as =monumental=.

Of the =CHAMBER AND ORCHESTRAL= music, a minute analysis reaching to the
rhythmical significance of each bar is given.

The analytical accounts of the =PIANO= works are each subdivided under
the headings: Key; Time and Extent; Thematic Material; Melody; Harmony;
Rhythm; etc.

The =CHORAL= works are dealt with in the fullest detail, and original
English translations have been made to most of the =SONGS=.

Each volume is a self-contained unit and a complete textbook on its
particular subject.

=WITH 1,500 PAGES AND OVER 1,000 MUSIC EXAMPLES AND TABLES, COMPLETE IN
4 VOLUMES. OCTAVO, CLOTH,= L6 _net._ =OR SOLD SEPARATELY AS FOLLOWS:--=

=Chamber and Orchestral Works. First Series to Op. 67.= 30s. _net._

=Chamber and Orchestral Works. Second Series. Op. 68 to the end.= 30s.
_net._

=Piano and Organ Works.= Comprising the complete Solo Works; Works for
Piano and Orchestra; also Works for Piano Duet and Organ Works as
applicable to Pianoforte Solo. 30s. _net._

=Vocal Works.= With portrait. 599 pages. 30s. _net._

     "This treatise is comparable only to the Kochel catalogue of
     Mozart. Research and detail could go no further; this book, a
     labour of love indeed, will be the standard work of reference on
     Brahms for this century, if not longer."--_The Library Assistant._

AESTHETICS, CRITICISMS, ESSAYS.

=PAN PIPES. THE SPIRIT OF MUSIC= in Nature, Art and Legend, from East to
West. Penned in Sixteen Articles for General Reading, with Drawings of
Eastern Musical Instruments By G. P. GREEN (_author of_ "Some Aspects of
Chinese Music"). Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net._

=HOW TO LISTEN TO GOOD MUSIC= and Encourage the Taste in Instrumental
and Vocal Music. With many useful Notes for Listener and Executant. By
K. BROADLEY GREENE. Complete, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_; or in two books,
paper, 2s. 6d. _net_ each.

=MOZART, WEBER AND WAGNER=, with Various other Essays on Musical
Subjects. By HECTOR BERLIOZ. Translated from the French by EDWIN EVANS,
Senior, F.R.C.O. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net._

A charming Book of Musical Essays.

=SOME FAMOUS SYMPHONIES=, How to Understand Them. With their Story and
Simple Analysis. References also to Gramophone Records; numerous
Portraits. By J. F. Porte. Dealing with Symphonies of Beethoven,
Berlioz, Borodin, Brahms, Chausson, Dvorak, Elgar, Cesar Franck, Haydn,
Mendelssohn, Mozart, Schubert, Stanford and Tchaikovsky. Complete in
cloth, 8s. _net_, or in 2 separate parts, paper, 2s. 6d. _net_ each.

For the general reader and musician alike.

=THE DEATH AND RESURRECTION OF THE MUSICAL FESTIVAL.= By RUTLAND
BOUGHTON. 8vo, sewed, 1s. _net_.

     The Decay of Triennials--The Rise of Competitions--The Reform of
     Competitions--The Festival of the Future.

=SOME ASPECTS OF CHINESE MUSIC AND SOME THOUGHTS AND IMPRESSIONS ON ART
PRINCIPLES IN MUSIC.= By G. P. GREEN. Post 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_, paper
covers, 3s. 6d. _net_.

=THE FUTURE OF MUSIC.= Coming Changes Outlined in Regard to Composer,
Conductor and Orchestra. By LOUIS LALOY. Translated by MRS. FRANZ
LIEBICH. 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_; paper, 2s. _net_.

=SOME ASPECTS OF GIPSY MUSIC.= By D. C. PARKER. Post 8vo, cloth, 6s.
_net_ (or paper covers, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=MUSIC AND MUSICIANS.= Essays and Criticisms, by ROBERT SCHUMANN.
Translated, Edited and Annotated by F. R. RITTER. Portrait of Robert
Schumann, photographed from a Crayon by BENDEMANN. First Series, Eighth
Edition. Thick crown 8vo, cloth, 419 pages, 15s. _net_.

_Ditto._ Second Series. Fourth Edition, with a Contents-index added.
Thick crown 8vo, cloth, 540 pages, 15s. _net_.

=THE DEEPER SOURCES OF THE BEAUTY AND EXPRESSION OF MUSIC.= By JOSEPH
GODDARD. With many Musical Examples. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

=MUSIC AND THE HIGHER EDUCATION.= Art a Necessity in the College World.
The Teacher's Preparation and his Method. By EDWARD DICKINSON. Crown
8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=WOMAN AS A MUSICIAN.= An Art Historical Study. By F. R. RITTER, 8vo,
sewed, 3s. _net_.

=MUSICAL DEVELOPMENT=, or, Remarks on the Spirit of the Principal
Musical Forms. Being an AEsthetical Investigation, in which an Attempt is
made to show the Action in Music of certain Laws of Human Expression; to
point out what are the Spiritual Aims of the Chief Forms of Composition,
and the Broad Principles upon which they should be Constructed. By
JOSEPH GODDARD. 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=IN THE SERVICE OF ART.= A Plea for Simplicity in Music. By J.-JOACHIM
NIN. Translated by MRS. FRANZ LIEBICH. Post 8vo, 2s. 6d. _net_.

     Translations of this brilliant essay have already appeared in
     Spanish, Italian and German.

=THE PLACE OF SCIENCE IN MUSIC.= By H. SAINT-GEORGE. Addressed to
Advanced Students of that branch of Musical Knowledge commonly called
Harmony. With music examples. 8vo, sewed, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=NECESSITY OF MUSIC IN THE SCHOOL CURRICULUM.= Address delivered to
Members of the Music Teachers' Association. By A. W. POLLITT, _Mus.D.,
F.R.C.O._ 8vo, sewed, 1s. 6d. _net_.

=AESTHETICS OF MUSICAL ART=, or, The Beautiful in Music. By DR. FERDINAND
HAND. Translated from the German by WALTER E. LAWSON, Mus. Bac. Cantab,
etc. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=NATIONAL SCHOOL OF OPERA FOR ENGLAND.= Being the Substance of a Paper
read at Trinity College, London. By FRANK AUSTIN. 1s. _net_.

=MATERIAL OF MELODY= and Early Steps in Musical Art. By J. H. LEWIS. 6d.
_net_.

=MUSIC IN THE HIRSCH LIBRARY= (Part 53 of the Catalogue of Printed Music
in the British Museum), by A. Hyatt King and C. Humphries, 1951.
Published for the Trustees of the British Museum. This catalogue,
prepared by the Museum staff, lists also a considerable number of works
which were either not included in the original four volume catalogue by
P. Hirsch, or were acquired later. 4to, cloth, L2 2s. _net_.




BOOKS ABOUT MUSICIANS AND THEIR WORKS.

I.--COLLECTED.


=ON RUSSIAN MUSIC.= Critical and Historical Studies of Glinka's Operas,
Balakirev's Works, etc. With chapters dealing with Compositions by
Borodin, Rimsky-Korsakov, Tchaikovsky, Mussorgsky, Glazunov, and various
other Aspects of Russian Music. By GERALD ABRAHAM. With Frontispiece and
Music Examples. 8vo, cloth, 15s. _net._

     Companion to the same author's "Studies in Russian Music."

=STUDIES IN RUSSIAN MUSIC.= Rimsky-Korsakov and his Contemporaries.
Critical Essays on the most important of Rimsky-Korsakov's operas,
Borodin's "Prince Igor," Dargomizhsky's "Stone Guest," etc.; with
chapters on Glinka, Mussorgsky, Balakirev and Tchaikovsky. By GERALD
ABRAHAM. Copiously illustrated by music examples. 350 pages, crown 8vo,
cloth, 18s. _net._

=FROM MENDELSSOHN TO WAGNER.= Being the Memoirs of J. W. Davison, forty
years Music Critic of "The Times," compiled by his son, HENRY DAVISON,
from Memoranda and Documents. With 52 portraits of Musicians and
Important Letters (previously unpublished) of Mendelssohn, Berlioz,
Gounod, Jullien, Macfarren, Sterndale Bennett, etc. Index, 539 pages,
8vo, cloth, 25s. _net._

=WITH THE GREAT COMPOSERS.= A Series of Pen Pictures, exhibiting the
Personal Characteristics as Artists of the World's great Tone Poets in
the form of Interviews. By GERALD CUMBERLAND. Portraits. Cr. 8vo, cloth,
10s. _net._

     Deals with Chopin, Haydn, Mendelssohn, Paganini, Beethoven, Handel,
     Rossini, Schubert, Liszt, Berlioz, Mozart, Wagner, Tchaikovsky,
     Cherubini, Wolf, Borodin, Schumann, Sullivan.

=THE SYMPHONY WRITERS SINCE BEETHOVEN.= Critical Essays on Schubert,
Schumann, Goetz, Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Brueckner, Berlioz, Liszt, Strauss,
Mahler, Mendelssohn, Saint-Saens, etc. By FELIX WEINGARTNER. Translated
by A. BLES. Twelve Portraits. _Second Impression._ With Chapter added by
D. C. PARKER on Weingartner's Symphony No. 5. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.
_net._

=REEVES' DICTIONARY OF MUSICIANS.= Biographical Accounts of about 2,500
Noteworthy Musicians of the Past and Present. Edited by EDMONDSTOUNE
DUNCAN and Others. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_ (paper covers, 4s.
_net_).

=SKETCHES OF GREAT VIOLINISTS AND GREAT PIANISTS.= Biographical and
Anecdotal, with Account of the Violin and Early Violinists. Viotti,
Spohr, Paganini, De Beriot, Ole Bull, Clementi, Moscheles, Schumann
(Robert and Clara), Chopin, Thalberg, Gottschalk, Liszt. By G. T.
FERRIS. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net._ Edition with
Portraits to each, 10s. _net._

=SKETCHES OF ENGLISH GLEE COMPOSERS.= Historical, Biographical and
Critical. From about 1735-1866. By D. BAPTIE. Post 8vo, cloth 8s. 6d.
_net._

=ENGLISH GLEE AND MADRIGAL WRITERS.= By W. A. BARRETT. 8vo, cloth, 6s.
_net_ (paper covers, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=SOME MUSICAL RECOLLECTIONS OF FIFTY YEARS.= By RICHARD HOFFMAN. With
Memoir by MRS. HOFFMAN. Illustrated with many Plate Portraits. Crown
8vo, cloth, 10s. _net._

=MUSICAL MEMORIES.= By WILLIAM SPARK, _Mus.Doc. (late Organist of the
Town Hall, Leeds)_. Revised Popular Edition. With sixteen Portraits.
Thick crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net._

=BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY OF FIDDLERS.= Including Performers on the
Violoncello and Double Bass, Past and Present. Containing a Sketch of
their Artistic Career, together with Notes of their Compositions. By A.
MASON CLARKE. Nine Portraits. Post 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net._

     "We may here take the opportunity of recommending a useful book to
     all lovers of violins and violinists. Fiddlers, Ancient and Modern,
     is practically a little Biographical Dictionary, well arranged,
     with some excellent portraits."--_Northern Whig._

=HOW TO STUDY THE PIANOFORTE WORKS OF THE GREAT COMPOSERS.= By HERBERT
WESTERBY Mus.Bac. Handel, Bach, Haydn, Scarlatti, Mozart, Clementi, C.
P. E. Bach. With Portraits and Musical Examples throughout. Crown 8vo,
cloth 12s. _net._

The following issued singly, paper covers: HANDEL, 1s.; D. SCARLATTI,
1s.; J. S. BACH, 1s. 6d.; C. P. E. BACH AND HAYDN, 1s.; CLEMENTI, 1s.;
MOZART, 1s. 6d.

=MAKERS OF MUSIC.= Biographical Sketches of the Great Composers. With
Chronological Summaries of their Works and Facsimiles from Musical MSS.
of Bach, Handel, Purcell, Dr. Arne, Gluck, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven,
Weber, Schubert, Berlioz, Mendelssohn, Chopin, Schumann, Wagner, Verdi,
Gounod, Tchaikovsky, Brahms and Grieg, with General Chronological Table.
By R. FARQUHARSON SHARP. Numerous Portraits. Fourth Edition, Revised and
Enlarged. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

     The author's endeavour throughout this work has been to convey an
     impression of the personality of each composer, as well as to
     furnish biographical details. At the end of each biography is a
     tabulated list of the composer's works and dates of production,
     together with a facsimile from one of his original manuscripts. A
     useful volume, got up in good style and well adapted for a gift or
     prize. Has speedily run into several editions.

=BRITISH MUSICAL BIOGRAPHY.= A Dictionary of Musical Artists, Authors
and Composers born in Britain and its Colonies. By J. D. BROWN and S. S.
STRATTON. 8vo, cloth, 21s. _net_.




BOOKS ABOUT MUSICIANS AND THEIR WORKS.


II.--INDIVIDUAL.

=BACH. A DIGEST OF THE ANALYSES OF J. S. BACH'S FORTY-EIGHT CELEBRATED
FUGUES FROM THE WELL-TEMPERED CLAVIER= (Das Wohltemperirte Klavier).
With over 1,600 Music Examples and 46 Tables. The five parts in one
thick royal 8vo vol., cloth, 25s. _net_. Compiled by BROOK SAMPSON,
F.R.C.O.

The following parts can be had separately:--

Section I, Subject, Answer, Theme. 2s. 6d. _net_.

Section II, Exposition, Counter-Exposition, Plan of Construction. 2s.
6d. _net_.

Section III, Subject and Counter-Subject, etc. 5s. _net_.

Section IV, Codetta and Episodes. 5s. _net_.

Section V, Stretti--Summary of Interesting Facts--General Index. 5s.
_net_.

=THE FORTY-EIGHT FUGUES IN THE WELL-TEMPERED CLAVIER= (Das
Wohltemperirte Klavier). By J. S. BACH. Analysed by BROOK SAMPSON,
Mus.Bac. Oxon., F.R.C.O.

Following obtainable, 1s. 6d. _net each_.

  No. 4, in C sharp minor
  No. 9, in E major
  No. 16, in G minor
  No. 18, in G sharp minor
  No. 24, in B minor
  No. 28, in C sharp minor
  No. 29, in D major
  No. 34, in E minor
  No. 36, in F minor
  No. 38, in F sharp minor
  No. 40, in G minor

=OUTLINE ANALYSIS OF BACH'S FORTY-EIGHT FUGUES.= By BROOK SAMPSON. 3s.
_net_.

=BALFE: HIS LIFE AND WORK.= By WM. ALEXANDER BARRETT. Over 300 pages.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

=A CRITICAL STUDY OF BEETHOVEN'S NINE SYMPHONIES=, with a Few Words on
His Trios and Sonatas, a Criticism of "Fidelio" and an Introductory
Essay on Music. By HECTOR BERLIOZ. Translated from the French by EDWIN
EVANS, _Senior_. Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth, 21s. _net_.

=BEETHOVEN AND HIS PIANO WORKS= (Sonatas, Concertos, Variations, etc.).
Descriptive and Analytic Aid to their Understanding and Rendering. By
HERBERT WESTERBY. With list of Principal Editions and Bibliography. 3
illustrations, 45 music examples. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.


"THE IMMORTAL NINE."

=BEETHOVEN'S NINE SYMPHONIES.= Fully Described and Analysed. A Series of
Chapters giving a complete Account of Thematic Material and auxiliary
Motives: an Analytical Chart of each Movement; full Technical
Descriptions of Developments; Particulars of Formal and Rhythmic
Features; Epitomical Tables, etc. Illustrated by 637 Musical Examples.
By EDWIN EVANS (Senior), _author of_ "Handbook to the Vocal Works of
Brahms," etc. Cloth, Vol. I (Nos. 1 to 5), 17s. 6d. _net_. Vol. II (Nos.
6 to 9), 17s. 6d. _net_.

=BEETHOVEN'S SYMPHONIES= in their Ideal Significance, Explained by ERNST
VON ELTERLEIN. Translated by FRANCIS WEBER. With an Account of the Facts
Relating to Beethoven's Tenth Symphony. By L. NOHL. Second Edition, with
Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=BEETHOVEN'S SYMPHONIES= Critically Discussed by ALEXANDER TEETGEN. With
Preface by JOHN BROADHOUSE. Second Edition. Post 8vo, cloth, 6s. 6d.
_net_.

=BEETHOVEN'S PIANO SONATAS.= A Descriptive Commentary on the Sonatas in
the light of Schnabel's Interpretations; giving an aesthetic Appreciation
of each Sonata, with an Outline of the Development of the Sonata Form in
Beethoven's hands. With a Biographical Sketch of Schnabel and an account
of his activity as an executant, composer and teacher. By RUDOLF
KASTNER. Englished by GERALD ABRAHAM. 55 pages, post 8vo, cloth, 5s. 6d.
NET (paper, 3s. 6d. NET).

=BEETHOVEN'S PIANOFORTE SONATAS= Explained for the Lovers of the Musical
Art. By ERNST VON ELTERLEIN. Translated by E. HILL, with Preface by
ERNST PAUER. Revised Edition (the Seventh issue). With Portrait, and
View of Beethoven's House. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

     "He writes with the ripe knowledge and thorough understanding of a
     practical musician. Every musical student or amateur can safely
     trust him as a competent and agreeable guide."--E. PAUER.

=NOTES ON THE INTERPRETATION OF 24 FAMOUS PIANO SONATAS OF BEETHOVEN.=
By J. ALFRED JOHNSTONE (_author of_ "The Art of Teaching Piano Playing,"
"Piano Touch, Phrasing and Interpretation," etc.). Portrait, crown 8vo,
cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

=BEETHOVEN.= By RICHARD WAGNER. With a Supplement from the Philosophical
Works of Arthur Schopenhauer. Translated by EDWARD DANNREUTHER. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. _net_.

     "It is a plain duty to be familiar and even intimate with the
     opinion of one famous man about another. Gladly therefore we
     welcome Mr. Dannreuther's translation of the work before us. Mr.
     Dannreuther has achieved his task with the conscientiousness of his
     nature and with a success due to much tact and patience."--_Musical
     Times._

     "This work contains his contributions towards the metaphysics of
     music, if, indeed, such can be said to exist. Apart, however, from
     metaphysics, the work is an exposition of Wagner's thoughts on the
     significance of Beethoven's music."--_Grove's Dictionary._

=BORODIN THE COMPOSER AND HIS MUSIC.= A Descriptive and Critical
Analysis of his Works and a Study of his Value as an Art Force. With
many references to the Russian Kouchka Circle of Five--Balakirev,
Moussorgsky, Cesar Cui and Rimsky-Korsakov, with Borodin. By G. E. H.
ABRAHAM. With 5 Portraits. Thick crown 8vo, cloth, 15s. _net_.

=LIFE OF JOHANNES BRAHMS.= By FLORENCE MAY. Second Edition. Revised by
the Author, with additional matter and Illustrations, and an
Introduction by Ralph Hill. In 2 vols., 8vo, cloth, 35s. _net_.

=LIFE OF CHOPIN. By FRANZ LISZT.= New and very much Enlarged Edition.
Translated in full now for the first time by JOHN BROADHOUSE. Second
Edition, Corrected. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

     "Franz Liszt has written a charming sketch of Chopin's life and
     art."--_Encyclopaedia Britannica._

     "Liszt's criticisms upon his separate works have all the eloquent
     mysticisms to be expected from him; and the biography is a book
     musicians will always prize."--_Sunday Times._

GEORGE SAND describes it as "un peu exuberent en style, mais rempli de
bonnes choses et de tres belles pages."

=CHOPIN, HIS LIFE AND LETTERS.= By MORITZ KARASOWSKI. Translated by
EMILY HILL. Third Edition, with additional Letters in Polish with
English translation, Chopin to Grzymala, and extra Illustrations.
Fourteen Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 21s. _net_.

     Karasowski was a close friend of the family of Chopin and was
     intimate with them for several years. He was given access to the
     letters, many of which were subsequently destroyed during the
     Warsaw insurrection, written by Chopin to his family in Poland
     throughout his life abroad. These facts give this work particular
     value, and to it we are also indebted for valuable information
     regarding Chopin's life.

=CHOPIN'S GREATER WORKS= (Preludes, Ballads, Nocturnes, Polonaises,
Mazurkas). How they should be Understood. By J. KLECZYNSKI. Including
Chopin's Notes for a "Method of Methods." Translated with additions by
N. JANOTHA and Edited by SUTHERLAND EDWARDS. Second Edition. With three
Portraits and a Facsimile. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net_.

=FREDERIC CHOPIN=, Critical and Appreciative Essay. By J. W. DAVISON,
forty years Music Critic of "The Times." 8vo, 3s. _net_.

=CHOPIN: AS REVEALED BY EXTRACTS FROM HIS DIARY.= By COUNT TARNOWSKI.
Translated from the Polish by N. JANOTHA. With eight Portraits. Crown
8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_ (or paper cover, 3s. 6d. _net_).

In the above notes Chopin alludes to many of his compositions as well as
relating the conditions under which they were written.

=CHOPIN THE COMPOSER AND HIS MUSIC.= An Analytical Critique of Famous
Traditions and Interpretations, as exhibited in the Playing of Great
Pianists, Past and Present. By JOHN F. PORTE. With portrait. 193 pages,
crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. 6d. _net_.

     "Your excellent book gives me supreme pleasure. You judge tradition
     so well. I thank you for your artistic sympathy and your wonderful
     book."--MORITZ ROSENTHAL.

=HOW TO PLAY CHOPIN.= The Works of Chopin. Their Proper Interpretation.
By J. KLECZYNSKI. Translated by A. WHITTINGHAM. Sixth Edition. Woodcut
and Music Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     "Contains the cream of Chopin's instructions to his own pupils. To
     admirers of Chopin and players of his music we should say this book
     is indispensable."--_Bazaar._

=HANDBOOK TO CHOPIN'S WORKS.= Detailed Account of all Compositions of
Chopin. Short Analyses for Piano Student and Critical Quotations from
Writings of Well-known Musical Authors. Also a Short Biography, Critical
Bibliography and a Chronological List of Works, etc. By G. C. A. JONSON.
Third edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 15s. _net_.

     "Here in one compact volume, is all that it is necessary to know
     about Chopin and his works except by the leisured
     enthusiast."--_Daily Chronicle._

=CHERUBINI, LIFE OF.= By F. J. CROWEST. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_.

=CHERUBINI.= Memorials illustrative of his Life. By E. BELLASIS. Thick
crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

     Standard biography of Cherubini.

=CESAR FRANCK.= Personal Reminiscences. By J. W. HINTON, M.A., Mus.D.
Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 5s. _net_.

=GLUCK AND HIS OPERAS.= With an Account of their Relation to Musical
Art. By HECTOR BERLIOZ. Translated from the French by EDWIN EVANS,
Senior. Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=HANDEL'S "MESSIAH."= The Oratorio and its History. A Handbook of Hints
and Aids to its Public Performance, with useful Notes on each Movement,
as well as Numerous References and much Original Information. By J.
ALLANSON BENSON. Cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper 3s. _net_).

=FRANZ LISZT.= By T. CARLAW MARTIN. A Sketch of his Life and
Personality. Post 8vo, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=LISZT, COMPOSER, AND HIS PIANO WORKS.= Descriptive Guide and Critical
Analysis, written in a popular and concise style. By HERBERT WESTERBY,
Mus.Bac. Lon., etc. 5 illustrations, 24 music examples. 336 pp., crown
8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

=THE ORGAN PARTS OF MENDELSSOHN'S ORATORIOS AND OTHER CHORAL WORKS.=
Analytically Considered. By ORLANDO A. MANSFIELD, _Mus.Doc._, _F.R.C.O._
Numerous Musical Examples. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=HOW TO INTERPRET MENDELSSOHN'S "SONGS WITHOUT WORDS"= (the celebrated
"Lieder ohne Worte"). A Readable and Useful Guide for All. Gives the
Piano Student helpful Insight into the first Principles of Form in
Music. By CHARLES W. WILKINSON. With portrait and facsimile of MS. Crown
8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper, 3s. 6d. _net_).

     These notes on each of the "Lieder" will help the student in
     playing these homely and easily intelligible compositions.

=ANALYSIS OF MENDELSSOHN'S ORGAN WORKS.= A Study of their Structural
Features. For the Use of Students. By JOSEPH W. G. HATHAWAY, _Mus.B.
Oxon._ 127 Musical Examples. Portrait and Facsimiles. Crown 8vo, cloth,
8s. 6d. _net_.

=MOZART=: a Commemorative Address read before the Positivist Society. By
V. LUSHINGTON. 8vo, 2s. _net_.

     Mozart and Religion.

=MOZART AND THE SONATA FORM=: A Companion Book to any Volume of the
Sonatas for Piano, including an Analysis of the Form of each Movement,
with Notes upon Treatment and Tonality, by J. R. TOBIN, Mus.B. Crown
8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=THE SONATA=: Its Form and Meaning, as Exemplified in the Piano Sonatas
by Mozart. A Descriptive Analysis, with Musical Examples. By F. H.
MARKS. Sq. 8vo, well printed on good paper, cloth, 15s. _net_; paper,
10s. 6d. _net_; or in two volumes (Nos. 1 to 9 and 10 to 20), paper,
each 6s. _net_.

=QUESTIONS ON MOZART'S SONATAS=, both Educational and Suggestive. By F.
HELENA MARKS. Aid and Companion to the Study of the Author's work, "The
Sonata: Its Form and Meaning as Exemplified in the Piano Sonatas by
Mozart." For Teachers and Students. 2s. 6d. _net_.

=PURCELL.= By WILLIAM H. CUMMINGS, _Mus. Doc._ Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.
_net_.

=RACHMANINOFF.= An Exhilarating Biographical Study of this Genius of the
Keyboard. By WATSON LYLE. With Critical Survey of his Works as recorded
on Gramophone Records, also his Playing of other Composers' Works.
Preface by LEFF POUISHNOFF. Two Portraits and List of Works. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 15s. _net_.

=FRANZ SCHUBERT=, Man and Composer. A Vivid Story of a Charming
Personality. By C. WHITAKER-WILSON. With Original Translations into
English of eight Well-known Schubert Songs, together with the Music for
the Voice. Portraits and Illustrations of Schubert and his Friends.
Handsome volume, thick crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 15s. _net_.

     Schubert--the most poetical musician that ever was.--LISZT.

     Schubert--the man with the Divine Spark.--BEETHOVEN.

=HENRY SMART'S ORGAN COMPOSITIONS ANALYSED.= By J. BROADHOUSE. Crown
8vo, cloth, 5s. _net_.

=TEMPLETON AND MALIBRAN.= Reminiscences of these Renowned Singers, with
Original Letters and Anecdotes. Three Authentic Portraits by MAYALL.
8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=WAGNER'S TEACHINGS BY ANALOGY.= His Views on Absolute Music and of the
Relations of Articulate and Tonal Speech, with Special Reference to
"Opera and Drama." A Series of Papers for the Student. By EDWIN EVANS,
Senior, F.R.C.O. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_; paper, 3s. 6d. _net_.

     The above forms an introduction to Wagner's Prose Writings.

=WAGNER'S "PARSIFAL."= And the Bayreuth Fest-Spielhaus. By N. KILBURN.
Paper, 1s. _net_.

=WAGNER SKETCHES=, 1849. A Historical Retrospect in vindication of
Wagner. By WILLIAM ASHTON ELLIS. Cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_ (paper 2s. _net_).


=OPERA AND DRAMA.= By RICHARD WAGNER. Translated by EDWIN EVANS, Senior,
F.R.C.O. Vol. I: Part I. Opera and the Essence of Music. Part II. The
Stage-Play and Dramatical Poetic Art in the Abstract. Vol. II: Part III.
Poetry and Music in the Drama of the Future. The Three Parts in 2 vols.
Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth, 30s. _net_.

     The value of the study of Wagner's prose writing as an education to
     the musical student cannot be over-estimated, and amongst these
     prose writings "Opera and Drama" may be considered his principal
     critical and theoretical production. Without a study of its
     contents no true and lasting understanding of opera can be arrived
     at.

     Wagner writing to his friend Uhlig said:

     _"Here you have my testament; I may as well die now--anything
     further that I could do seems to me a useless piece of luxury."_

     ERNEST NEWMAN in "A Study of Wagner," writes: "Although there
     appears here and there in his prose-work something of the vast
     synthetic power of his musical imagination--such a work as 'Opera
     and Drama,' for instance, finally compelling our admiration for its
     tenacity of purpose and the breadth of vision that sweeps so far
     before and after."

=WAGNER'S PROSE WORKS.= Translated by WM. ASHTON ELLIS. Vol. I, The
Art-Work of the Future, etc., 21s. _net_; Vol. II, Opera and Drama, 25s.
_net_; Vol. III, The Theatre, 21s. _net_; Vol. IV, Art and Politics,
21s. _net_; Vol. V., Actors and Singers, _out of print_; Vol. VI,
Religion and Art, _out of print_; Vol. VII, In Paris and Dresden, 25s.
_net_; Vol. VIII, Posthumous, etc., 25s. _net_. Complete sets are
occasionally available. Apply to the publishers of this list for
particulars.

=DIARY OF A PILGRIM IN THE NETHERLANDS.= The Holy Grail in Bruges and
Other Impressions of Travel. Bruges, Courtrai, Tournai, Amsterdam, the
Hague, Antwerp. By ROSE KOENIG. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_ (paper
covers, 2s. _net_).

=HOW TO UNDERSTAND WAGNER'S "RING OF THE NIBELUNG."= Being the Story and
a Descriptive Analysis of the "Rheingold," the "Valkyr," "Siegfried" and
the "Dusk of the Gods." With Musical Examples of the Leading Motives of
each Drama. By GUSTAVE KOBBE. Together with a Sketch of Wagner's Life.
By N. KILBURN, Mus.Bac. Cantab. Seventh Edition, with Additions, a
Portrait and Facsimile. Post 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     "Description and analysis go hand in hand with the narration of the
     story. Musical examples are given as aids to the identification of
     the leading motives and an index makes it easy for any reader to
     turn up any particular motive instantly."--_Yorkshire Observer._

=MY RECOLLECTIONS OF RICHARD WAGNER.= By AUGUST LESIMPLE. Post 8vo,
cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_ (paper covers, 2s. _net_).

=WAGNER.= A Sketch of his Life and Works. By N. KILBURN, Mus.Bac.
Cantab. Paper, 1s. _net_.

=ON CONDUCTING.= By RICHARD WAGNER. Translated by EDWARD DANNREUTHER.
Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     "One of the finest of his minor publications, and to the
     professional musician, perhaps the most instructive, giving his
     views as to the true way of rendering classical music, with
     numerous directions how to do it, and how not to do it, together
     with many examples in musical type from the instrumental works of
     Beethoven, Weber, Mozart, etc."--_Grove's Dictionary._

=WAGNER.= "Ring of the Nibelungen." Being the Story concisely told of
"Das Rheingold," "Die Walkuere," "Siegfried" and "Goetterdaemmerung." By N.
KILBURN, Mus.Bac. Cantab. Crown 8vo, paper, 2s. _net_.

=THREE IMPRESSIONS OF BAYREUTH.= The 1908 and Previous Wagner Festivals.
By ROSE KOENIG. With Two Facsimile Programmes. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
_net_ (paper, 2s. _net_).

=LIFE OF WEBER.= With List of his Compositions. By SIR J. BENEDICT.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_.

=BERLIOZ AND THE ROMANTIC CENTURY.= By J. BARZUN. Two volumes. 18
illustrations. Demy 8vo, cloth, 42s. _net_.

     This monumental work, on which Professor Barzun has been engaged
     for twenty years, is the first comprehensive book on Berlioz in the
     English language.


HISTORY OF MUSIC, AND OF MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.

=STRINGED INSTRUMENTS OF THE MIDDLE AGES.= Their Evolution and
Development. By HORTENSE PANUM. English edition, revised and edited by
JEFFREY PULVER. A detailed and comprehensive history, with
illustrations, of the evolution of the mediaeval stringed musical
instruments from their first appearance in the records of the earliest
civilisations, through their gradual development in the Greek, Roman and
Christian eras down to more recent times. 400 illustrations, 8vo, cloth,
pp. ix, 511, 35s.

     Many years of travel and research were necessary to make the
     production of this work possible. The author, in addition, has most
     painstakingly searched mediaeval literature and the records of
     contemporary art for references to and descriptions of the
     instruments dealt with, and it is believed that the account here
     given of them is as complete as it is possible to make it.

     The book is most generously illustrated and carefully indexed by
     the editor. No pains have been spared to secure drawings or
     photographs of practically every type mentioned.

=TRIBAL MUSIC AND DANCING IN THE SOUTHERN SUDAN=, at Social and
Ceremonial Gatherings. A descriptive account of the music, rhythm, etc.,
from personal observation. By DR. A. N. TUCKER. 5 illustrations, 61
music examples illustrating the dances, songs and rhythm. 57 pages, demy
8vo, 10s. 6d. _net_ (or paper, 6s. 6d. _net_).

=HISTORY OF THE TRUMPET= of Bach and Handel. A New Point of View and New
Instruments. Forming a History of the Trumpet and its Music, from its
earliest use as an artistic instrument to the middle of the 18th
century. Special reference given to its employment by Bach and Handel,
and the correct modern performance of old parts; including a description
of the new instrument invented by the author for this purpose. By WERNER
MENKE. Englished by GERALD ABRAHAM. With 5 plates and music supplement.
English and German text. 223 pages, crown 8vo, cloth, 15s. _net_.

=BOWED HARP (THE).= A Study showing Fresh Light on the History of Early
Musical Instruments. By OTTO ANDERSSON, Ph.D., President of the Swedish
University at Aebo. From the Original Swedish Edition, revised by the
Author. The Translation Edited with additional footnotes by Kathleen
Schlesinger. 116 Illustrations, Bibliography and Index. 340 pages, 8vo,
cloth, 30s. _net_.

     "A valuable contribution to the literature about early musical
     instruments."--_The Strad._

=MUSIC IN MEDIAEVAL SCOTLAND.= By DR. HENRY G. FARMER. Introduction by
SIR RICHARD R. TERRY, Mus.Doc. 8vo, sewed, 5s. _net_.

=MUSIC OF THE MOST ANCIENT NATIONS=, Particularly of the Assyrians,
Egyptians and Hebrews; with special reference to Discoveries in Western
Asia and in Egypt. By CARL ENGEL. This issue has large size
reproductions of Harp unearthed at Ur (1928), and of Silver Military
Trumpet from the Tomb of Tut-Ankh-Amen in the Valley of the Kings
(unearthed 1926). The volume has about 100 illustrations. Thick 8vo,
cloth, 30s. _net_.

=STORY OF INDIAN MUSIC AND ITS INSTRUMENTS.= A Study of the Present and
a Record of the Past. Together with Sir William Jones' celebrated
Treatise in full. With 19 Plates, chiefly of Instruments, 7 Music
Illustrations and a Map. By ETHEL ROSENTHAL, _A.R.C.M., F.R.G.S._ Crown
8vo, cloth, 15s. _net_.

=OPERA STORIES OF TO-DAY AND YESTERDAY=, Retold Act by Act (including
Wagner's 5 "The Ring" Operas). By EDMONDSTOUNE DUNCAN. Complete, cloth,
6s. 6d. _net_.

     A racy account of the plots and histories of fifty famous operas,
     from Purcell, Gluck and Mozart, to Richard Strauss and Ethel Smyth.

=OLD ENGLISH PSALMODY.= By W. T. BROOKE. First Series: From the
Accession of Edward VI to the Restoration of Charles II, 1547-1660.
Second Series: Psalmists from 1660-1800. Crown 8vo, paper covers, 3s.
6d. _net_ each series.

=THE GIPSY IN MUSIC.= By FRANZ LISZT. Englished for the first time by
EDWIN EVANS, _Senior_, and preceded by an Essay on Liszt and his Work.

     Gipsy and Jew, Two Wandering Races. Gipsy Life in Relation to Art.
     Gipsy Music and Musicians.

The result of the Author's long Experience and Investigations of the
Gipsies and their Music. With Portraits of the Author, etc. In two
handsome volumes, 8vo, cloth, 30s. _net_.

=ARABIC MUSICAL MANUSCRIPTS IN THE BODLEIAN LIBRARY.= Plate of two
Musical Instruments from early Arabic Manuscripts. By H. G. FARMER,
_M.A., Ph.D._ 8vo, sewed, 10s. _net_.

=HISTORY OF THE HARP.= From the Earliest Period. By JOHN THOMAS
(_Pencerdd Gwalia_). 8vo, paper covers, 6s. _net_.

=HISTORY OF RUSSIAN MUSIC.= By M. MONTAGU-NATHAN. Being an Account of
the Rise and Progress of the Russian School of Composers. With a Survey
of their Lives and a Description of their Works. Frontispiece. 2nd
Edition, Revised. Thick crown 8vo, cloth, 15s. _net_.

     "Mr. Montagu-Nathan's book breaks new ground; it introduces the
     English reader to a number of composers many of whom until recently
     were nothing more than names. Mr. Montagu-Nathan presents a vast
     amount of new material to the music-loving public of this country
     ... his book should find many eager readers."--_Manchester
     Courier._

     "... We want a book packed full of hard stuff. This we get at its
     best in ... Mr. Montagu-Nathan's 'History.'"--_Saturday Review._

=MUSIC AND MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS OF THE ARAB=, with Introduction on How to
Appreciate Arab Music by FRANCESCO SALVADOR-DANIEL (_Director, Paris
Conservatoire of Music, 1871_). Edited with Notes, Memoir, Bibliography
and thirty Examples and Illustrations, by DR. H. G. FARMER. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 25s. _net_.

=THE STUDENT'S HISTORY OF MUSIC.= History of Music, from the Christian
Era to the Present Time. By DR. F. L. RITTER. Third Edition. 478 pages
of Letterpress and 72 Plates of Musical Illustrations. Thick crown 8vo,
cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

=IRISH MUSICAL HISTORY=, Introductory Sketch of, by W. H. GRATTAN FLOOD.
A compact Record of the Progress of Music in Ireland during 1,000 Years.
Portraits. Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s. 6d. _net_ (paper 3s. _net_).

=RISE AND DEVELOPMENT OF OPERA.= Embracing a Comparative View of the Art
in Italy, Germany, France and England. By JOSEPH GODDARD. Showing the
Cause of the Falling Back of the English School in the Modern Period,
and the Compensation which that Involved. Numerous Musical Examples,
Portraits and Facsimiles. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

=RISE AND DEVELOPMENT OF MILITARY MUSIC.= By DR. H. G. FARMER. With
Illustrations of Early Instruments and Musical Examples, and Short
Biographical Notices of all the Staff Bandmasters. Preface by LIEUT. A.
WILLIAMS, _M.V.O., Mus.Doc., Bandmaster of Grenadier Guards_. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 15s. _net_.

=CATECHISM OF MUSICAL HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY= By F. J. CROWEST. Revised
and Enlarged Edition. Tenth Thousand. 187 pages. Post 8vo, cloth, 5s.
_net_ (paper, 2s. 6d. _net_).

     _Musical Education_ says: "An excellent little book--yet not so
     little since it contains an immense amount of
     information--historical, biographical and critical--in a very small
     compass."

=THE TROUBADOUR AS MUSICIAN=, Past and Present. By C. A. HARRIS. Cloth,
5s. _net_ (paper, 2s. 6d. _net_).

=POLISH MUSIC AND CHOPIN, ITS LAUREATE.= A Historical Account from 995
to the Present Time, including Chopin and his Works. By E. RAYSON. Four
Portraits. Square 8vo, cloth, 5s. _net_ (paper, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=NATIONAL MUSIC OF THE WORLD.= By H. F. CHORLEY. Edited by H. G.
HEWLETT. Many Music Examples. New Issue, with Index added. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 10s. 6d. _net_.

     Treats of the national tunes, folk-songs and airs of various races
     of the world. The chapters are undoubtedly marked in a high degree
     with the critic's acumen, attesting the wide range of Chorley's
     learning.

=CHRONOMETRICAL CHART OF MUSICAL HISTORY.= Presenting a Bird's Eye View
from the Pre-Christian Era to the XXth Century. By C. A. HARRIS,
_A.R.C.O._, etc. On linen, folded in case, 5s. _net_ (on special paper,
2s. 6d. _net_).

     "Sure to be very useful to students ... excellently arranged and
     seems to be very accurate and thorough."--DR. RALPH DUNSTAN.

=HISTORICAL FACTS FOR THE ARABIAN MUSICAL INFLUENCE ON MUSICAL THEORY.=
By HENRY GEORGE FARMER, _M.A., Ph.D._ Thick crown 8vo, cloth, 27s. 6d.
_net_.

     Dr. Farmer's researches into the MUSIC OF THE ARABS OF THE MIDDLE
     AGES, a period when these people led the world's culture, have
     universal recognition. He now throws a flood of fresh light on many
     obscure corners in the History of Mediaeval Music.

     The present work undoubtedly breaks fresh ground in history, and is
     from the hands of a scholar.

=THE PAST AND THE FUTURE.= An Inaugural Lecture at Gresham College. By
SIR F. BRIDGE, _Mus.Doc._ Crown 8vo, sewed, 1s. _net_.

=THE WORLD'S EARLIEST MUSIC.= Traced to its Beginnings in Ancient Lands.
By collected Evidences of Relics, Records, History and Musical
Instruments, from Greece, Etruria, Egypt, China, through Assyria and
Babylonia to the Primitive Home, the Land of Akkad and Sumer. By HERMANN
SMITH. With sixty-five full-page Illustrations and Cuts, nearly 400
pages. Crown 8vo, cloth, 21s. _net_.

THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF MUSIC. Chapters on the Study of Musical
History. By EDWARD DICKINSON. With Annotated Guide to Music Literature.
Over 400 pages. Thick 8vo, cloth, 18s. 6d. _net_.

     ERNEST NEWMAN (_Manchester Guardian_) writes: " ... the extent and
     the accuracy of the information conveyed make the book
     indispensable to _students_ and to _public libraries_."

=GENERAL HISTORY OF MUSIC= from the Infancy of the Greek Drama to the
Present. By W. S. ROCKSTRO. Fourth Edition, 535 pages. Thick 8vo, cloth,
21s. _net_.

=TREATISE ON BYZANTINE MUSIC.= By S. G. HATHERLEY. 208 Musical Examples.
162 pages, 4to, cloth, 25s. _net_.

     There are upwards of 50 unabbreviated musical pieces, ancient and
     modern, from Greek, Russian, Turkish and Egyptian sources, given
     and fully analysed.


ORCHESTRAL.

=THE CHAMBER AND ORCHESTRAL WORKS OF JOHANNES BRAHMS. FIRST SERIES TO
OP. 67.= Historical, Descriptive and Analytical Account of each Work
treated in the order of the Opus number, and preceded by a Didactic
Section. With Exhaustive Structural, Thematic and Rhythmical Analyses,
and a complete Rhythmical Chart of each Movement. By EDWIN EVANS,
Senior. With 435 music examples and tables. 8vo, cloth, 30s. _net_.

=THE CHAMBER AND ORCHESTRAL WORKS OF JOHANNES BRAHMS. SECOND SERIES, OP.
68 TO THE END.= By EDWIN EVANS, Senior. Uniform with the above. With 633
music examples and tables. 8vo, cloth, 30s. _net_.

     The above two volumes are a complete technical account of the
     chamber and orchestral music, with the exception of the two piano
     concertos. They form a part of the Historical, Descriptive and
     Analytical Account of the Entire Works of Brahms advertised on page
     2.

=ORCHESTRAL AND BAND INSTRUMENTS.= A Short Account of the Instruments
used in the Orchestra, and in Brass and Military Bands. By G. F.
BROADHEAD, Mus.B. Dunelm, L.Mus.T.C.L. With 24 Illustrative Music
Examples. 8vo, cloth, 5s. _net_ (paper, 3s. _net_).

=CONCISE METHOD OF INSTRUMENTATION.= How to Write for the Orchestra and
Arrange an Orchestral or Band Score. Illustrated with Musical Examples
and various large folding Charts and Index. By EDWIN EVANS, _Senior_,
_author of_ "Beethoven's Nine Symphonies Fully Described and Analysed,"
etc. 8vo, cloth. Vol. I, 15s. _net_; Vol. II, 15s. _net_; Vol. I. How to
Write for Strings, Arrangement of Scoring and Preparation of Parts. With
Charts. Vol. II. How to "Write for Wood, Brass and Drums, and Arrange a
Band Score. With large folding Charts."

=INSTRUMENTS AND ART OF THE ORCHESTRA.= An Introductory Study. With
Table showing Range of each Instrument. By P. W. DE COURCY-SMALE,
_Mus.Bac._ Cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper, 3s, 6d. _net_).

=ORCHESTRAL WIND INSTRUMENTS=, Ancient and Modern. Being an Account of
the Origin and Evolution of Wind Instruments from the Earliest to the
most Recent Times. Illustrated with Plates specially prepared for this
Work, giving sixty-one Examples of Instruments (or parts) described. By
ULRIC DAUBENY. Important original work fully illustrated with beautiful
Reproductions taken from fine Photographs of the Actual Instruments.
8vo, cloth, 21s. _net_.

=HANDBOOK ON THE TECHNIQUE OF CONDUCTING.= By SIR ADRIAN BOULT. Seventh
Edition, revised. 5s. _net_.

=PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR THE CONDUCTOR= and Useful Notes for the Orchestra.
By F. W. DE MASSI-HARDMAN. With Music Examples and Diagrams. 3s. _net_.

=ART OF THE CONDUCTOR.= A Suggestive Guide to the Theory and Practice.
With 41 Diagrams and Examples. By HECTOR BERLIOZ. Translated by J.
BROADHOUSE. Cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

=A MUSICAL ZOO.= Twenty-four Illustrations displaying the Ornamental
Application of Animal Forms to Musical Instruments (Violins, Viol da
Gambas, Guitars, Pochette, Serpent, etc.) Drawn from the Carved Examples
by HENRY SAINT-GEORGE. Cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=THE FUTURE OF MUSIC.= Coming Changes Outlined in Regard to Composer,
Conductor and Orchestra. By LOUIS LALOY. Translated by MRS. FRANZ
LIEBICH. 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_ (paper, 2s. _net_).

=HOW TO PLAY FROM SCORE.= Treatise on Accompaniment from Score on the
Organ or Piano. By F. FETIS. Translated by A. WHITTINGHAM. With forty
pages of Examples. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     This popular and useful book might have been entitled "The Art of
     Making Arrangements for the Organ or Pianoforte from Full
     Orchestral and Other Scores." It contains all that is necessary to
     know upon this subject.

=ON CONDUCTING.= By RICHARD WAGNER. Translated by E. DANNREUTHER. Fourth
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     WEINGARTNER, speaking of this celebrated work, says: "Wagner's book
     laid the foundation for a new understanding of the function of the
     conductor, in whom we now recognise, not only the eternal factor
     that holds together an orchestral, choral or operatic performance,
     but above all the spiritualising internal factor that gives the
     performance its very soul."

     _Grove's Dictionary_ says "One of the finest of his minor
     publications, and to a professional musician perhaps the most
     instructive. A Treatise on _Style_, giving his views as to the true
     way of rendering classical music, with minute directions how to do
     it and how not to do it, together with many examples in musical
     type from the instrumental works of Beethoven, Weber, Mozart, etc."

=NOTES ON CONDUCTING AND CONDUCTORS.= By T. R. CROGER, _F.R.G.S.,
F.Z.S._, also the Organising and Conducting of Amateur Orchestras, with
three full-page Illustrations of the various "Beats" and Plan of the
Orchestra. Fifth Impression, Revised and Enlarged. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.
_net_ (paper, 3s. _net_).

     "A mine of good things."--_Musical Opinion._

     "One of the best guides to conducting."--_Music Trades Review._

=ABOUT CONDUCTING.= Practical Advice on Concerts, Rehearsals, the
Orchestra, Players, Scores and Parts, etc. by SIR HENRY WOOD (Conductor
and Organiser of the Promenade Concerts). With two plans, crown 8vo,
cloth, 5s. 6d. _net_.


ORGAN.

=TECHNICS OF THE ORGAN.= An Illuminative Treatise on many Points and
Difficulties connected therewith. Special Treatment of Rhythm,
Minimisation of the Use of Accessories, Extemporisation, Expressive
Regulation of Organ Tone and Accompaniment. By EDWIN EVANS, Senior,
F.R.C.O. With over 100 Music Examples. 4to, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

     A valuable Book to help a Moderate Player to become a Master.

=NEW ORGAN PRINCIPLES AND THEIR INTERPRETATION.= A Guide to and
Suggestions on Phrasing and Registration with a view to improved Organ
Playing. By TERENCE WHITE. With 54 music examples. Octavo, cloth, 6s.
_net_ (paper covers, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=ORGAN OF THE ANCIENTS FROM EASTERN SOURCES= (Hebrew, Syriac and
Arabic). By HENRY GEORGE FARMER, M.A., Ph.D., Carnegie Research Fellow.
Foreword by CANON F. W. GALPIN. With numerous Illustrations. Square 8vo,
cloth, 27s. 6d. _net_.

     "An authoritative treatment of the subject."--_Grove's Dictionary._

=TECHNICS OF ORGAN TEACHING.= A Handbook which treats of Special Points
in Organ Teaching Examinations, together with Test Questions. By R. A.
JEVONS. 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=ART OF ORGAN ACCOMPANIMENT IN THE CHURCH SERVICES.= What to Do and what
to Avoid: being a Guide to the Organist in the effective rendering of
the Music. By WALTER L. TWINNING, _F.R.C.O._, author of "Examination
Test Questions," etc. Cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper covers, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=MODERN ORGAN BUILDING.= Being a Practical Explanation and Description
of the Whole Art of Organ Construction, with Especial Regard to
Pneumatic Action. Together with Chapters on Tuning, Voicing, etc. By
WALTER and THOMAS LEWIS (_Organ Builders_). =Third edition=, with
additional matter and Diagrams added, covering the latest developments
in electrical control, unit chest, etc., and organ blowing. 116
illustrations, including 76 drawn to scale and reproduced from actual
working drawings, together with diagrams, tables, etc. xxix, 247 pages,
4to, cloth.

=THE ORGAN AS VIEWED FROM WITHIN.= A Practical Handbook on the Mechanism
of the Organ. By JOHN BROADHOUSE. With over fifty Illustrations. Second
Impression. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net_.

=THE PEDAL ORGAN.= Its History, Design and Control. By THOMAS CASSON.
With folding Diagram. Second Impression. 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_.

=THE EARLY ENGLISH ORGAN BUILDERS= and their Works, from the Fifteenth
Century to the Period of the Great Rebellion. An Unwritten Chapter on
the History of the Organ. By DR. E. F. RIMBAULT. Well printed, with
Woodcuts. Post 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

=THE ORGAN=: A Comprehensive Treatise on its Structure, Capabilities,
History and Bibliography. With Criticisms and Depositories, preceded by
an Analytical Consideration of general Bibliographical and Catalogual
Construction. By J. W. WARMAN, _late Organist of the Anglican Cathedral,
Quebec_. Four parts [A to Nou. (the rest unprinted)], 15s. _net_.

     The parts advertised above are all that have been published, as the
     untimely death of Mr. Warman prevented the completion of the work.
     The book is a mine of wealth for those interested in organ
     subjects. The author devoted the best part of his life in compiling
     the work and collecting material for his subject.

=SOME CONTINENTAL ORGANS= (Ancient and Modern) and their Makers. With
Specifications of many of the fine Examples in Germany and Switzerland.
By JAMES I. WEDGEWOOD. Post 8vo, cloth, 6s. 6d. _net_.

     Contains specification and a brief _critique_ of some of the famous
     old Continental organs. Describes also several up-to-date
     Continental organs. Amongst others particulars are given of those
     at Haarlem, Cologne, Aix-la-Chapelle, Frankfort, Heidelberg, Ulm,
     Stuttgart, Einsiedeln, Strassburg and Antwerp. This work forms a
     valuable supplement to Hopkins's and Rimbault's great treatise.

=MODERN ORGAN TUNING=, The How and Why, Clearly Explaining the Nature of
the Organ Pipe and the System of Equal Temperament, together with an
Historic Record of the Evolution of the Diatonic Scale from the Greek
Tetrachord. By HERMANN SMITH. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     "The greatest authority on acoustical matters connected with organ
     pipes who has ever lived," says Mr. G. A. Audsley of Hermann Smith
     in his "Art of Organ Building."

=THE TEMPLE EDITION OF ORGAN OVERTURES AND ARRANGEMENTS=, all with Ped.
Obb. 3s. _net_ each.

     See page 25 for list of about sixty works in this series, including
     works by Wagner, Tchaikovsky, Beethoven, Mozart, Handel, Berlioz,
     Glinka, Schubert, Gounod, Herold, Mendelssohn, Meyerbeer, Balfe,
     Auber, Rossini, Weber, Wallace, Suppe, Adam, Thomas, Nicolai,
     Sterndale-Bennett, Cornelius and Flotow, chiefly arranged by Edwin
     Evans.

=THE INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN IN HISTORY.= By DUDLEY BUCK. Fresh issue
with Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 4s. _net_ (or paper, 2s. _net_).

=ORGANIST'S REPERTOIRE GUIDE.= An International Repertoire Guide
(Historical, Educational and Descriptive) to Foreign, British and
American Works. By HERBERT WESTERBY, B.B.C. Organ Recitalist (_author
of_ "Liszt, Composer, and his Piano Works"). 4to, cloth, 17s. 6d. _net_.

     Describes the best Organ Music of foreign countries as well as of
     Britain and America.

     A large and beautifully presented quarto work, fully illustrated by
     thirty-six plates on fine art paper, comprising seven English and
     sixteen foreign organs, thirty-one portraits, and illustrations of
     the houses of Bach and Handel.

=REFORM IN ORGAN BUILDING.= By THOMAS CASSON. Crown 8vo, sewed, 2s. 6d.
_net_.

=TUTOR FOR THE AMERICAN ORGAN AND HARMONIUM.= By W. F. TAYLOR. 4to, 2s.
6d. _net_.

=THE BYRD ORGAN BOOK=, for Piano or Organ. A Collection of 21 Pieces
(Pavans, Galliards, etc.), by William Byrd, 1543-1623, edited from the
Virginal MSS., and now first published in Modern Notation. By M. H.
GLYN, 7s. 6d.

     "A charming collection."--_West Sussex Gazette._

=ADVICE TO YOUNG ORGANISTS.= By J. T. FIELD. 6d. _net_.

=THE ORGAN FIFTY YEARS HENCE.= A Study of its Development in the Light
of its Past History and Present Tendencies. By FRANCIS BURGESS,
_F.S.A._, _Scot._ 8vo, 2s. _net_.


THE TEMPLE EDITION OF ORGAN OVERTURES. (3 Staves).

Arranged from Full Score by Edwin Evans, Senr. (except where other wise
stated).

Price 3/-_net_ each.

  =ATHALIE= (Mendelssohn).
  =BARBER OF BAGDAD= (Peter Cornelius).
  =BEATRICE AND BENEDICT= (Berlioz).
  =BENVENUTO CELLINI= (Berlioz).
  =BOHEMIAN GIRL= (Balfe).
  =CALM SEA AND PROSPEROUS VOYAGE= (Mendelssohn).
  =CARNAVAL ROMAIN= (Berlioz).
  =CORSAIR= (Berlioz).
  =CROWN DIAMONDS= (Auber).
  =EGMONT= (Beethoven).
  =EURYANTHE= (Weber).
  =FAUST= (Gounod).
  =FAUST= (Wagner).
  =FESTIVAL OVERTURE= (Tschaikowsky).
  =FIGARO= (Mozart).
  =FINALE= (Rubinstein's Sonata, Op. 12).
  =FLYING DUTCHMAN= (Wagner).
  =FRA DIAVOLO= (Auber).
  =FREISCHUTZ= (Weber). A. Whittingham.
  =ISABELLA= (Suppe).
  =ITALIANA= (Rossini).
  =KING LEAR= (Berlioz).
  =KING STEPHEN= (Beethoven). P. J. Mansfield.
  =LA CLEMENZA DI TITO= (Mozart). P. J. Mansfield.
  =L'AFRICAINE= (Meyerbeer).
  =LA REINE DE SABA= (Gounod).
  =LARGO= from Beethoven's Sonata in E flat. W. A. C. Cruikshank.
  =LE SONGE D'UNE NUIT D'ETE= (Thomas).
  =LIFE FOR THE CZAR= (Glinka).
  =LIGHT CAVALRY= (Suppe).
  =LOHENGRIN= (Wagner).
  =LURLINE= (Wallace).
  =MAGIC FLUTE= (Mozart).
  =MARITANA= (Wallace).
  =MASANIELLO= (Auber).
  =MEISTERSINGERS= (Wagner).
  =MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR= (Nicolai).
  =MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM= (Mendelssohn).
  =MIGNON= (A. Thomas).
  =NAIADES, THE= (Sterndale Bennett).
  =OBERON= (Weber). A. Whittingham.
  =OTHO= (Handel).  W. A. C. Cruikshank.
  =1812 OVERTURE= (Tschaikowsky).
  =POET AND PEASANT= (Suppe).
  =PARSIFAL= (Wagner).
  =RAYMOND= (Thomas).
  =RIENZI= (Wagner).
  =ROSAMUNDE= (Schubert).
  =RUY BLAS= (Mendelssohn).
  =SCIPIO= (Handel).
  =SEMIRAMIDE= (Rossini).
  =SI J'ETAIS ROI= (Adam).
  =SIRENE, LA= (Auber).
  =SON AND STRANGER= (Mendelssohn). W. A. C. Cruikshank.
  =STRADELLA= (Flotow).
  =TANCREDI= (Rossini).
  =TANNHAUSER= (Wagner).
  =TRISTAN AND ISOLDA= (Wagner).
  =WAVERLEY= (Berlioz).
  =WILLIAM TELL= (Rossini). A. Whittingham.
  =ZAMPA= (Herold).


PIANO SOLO OVERTURES.

Price 2/-_net_ each.

  =BOHEMIAN GIRL= (Balfe).
  *=CALIPH OF BAGDAD= (Boieldieu).
  =CROWN DIAMONDS= (Auber).
  =DER FREYSCHUTZ= (Weber).
  =DON GIOVANNI= (Mozart).
  =DONNA DEL LAGO= (Rossini).
  =FRA DIAVOLO= (Auber).
  =GUY MANNERING= (Sir H. R. Bishop).
  =IDOMENEO= (Mozart).
  =IL BARBIERE= (Rossini).
  *=IL TANCREDI= (Rossini).
  =LIGHT CAVALRY= (Suppe).
  =MAGIC FLUTE= (Zauberfloete), (Mozart).
  =MARITANA= (Wallace).
  =MASANIELLO= (Auber).
  *=MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR= (Nicolai).
  =MIGNON OVERTURE= (A. Thomas).
  =NOZZE DE FIGARO= (Mozart).
  *=POET AND PEASANT= (Suppe).
  =RAYMOND= (Thomas).
  =SEMIRAMIDE= (Rossini).
  =WILLIAM TELL= (Rossini).
  *=ZAMPA= (Herold).

* Also arranged as Duet (piano, 4 hands), price 2/6 _net_.



PIANOFORTE.

=THE PIANO WORKS OF BRAHMS.= By EDWIN EVANS, _Senior_. Historical,
Descriptive and Analytical Account of each Work treated in the Order of
the Opus number, and preceded by a Didactic Section. 8vo, cloth, 30s.
_net_.

     The above volume is a complete technical account of the piano
     works. It forms a part of the Historical, Descriptive and
     Analytical Account of the Entire Works of Brahms advertised on page
     2.

=HOW TO PLAY BACH'S 48 PRELUDES AND FUGUES.= A Guide Book for the use of
Piano Students as an aid to the Unravelling and Interpretation of these
Masterpieces, ensuring a more Intelligent Keyboard Rendering. By C. W.
WILKINSON. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=NATURAL TECHNICS IN PIANO MASTERY.= A Complete and Authoritative
Manual, covering every phase of Piano Playing and Study. Many Diagrams
of Hand and Finger Technique and some Music Examples. By JACOB
EISENBERG. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

=PARTHENIA=, or the First Musick ever printed for the Virginals. 21
Compositions by three Famous 16th and 17th century Masters, William
Byrd, Dr. John Bull and Orlando Gibbons. Arranged for the Piano and
freed from the errors of Dr. Rimbault's edition by accurate comparison
with the original text by MARGARET H. GLYN. Folio, 12s. 6d. _net_.

     This edition of "Parthenia" has been entirely re-engraved.

=THE APPROACH TO LISZT.= A Course of Modern Tonal-Technique for the
Piano, in the form of Graded Studies from the Moderately Difficult to
the Master Stage. By HERBERT WESTERBY, _Mus.Bac. Lond., F.R.C.O., etc._
Folio, 5s. 6d. _net_.

     Preliminary Studies in Touch and Phrasing in all Keys. Based on the
     Scales and Broken Chords.

     Intermediate Studies in Sequential, Wrist and Preparatory Arpeggio
     Work in the Black and White Key Positions.

     Advanced Sequential Studies on the Black Keys, with Sixteen
     Excerpts from Liszt's Piano Works. The Master Works: Fifty-eight
     Excerpts from Liszt.

=THE ART OF TUNING THE PIANOFORTE.= A New Comprehensive Treatise to
enable the Musician to Tune his Piano upon the System founded on the
Theory of Equal Temperament. By HERMANN SMITH. New Edition, thoroughly
Revised. Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 6s. _net_.

=ESSENTIALS IN PIANO-PLAYING=, and other Musical Studies. By J. ALFRED
JOHNSTONE, Hon. L.Mus., T.C.L. Portrait, 243 pages. Crown 8vo, cloth,
10s. _net_.

=EXTEMPORISING AT THE PIANO MADE EASY.= A Manual for Beginners in
Musical Composition. Hints and Aids for the "From Brain to Keyboard"
Composer. By REV. E. H. MELLING, _F.R.C.O._ 8vo, limp cloth, 3s. 6d.
_net_ (paper 2s. _net_).

=INDIVIDUALITY IN PIANO TOUCH.= By ALGERNON H. LINDO and J. ALFRED
JOHNSTONE. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=THE ARTIST AT THE PIANO.= Essays on the Art of Musical Interpretation.
By GEORGE WOODHOUSE. New and Revised Edition. Portrait of Paderewski.
8vo, cloth, 5s. 6d. _net_.

     The celebrated pianist, Paderewski, after reading the manuscript of
     this stimulating volume, wrote: "The booklet is quite a remarkable
     work and a really valuable contribution to the philosophy of
     pianistic art."

=THE STUDENT'S GUIDE TO THE ART OF TEACHING THE PIANOFORTE.= By CYRIL R.
H. HORROCKS, L.R.A.M., L.T.C.L., A.R.C.M. With an Extensive and
Carefully Graded List of Studies and Course of the Great Masters.
Numerous Musical Examples. Second edition, Revised. Crown 8vo, cloth,
10s. _net_.

     Until quite recently it was thought impossible to give practical
     instructions on the art of teaching, but the error of this idea has
     been proved by the great success of the teachers' class at the
     various musical institutions. The author's aim is to supply a
     guide-book expressly for beginners and those with limited
     experience in the art.

=PIANOFORTE TEACHER'S GUIDE.= By L. PLAIDY. Translated by FANNY RAYMOND
RITTER. Crown 8vo, boards, 3s. _net_ (paper, 2s. _net_).

     "Some of the finest pianists of the day owe much of their technical
     facility to Plaidy's excellent method."--_Bazaar._

=CANDIDATE'S SCALE AND ARPEGGIO TESTS= for the Piano. In the Primary,
Elementary and Junior Grades of all Local Examinations in Music, and the
Higher and Lower Divisions of the Associated Board of the R.A.M. and
R.C.M. By WILSON MANHIRE. 1s. _net_.

=TECHNICAL STUDY IN THE ART OF PIANOFORTE PLAYING= (Deppe's Principles).
By C. A. EHRENFECHTER. With numerous Illustrations. Fourth Edition.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_.

     CONTENTS: Position--Arm--Wrist--Fingers; Touch (Tone Production);
     Legato; Equality of Tone; Tension and Contraction; Five Finger
     Exercises; Skips; The Scale; Arpeggio Chords; Firm Chords; High
     Raising of the Arm; Melody and its Accompaniment; Connection of
     Firm Chords; The Tremolo: The Shake (Trill); The Pedal; Fingering.

=HOW TO ACCOMPANY AT THE PIANO.= By EDWIN EVANS. (Plain Accompaniment,
Figurated Accompaniment, Practical Harmony for Accompanists). 172 Music
Examples which are made Clear by the Explanatory Text. Crown 8vo, cloth,
10s. _net_.

=GRADUATED SCALE AND ARPEGGIO MANUAL.= Compiled for the various Exams.
By HENRY SAINT-GEORGE. 3s. _net_.

=A SYSTEM OF STUDY OF SCALES AND CHORDS.= Being Chapters on the Elements
of Pianoforte Technique. By B. VINE WESTBROOK, F.R.C.O. Numerous
Examples. New and Revised edition. 8vo, 3s. _net_.

     The author outlines a scheme which abolishes the drudgery and
     inspires the pupil with an enthusiasm for practice and formulates a
     method or system in which that practice may be carried out.

=PIANO CLASSES IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS.= By AUDREY KING. With Music
Examples. Crown 8vo, 1s. _net_.

=HOW TO PLAY 110 FAVOURITE PIANO SOLOS.= Being the 4 Series complete in
1 vol. of "Well-Known Piano Solos: How to Play them with Understanding,
Expression and Effect." By CHARLES W. WILKINSON. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s.
6d. _net_.

=WELL-KNOWN PIANO SOLOS.= How to Play them with Understanding,
Expression and Effect. By C. W. WILKINSON. Four Series, 2s. each (each
series containing about 26 articles), or four in one vol. as above.

     Contents of the First Series:--SINDING, Rustle of Spring.
     SCARLATTI, Pastorale le Capriccio. PADEREWSKI, Minuet in G. HANDEL,
     Harmonious Blacksmith. RUBINSTEIN, Melody in F. SCHARWENKA, Polish
     Dance. SCHUMANN, Nachtstuecke. GODARD, Mazurka. DELIBES, Pizzicati
     from Sylvia. GRIEG, Wedding Day at Troldhangen. ELGAR, Salut
     d'Amour. PADEREWSKI, Melodie. RAFF, La Fileuse. TCHAIKOVSKY,
     Troika. GODARD, Berger et Bergeres. CHAMINADE, Pierrette.
     MOSZKOWSKI, Etincelles. PADEREWSKI, Minuet in A major. GRIEG,
     Norwegian Bridal Procession. LISZT, Regata Veneziana. CHAMINADE,
     Automne. MOSZKOWSKI, Serenata. LACK, Valse Arabesque. SCHUMANN,
     Arabeske. CHOPIN, Etude in G flat. DURAND, First Valse.

     Draws one's attention to the beauties in a piece, explains
     difficulties here and there, draws attention to a pedal effect and
     any peculiarity of fingering, and generally gives all the
     information a professor is expected to give to his pupils.

=DELIVERY IN THE ART OF PIANOFORTE PLAYING=, On Rhythm, Measure,
Phrasing, Tempo. By C. A. EHRENFECHTER. Second Edition. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 6s. _net_.

     "The section with reference to accent is particularly good. There
     are numerous illustrations from the works of the masters."--W. H.
     WEBBE in _The Pianist's A. B. C._

=PIANO TOUCH, PHRASING AND INTERPRETATION.= By J. Alfred Johnstone.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

=PRACTICE REGISTER= for Pupil's Daily Practice. A Specimen, 1d. (or 2s.
6d. per 100).

=REEVES' VAMPING TUTOR.= Art of Extemporaneous Accompaniment, or Playing
by Ear on the Pianoforte, Rapidly Enabling anyone having an Ear for
Music (with or without any Knowledge of Musical Notation) to Accompany
with Equal Facility in any Key. Practical Examples. By FRANCIS TAYLOR.
New Edition, to which is added Instructions for Accompaniment with Equal
Facility in every Key illustrated by Examples. Folio, 2s. _net_.

=THE DEPPE FINGER EXERCISES= for Rapidly Developing an Artistic Touch in
Pianoforte Playing, Carefully Arranged, Classified and Explained by AMY
FAY (Pupil of Tausig, Kullak, Liszt and Deppe). Folio, English or
Continental Fingering, 2s. _net_.

=INTRODUCTION TO RUSSIAN PIANO MUSIC.= By HERBERT WESTERBY,
Mus.Bac.Lond., F.R.C.O., L.Mus.T.C.L., 1s. _net_.

=REEVES' POPULAR PIANOFORTE TUTOR.= Rudiments of Music, Exercises with
Popular Airs, Major and Minor Scales. With Illustration of Fingerboard.
Folio, 2s. 6d. _net_.


TECHNICAL AND THEORETICAL.

=ESSENTIALS IN MUSIC STUDY FOR EXAMINATIONS.= A Helpful Guide both for
the General Student and Candidates for Junior and Intermediate
Examinations. By REV. E. H. MELLING, F.R.C.O. Cloth, 5s. _net_ (paper
covers, 2s. 6d. _net_).

     Rev. E. H. Melling is the author of several popular works which
     have been found of great use to music students--"Guide for the
     Young Composer," "Extemporising at the Piano made Easy," etc.

=GUIDE FOR THE YOUNG COMPOSER.= Hints on the Art of Composition, with
Examples of Easy Application. By REV. E. H. MELLING, F.R.C.O. Cloth, 5s.
_net_ (paper covers, 2s. 6d. _net_).

=EXAMINATION TEST QUESTIONS.= Containing spaces for the Pupils' Written
Answers. By WALTER L. TWINNING, F.R.C.O. No. 1, Musical Notation and
Time; No. 2, Formation of Scales; No. 3, Ornaments; No. 4, Intervals,
9d. _net_ each.

=THEORY OF MUSIC FOR YOUNG MUSICIANS.= With Answers given to all the
Questions, and a Dictionary of necessary Musical Terms. By MARY SHARP.
Limp cloth, 2s. 6d. _net_ (paper covers, 1s. 6d. _net_).

=102 TEST QUESTIONS ON THE GENERAL RUDIMENTS OF MUSIC.= In Groups of Six
each Lesson, for Written or Oral Use. By WILSON MANHIRE, L.R.A.M. 6d.
_net_.

=PRIMARY COURSE IN THE RUDIMENTS OF MUSIC=, With Hints on Answering
Questions (Written Work) for All Examinations in the Primary, Elementary
and Preparatory Grades. By WILSON MANHIRE, L.R.A.M., etc. 2s. _net_.

=EXAMINATION CANDIDATE'S GUIDE= to Scale and Arpeggio Piano Playing
(with Tests). All that is required for the Various Exams. By WILSON
MANHIRE, L.R.A.M. 3s. _net_.

=CANDIDATE'S SCALE AND ARPEGGIO TESTS= for the Piano. By WILSON MANHIRE,
L.R.A.M. 1s. _net_.

=STUDIES IN MODULATION= for Practical and Theoretical Purposes. By PERCY
BAKER, F.R.C.O., etc. Cloth, 5s. 6d. _net_ (paper, 3s. _net_).

=MUSICAL FORM=, A Handbook to, for Instrumental Players and Vocalists.
By E. VAN DER STRAETEN. With Musical Examples, 205 pages. 8vo, cloth,
6s. 6d. _net_ (paper 4s. _net_).

     The part of the work on Dance Forms gives a history and description
     of the Suite or Partita, Allemande, Courante, Sarabande, Gigue,
     Gavotte, Musette, Bourree, Branle, Passepied, Rigaudon, Loure,
     Pavane, Galliard, Tambourin, Cebell, Rondo, Menuet, Polonaise,
     Mazurka, Bolero, Tarantella, Saltarello, March, Ciaccone and
     Passacaglia.

=STUDIES IN HISTORICAL FACTS AND MUSICAL FORM.= Being a Guide and Note
Book for a more Systematic Preparation of the General Knowledge Papers
now set at the Universities and Colleges of Music. By PERCY BAKER.
Cloth, 5s. 6d. _net_ (paper, 3s. _net_).

=MOZART AND THE SONATA FORM.= By J. R. TOBIN, Mus.B. _See Pianoforte
Section._

=FUGUE.= A Conversational Address delivered to the Incorporated Guild of
Church Musicians. By J. H. LEWIS, Mus.Doc. (Victoria College of Music).
Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 2s. _net_.

=MUSICAL EXPRESSIONS, PHRASES AND SENTENCES=, with their Corresponding
Equivalents in French, German and Italian. By F. BERGER. 8vo, cloth, 5s.
6d. _net_ (paper, 3s. _net_).

=RUDIMENTS OF MUSIC=, Set forth in Graded QUESTIONS with ANSWERS, for
Use of Candidates preparing for the Examinations of R.A.M., R.C.M. and
T.C.L. By B. HOWARTH, L.R.A.M. and A.R.C.M. Crown 8vo, 2s. _net_.

     _The Answers are always on the right hand page and can be covered
     over if desired, the Questions being on the corresponding left hand
     pages._

=ELEMENTARY LESSONS ON SIGHT-SINGING.= Combining the Staff and Tonic
Sol-fa Notations. With Music Examples throughout. By J. W. ROSSINGTON,
L.R.A.M. Cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_; paper, 2s. _net_.

     For many singers there is only one method of becoming good
     sight-readers, viz., combining the tonic sol-fa with the staff
     notation. It is hoped that a perusal of these elementary lessons
     will show the principles on which this combination is effected, and
     simplify the somewhat difficult task of sight-reading.

=STEPS IN HARMONY.= With Copious Explanatory Examples and Graded Test
Exercises. A Handbook for Students. By DR. CHURCHILL SIBLEY. With Music
Examples throughout. Crown 8vo, boards, cloth back, 6s. _net_ (paper,
3s. 6d. _net_).

     It is believed that he who thoroughly masters the contents of these
     pages will be prepared to study intelligently the harmonic
     structure of the works of the great masters, and also to follow
     critically the changeful tendencies of the present day.

=600 QUESTIONS AND 600 EXERCISES IN ELEMENTARY MUSICAL THEORY.= By W. H.
PALMER. Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s. _net_ (paper covers, 3s. _net_).

     Intended as a help to the private student and to the candidate
     preparing for the several musical examinations.

=THE MODAL ACCOMPANIMENT OF PLAIN CHANT.= A Practical Treatise. By EDWIN
EVANS, Senior, F.R.C.O. Part I, Theoretical; Part II, Practical School
of Plain Chant Accompaniment, consisting of 240 Exercises, with an
Appendix of Notes. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net_.

=THE HARMONISING OF MELODIES.= A Text-Book for Students and Beginners.
By H. C. BANISTER. Third Edition, with numerous Musical Examples. Crown
8vo, limp cloth, 5s. _net_.

=MUSICAL ANALYSIS.= A Handbook for Students. By H. C. BANISTER. With
Musical Illustrations. Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 5s. _net_ (paper covers,
2s. 6d. _net_).

=THE ART OF MODULATING.= A Series of Papers on Modulating at the
Pianoforte. By HENRY C. BANISTER. With 62 Musical Examples. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper covers, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=MODERN CHORDS EXPLAINED.= (The Tonal Scale in Harmony.) By ARTHUR G.
POTTER. Musical Examples from C. Debussy, Richard Strauss and Granville
Bantock. 8vo, cloth, 4s. _net_ (paper covers, 2s. _net_).

=EXERCISES IN VOCAL SCORE READING.= Collected from the Works of Orlando
di Lasso, Palestrina, Vittoria, Barcroft, Redford, Peter Certon, Byrd,
Gibbons, Croft, Rogers, Boyce, etc. For Students preparing for the
R.C.O. and other Examinations. By JAMES LYON, Mus.Doc. Oxon. 4to, 4s.
6d. _net_.

=EXERCISES IN FIGURED BASS AND MELODY HARMONIZATION.= By JAMES LYON,
Mus.Doc. 4to, 3s. 6d. _net_.

=EXAMPLES OF FOUR-PART WRITING FROM FIGURED BASSES AND GIVEN MELODIES.=
By JAMES LYON, Mus.Doc. 4to, 5s. 6d. _net_.

     These exercises are printed in open score so as to be of use in
     score reading tests. This volume forms a key to "Exercises in
     Figured Bass" by the same author (see above).

=HOW TO COMPOSE.= A Practical Guide to the Composition of all Works
within the Lyric Form, and which include the Valse, Gavotte, Mazurka,
Polonaise, March, Minuet, and all Ordinary Dance Forms; as also the
Nocturne, Impromptu, Berceuse, Reverie and Similar Characteristic
Pieces. By EDWIN EVANS, Senior, F.R.C.O. With 60 Musical Examples. Crown
8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

=THE RUDIMENTS OF GREGORIAN MUSIC.= By FRANCIS BURGESS, F.S.A., Scot.
Second Impression. Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 2s. 6d. _net_ (paper, 1s. 6d.
_net_).

=MUSICAL PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY.= By DR. DUDLEY BUCK. Eighth Edition,
with the Concise Explanation and Pronunciation of each Term. Edited and
Revised by A. WHITTINGHAM. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. _net_ (paper, 1s. 6d.
_net_).

     A most valuable and useful little book to all musical people. The
     method adopted for giving the pronunciation of each term is most
     concise and clear.

=A FIRST BOOK OF MUSIC FOR BEGINNERS=, Embodying English and Continental
Teaching. By ALFRED WHITTINGHAM. Sixth Thousand. Crown 8vo, sewed, 4d.
_net_.

=HARMONY, EASILY AND PROGRESSIVELY ARRANGED.= Presenting in a Simple
Manner the Elementary Ideas as well as the Introduction to the Study of
Harmony. With about 300 Musical Examples and Exercises. By PAUL COLBERG.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     AUGUST WILHELMJ says: "This work is distinguished by brevity and
     clearness. I most warmly recommend it."

=COMPEND OF MUSICAL KNOWLEDGE.= By PERCY BAKER, F.R.C.O., L.Mus. T.C.L.
Being a Guide with Notes, Hints and Articles on the Study of Examination
Questions. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper, 3s. 6d. _net_).

     _Primarily_ to help candidates entering for the R.C.O. and T.C.L.
     Diplomas, though containing much information for the amateur
     musician and general reader. Indispensable to teachers in guiding
     their pupils through a course of study dealing with a large number
     of subjects like those set for the F.R.C.O. and A.R.C.O.

=ELEMENTARY MUSIC.= A Book for Beginners. By DR. WESTBROOK. With
Questions and Vocal Exercises. Fifteenth Thousand. Crown 8vo, cloth, 4s.
_net_ (paper, 2s. _net_).

     CONTENTS: 1. The Staff and its Clefs. 2. Notes and their Rests. 3.
     Bars and Time. 4. Accidentals. 5. Keys and Scales. 6. Intervals. 7.
     Musical Pitch. 8. Accent. 9. Secondary Signs. 10. Ornaments and
     Groups of Notes. 11. Voices and Scores. 12. Church Modes. 13.
     Italian and other Directions. 14. Foreign Note-Names. 15.
     Questions. 16. Vocal Exercises.

     "His explanations are extremely clear. The questions at the end
     will be found very useful."--_Musical Times._

=EXERCISES ON GENERAL ELEMENTARY MUSIC.= A Book for Beginners. By K.
PAIGE. Fourth Edition. Part I, 1s. 6d. _net_; Part II, 2s. _net_. Crown
8vo, paper (2 parts complete in cloth, 5s. _net_).

     CONTENTS OF PART I: 1. Pitch. 2. Length of Sounds. 3. Time. 4. Time
     and Accent. 5. Intervals. 6. Scales. 7. Transposition. 8.
     Syncopation. 9. Signs and Abbreviations. 10. Notation. 11.
     Miscellaneous Questions and Exercises.

     CONTENTS OF PART II: 1. Triads. 2. First Inversion of a Triad. 3.
     Second Inversion of a Triad. 4. Dissonances. 5. Suspensions. 6.
     Sequences. 7. Cadences. 8. Dominant Sevenths, etc.

=HOW TO MEMORISE MUSIC.= By C. F. KENYON. With numerous Musical
Examples. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s. _net_.

     "Mr. Kenyon proves himself an excellent guide; and indeed we know
     of no other work devoted to the subject with which he has dealt so
     thoroughly and so successfully."--_Glasgow Herald._

=HOW TO HARMONIZE MELODIES.= With Hints on Writing for Strings and
Pianoforte Accompaniments. By J. HENRY BRIDGER, Mus.Bac. With Musical
Examples throughout. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_.

=THE ART OF MODULATION.= A Handbook showing at a Glance the Modulations
from one Key to any other in the Octave, consisting of 1,008
Modulations. For the Use of Organists and Musical Directors. Edited by
CARLI ZOELLER. Third Edition. Roy. 8vo, cloth, 8s. _net_ (paper, 5s.
_net_).

=THE STUDENT'S BOOK OF CHORDS.= With an Explanation of their Inversions
and Resolutions. By PASCAL NEEDHAM. Crown 8vo, sewed, 1s. 6d. _net_.

     The chords with their inversions and resolutions are briefly and
     clearly explained.

=TRANSPOSITION AT SIGHT.= For Students of the Organ and Pianoforte. By
H. E. NICHOL. Fourth Edition, with numerous Musical Exercises. Crown
8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_; paper, 2s. _net_.

     The practice of transposing upon the lines here laid down develops
     the "mental ear," quickens the musical perception and gives ease in
     sight reading; as it is evident that, if the student can
     _transpose_ at sight, he will not have much difficulty in merely
     _playing_ at sight. Free use is made of the tonic sol-fa as well as
     the standard notation in many musical examples.

=SCHUMANN'S RULES AND MAXIMS FOR YOUNG MUSICIANS.= Sewed, 6d.

=THE STUDENT'S HELMHOLTZ.= Musical Acoustics, or the Phenomena of Sound
as Connected with Music. By JOHN BROADHOUSE. With more than 100
Illustrations. Fifth Impression. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d. _net_.

     "In his Preface the author says: 'The object of the present book is
     to give, in one volume, a good general view of the subject to those
     who can neither spare time to read, nor money to buy a number of
     large and expensive works.' A perusal of the book justifies us in
     asserting that this design is most satisfactorily carried out; and
     it is not too much to say that although the plan of the work
     excludes the possibility of minutely dissecting every subject
     treated upon, any careful reader may obtain so clear an insight
     into the principle of acoustics, as to enable him not only to pass
     an examination but to store up a large amount of general knowledge
     upon the phenomena of sound."--_Musical Times._


VIOLIN AND STRINGED INSTRUMENTS.

=VIOLINIST'S MANUAL.= A Treatise on Construction, Choice, Care,
Adjustment, Study and Technique of the Violin. Full of Useful and
Practical Advice regarding the Violin and Bow. By H. F. GOSLING.
Numerous Illustrations and an Index. Crown 8vo, cloth, 15s. _net_.

=VIOLIN TECHNICS=, or How to Become a Violinist. Exact Instructions,
Step by Step, for its Accomplishment with or without a Teacher. By
"FIRST VIOLIN." 3s. _net_.

=PLAYING AT SIGHT FOR VIOLINISTS= and Others in an Orchestra. Valuable
Hints and Aids for its Mastery. By SYDNEY TWINN. Post 8vo, 3s. _net_.

ADVANCED MODERN VIOLIN TECHNICS.

=TONAL SCALES AND ARPEGGIOS FOR VIOLIN.= Introductory to the Unusual
Intonation and Finger-grouping of Advanced Modern Music. By SYDNEY
TWINN. 4to, 3s. _net_.

     "These scales will be useful to advanced players who find
     difficulties in the unusual intonation and technique of modern
     music"--_Strad._

=SCALES AND ARPEGGIOS.= Indispensable Studies for the Violin. Edited by
ALBERT GRAFF. 1s. 6d. _net_.

=ARPEGGIOS FOR THE VIOLIN.= By BASIL ALTHAUS. Folio. 3s. _net_.

=VIOLINIST'S ENCYCLOPAEDIC DICTIONARY.= Containing the Explanation of
about 4,000 Words, Phrases, Signs, References, etc., Foreign, as well as
English, used in the Study of the Violin, and also by String Players
generally, by F. B. EMERY, M.A. New and enlarged edition, doubled in
size. 246 pp., crown 8vo. Cloth 10s. _net_, paper, 7s. 6d. _net_, or on
India paper and bound in red pegamoid rounded corners, 12s. 6d. _net_.
Suitable for student or travel.

=70 PREPARATORY VIOLIN EXERCISES= for Beginners in the First Position,
carefully Graduated, Supplementary to the First Instruction Book. By
WILSON MANHIRE, L.R.A.M., A.R.C.M., etc. 2s. 6d. _net_.

=BOW INSTRUMENTS=, their Form and Construction. Practical and Detailed
Investigation and Experiments regarding Vibration, Sound Results, and
Construction. By J. W. GILTAY. Issued into English by the Author in
Co-operation with E. VAN DER STRAETEN. Numerous Diagrams. 8vo, cloth,
16s. _net_.

     "A valuable treatise."--_The Strad._

=OLD VIOLINS AND VIOLIN LORE=, Famous Makers of Cremona and Brescia, and
of England, France and Germany (with Biographical Dictionary), Famous
Players, and Chapters on Varnish, Strings and Bows, with 13 full-page
plates. By H. R. HAWEIS. Thick crown 8vo, cloth, 17s. 6d. _net_.

=YOUNG VIOLINIST'S SCALE AND ARPEGGIO MANUAL.= By WILSON MANHIRE,
L.R.A.M., etc. 2s. _net_.

=FACTS ABOUT FIDDLES.= Violins Old and New. By J. BROADHOUSE. Fourth
Edition. Crown 8vo, paper. 2s. 6d. _net_.

=NOTABLE VIOLIN SOLOS=: How to Play Them. Three Series (consisting of 43
descriptive Articles in all). By E. VAN DER STRAETEN. 2s. 6d. _net_ each
series. Also complete, in cloth, with Portraits, 10s. _net_.

=VIOLIN MANUFACTURE IN ITALY= and its German Origin. By DR. E. SCHEBEK.
Translated by W. E. LAWSON. Second Edition. Square 12mo, cloth, 6s.
_net_; paper, 3s. 6d. _net_.

=CHATS WITH VIOLINISTS.= By WALLACE RITCHIE. With four Photographic
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net_.

     CHAPTERS: On the Importance of being Accurate; On Various Details;
     On the Violin and its Fittings; On Reading from Sight and Playing
     from Memory; A Few Violin Secrets; Some valuable Technical
     Exercises; Hand Development for Violinists, including Eighteen
     Excellent Finger Gymnastics; Sundry Useful Hints.

     I here lay before the public that information and advice which I
     have hitherto been content to reserve for the sole use of my own
     pupils. During a considerable experience, both as a student and as
     a teacher of the violin, I have naturally pieced together quite a
     variety of small hints and items of information which, though
     modest enough individually, have been found on the whole to be of
     no inconsiderable value, not only with regard to my own playing,
     but also--and which is of far more importance--in enabling me to
     impart a knowledge of the art to others.

=ADVICE TO VIOLIN STUDENTS.= Containing Information of the Utmost Value
to every Violinist. By WALLACE RITCHIE. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net_
(paper, 5s. _net_).

     CONTENTS: Selecting and Adjusting--Choice of a Teacher--Course of
     Study--The Sevcik Method--Practising--Style--Tone
     Production--Pronunciation of Terms, Names, etc.--Graded List of
     Studies, Pieces, etc. Together with Hints on Common
     Faults--Shifting--Reading
     Music--Stopping--Harmonics--Vibrato--Tempo--Intonation, Pitch, etc.

=THE VALUE OF OLD VIOLINS.= By E. POLONASKI. Being a List of the
Principal Violin Makers, British, Italian, French and German. With
Approximate Valuations of their Instruments and Occasional Notes on
their Varnish. Facsimiles of Labels and Violins. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s.
_net_.

=INFORMATION FOR PLAYERS=, Owners, Dealers and Makers of Bow
Instruments, also for String Manufacturers. Taken from Personal
Experiences, Studies and Observations. By WILLIAM HEPWORTH. With
Illustrations of Stainer and Guarnerius Violins and Gauge of Millimetres
and Centimetres, etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net_.

     CONTENTS: The
     Pegs--Neck--Fingerboard--Bridge--Tail-piece--Saddle--Violin
     Holder--Tail-pin--Bar--Sound-post--On the Stringing of Bow
     Instruments in General Use--Strings--Rosin--Cleaning of the
     Instrument and the Bridge--Bow--Violin
     Case--Repairs--Preservation--Conclusion.

=SKETCHES OF GREAT VIOLINISTS AND GREAT PIANISTS.= Biographical and
Anecdotal, with Account of the Violin and Early Violinists. Viotti,
Spohr, Paganini, De Beriot, Ole Bull, Clementi, Moscheles, Schumann
(Robert and Clara), Chopin, Thalberg, Gottschalk, Liszt. By G. T.
FERRIS. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6d. _net_.

=TREATISE ON THE STRUCTURE AND PRESERVATION OF THE VIOLIN= and all other
Bow Instruments. Together with an Account of the most Celebrated Makers
and of the Genuine Characteristics of their Instruments. By J. A. OTTO,
with Additions by J. BISHOP. With Diagrams and Plates. Fourth Edition,
further Enlarged. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

     Contains instructions for the repair, preservation and bringing out
     the tone of instruments; tracing model for violin, mutes and fiddle
     holders; list of classical works for stringed instruments. This
     work is especially valuable for makers of violins.

=HOW TO PLAY THE FIDDLE.= For Beginners on the Violin. By H. W. and G.
GRESSWELL. Eighth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. _net_; or in 2 vols.,
paper, 3s. _net_.

     JOACHIM says: "Contains many useful hints about violin playing."

=BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY OF FIDDLERS.= Including Performers on the
Violoncello and Double Bass, Past and Present. Containing a Sketch of
their Artistic Career, together with Notes of their Compositions. By A.
MASON CLARKE. 9 Portraits. Post 8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

     "We may here take the opportunity of recommending a useful book to
     all lovers of violins and violinists. Fiddlers, Ancient and Modern,
     is practically a little Biographical Dictionary, well arranged with
     some excellent portraits."--_Northern Whig._

=ART OF HOLDING THE VIOLIN AND BOW AS EXEMPLIFIED BY OLE BULL.= His Pose
and Method proved to be based on true Anatomical Principles. By A. B.
CROSBY, M.D., Professor of Anatomy. Portrait, Diagrams and
Illustrations. 8vo, cloth, 5s. _net_.

     Included in the above are some interesting recollections and
     anecdotes of Ole Bull.

=THE VIOLIN AND OLD VIOLIN MAKERS.= Being a Historical and Biographical
Account of the Violin. By A. MASON CLARKE. With Facsimile of Labels used
by Old Masters and illustrations of a copy of Gasparo da Salo. Crown
8vo, cloth, 10s. _net_.

=THE VIOLIN, ITS HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION.= Illustrated and Described
from many Sources. Together with a List of Italian and Tyrolese Makers.
With 28 Illustrations and folding Examples of the First Music issued for
the Lute, Fiddle and Voice. From the German of ABELE and NIEDERHEITMANN.
By J. BROADHOUSE. Fresh issue printed in larger size. Crown 8vo, cloth,
10s. _net_.

     "The learned and instructive treatise of Abele, skilfully rendered
     by J. Broadhouse and supplemented by a version of Niederheitmann's
     list of Italian and Tyrolese violin makers, a compilation
     invaluable to collectors and connoisseurs of rare fiddles ... a
     work which forms a noteworthy addition to the small number of
     English books upon this interesting subject."--_Scotsman._

=HOW TO MAKE A VIOLIN=, Practically Treated. By J. BROADHOUSE. New and
Revised Edition. With 47 Illustrations and Folding Plates and many
Diagrams, Figures, etc. Crown 8vo, cloth, 10s. 6d. _net_.

     CONTENTS: Introduction--The Parts of the Violin--On the Selection
     of Wood--The Tools required--The Models--The Mould--The Side-pieces
     and Side Linings--The Back--Of the Belly--The Thickness of the Back
     and Belly--The Bass Bar--The Purfling--The Neck--The
     Fingerboard--The Nut and String Guard--Varnishing and
     Polishing--Varnishes and Colouring Matter--The Varnish--A
     Mathematical Method of Constructing the Outline--The Remaining
     Accessories of the Violin.

     This new edition had the advantage of being revised throughout by a
     celebrated violin maker.

=A MUSICAL ZOO.= Twenty-four Illustrations displaying the Ornamental
Application of Animal Forms to Musical Instruments (Violins, Viol da
Gambas, Guitars, Pochette, Serpent, etc.). Drawn from the Carved
Examples by HENRY SAINT-GEORGE. Cloth, 6s. _net_ (paper, 3s. 6d. _net_).

=THE HISTORY OF THE VIOLIN= and other Instruments Played on with the Bow
from the Remotest Times to the Present. Also an Account of the Principal
Makers. Coloured Frontispiece and numerous Illustrations and Cuts. By W.
SANDYS, F.S.A., and S. A. FORSTER. Thick 8vo, cloth 27s. 6d. _net_.

=THE VIOLIN AND BOW.= A Treatise (in Three Languages, English, French
and German), with numerous Copies of Photographs taken from Life,
supplemented by various Examples and Original Studies by I. B.
POZNANSKI. 5s. _net_.

=TECHNICS OF VIOLIN PLAYING.= By KARL COURVOISIER. With Illustrations.
Eleventh Edition. Cloth, 5s. _net_, paper, 2s. 6d. _net_.

     "It is my opinion that this book will offer material aid to all
     violin players."--JOACHIM.

     "As far as words, aided by diagrams, can make clear so practical a
     subject as the playing of a musical instrument, this little book
     leaves nothing to be desired. The author, who was a pupil of
     Joachim, has treated the subject in a most thorough manner, and we
     can highly recommend his little book."--_Educational Times._

=AN IMPORTANT LESSON TO PERFORMERS ON THE VIOLIN.= By the Celebrated
TARTINI. Portrait. Being the Translation by DR. BURNEY, issued
originally in 1779, together with the original Italian. 8vo, cloth, 6s.
_net_ (paper, 3s. _net_).

=VIOLONCELLO EXERCISES, SCALES AND ARPEGGIOS.= By E. GILLET. Complete in
one vol., 4s. _net_; or Part I, Exercises, 1s. 6d. _net_, Part II,
Scales, 1s. 6d. _net_, and Part III, Arpeggios, 1s. 6d. _net_.

=ART OF VIOLONCELLO PLAYING.= Tutor in Three Books. By E. VAN DER
STRAETEN. Text in English and French. 4to. Book I, 3s. 6d. _net_; Book
II, 4s. _net_.

=WELL-KNOWN VIOLONCELLO SOLOS.= How to Play Them. Three Series. By E.
VAN DER STRAETEN. 2s. 6d. _net_, each series. Also complete in cloth,
with Portraits, 10s. _net_.

=HOW TO REPAIR VIOLINS= and other Musical Instruments. By ALFRED F.
COMMON. With Diagrams. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

=ROYSTON'S PROGRESSIVE VIOLIN TUTOR= (with Illustrations giving Correct
Position for Hand, Wrist and Fingers). Folio, 3s. _net_.


VOCAL.

=SUCCESS IN AMATEUR OPERA.= Instructions on Auditions, Equipment of the
Society and the Conductor, Allocation of Roles, Rehearsals, Training of
Soloists, Diction, Conducting, etc. By HUBERT BROWN. Including a Section
on Stage Management, by H. G. TOY. Preface by DEREK OLDHAM. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_; paper covers, 4s. _net_.

=SPEECH DISTINCT AND PLEASING=, or Why not Learn to Speak Correctly? A
clear description of the mental and physical qualities on which the art
of good speaking is founded and grounded. By FRANK PHILIP. 162 pages,
Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. _net_; paper covers, 4s. _net_.

=VOICE PRODUCTION FOR ELOCUTION AND SINGING.= By REV. E. H. MELLING.
Music Examples. 31 pages, f'cap 8vo, cloth, 4s. 6d. _net_; paper covers,
2s. 6d. _net_.

=THE VOCAL WORKS OF JOHANNES BRAHMS.= Historical, Descriptive and
Analytical Account of each Work. Original English Translations supplied
to many numbers. By EDWIN EVANS, Senior. Thick 8vo, cloth, 30s. _net_.

     The above volume is a complete technical account of the vocal
     works. It forms a part of the Historical, Descriptive and
     Analytical Account of the Entire Works of Brahms advertised on page
     2.

=VOCAL TRAINING AND PREPARATION FOR SONG INTERPRETATION.= With a Section
showing how to Determine Accurately by Pitch and Curve Graphs the
special Suitability of Songs selected for particular Vocal Requirements.
Music Illustrations and Descriptive Diagrams. By FRANK PHILIP. 8vo,
cloth, 15s. _net_.

=THE AMATEUR VOCALIST.= A Guide to Singing. With Useful Hints on Voice
Production, Song Preparation, etc. By WALTER L. TWINNING, F.R.C.O. Post
8vo, limp cloth, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=HOW TO TEACH CLASS SINGING=, and a Course of Outline Lessons which
illustrate the psychological principles upon which successful tuition is
based. By GRANVILLE HUMPHREYS, Professor of the Art of Teaching, Voice
Production, etc., at the T.S.-F.C.; late Lecturer in Class Singing at
the Training School for Music Teachers. Numerous Music Illustrations.
Cloth, 10s. _net_.

     Teachers will find this very striking book of great value. The
     publishers have no hesitation in strongly recommending it.

=THE VOICE AND SINGING.= Practically Explained, Condensed but
Comprehensive Treatise, designed principally for Students and Amateurs,
by an Experienced Singer and Teacher (C. W. PALMER). Cloth, 5s. _net_;
paper, 2s. 6d. _net_.

     "I have studied the subject as an enthusiast both theoretically and
     practically, both as student and teacher, for over thirty
     years."--_Extract from the Preface._

=VOCAL SUCCESS=, or Thinking and Feeling in Speech and Song, including a
Chapter on Ideal Breathing for Health. By the REV. CHAS. GIB. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_; or paper covers, 4s. 6d. _net_.

     The known facts of science in connection with both the structure
     and functions of the vocal organs are stated; and have been
     supplemented by impressions formed in the course of long experience
     and experiment in the training of voices.

=VOCAL SCIENCE AND ART.= Hints on Production of Musical Tone. By REV.
CHAS. GIB. The Boy's Voice, Muscular Relaxation, Art of Deep Breathing,
Elocution for Ordination Candidates. With Numerous Illustrations, and
Introduction, Notes and Diagrams, by J. F. HALLS DALLY, M.A., M.D., etc.
Dedicated to the Bishop of London. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

=RUDIMENTS OF VOCAL MUSIC.= With 42 Preparatory Exercises, Rounds and
Songs in the Treble Clef. By T. MEE PATTISON. Second Edition. Crown 8vo,
paper, 4d. _net_.

=PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT IN RELATION TO PERFECT VOICE PRODUCTION.= By H.
TRAVERS ADAMS, B.A. 8vo, paper, 3s. _net_.

     Intended for students. Treats of Vibration, Breaks and Registers,
     The Speaking Voice, Attack, Practical Application, Breathing,
     Exercise in Inspiration, Expiration, and so on.

=SIMPLICITY AND NATURALNESS IN VOICE PRODUCTION.= A Plea and an
Argument. By EDWIN WAREHAM. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_.

=OBSERVATIONS ON THE FLORID SONG.= Or Sentiments on the Ancient and
Modern Singers. By P. F. TOSI. Translated by Mr. Galliard. With folding
Musical Examples. 184 pages. A Reprint of this Celebrated Book, first
published in 1743. Crown 8vo, boards, with vellum-like back. 21s. _net_.

     Recommended to all students of the Italian method of singing by the
     late Charles Lunn.

     "The aged teacher embodies his own experience and that of his
     contemporaries at a time when the art was probably more thoroughly
     taught than it has ever been since."--_Grove's Dictionary._

=ELEMENTARY LESSONS ON SIGHT SINGING.= Combining the Staff and Tonic
Sol-fa Notations. With Music Examples throughout. By J. W. ROSSINGTON,
L.R.A.M. Cloth, 3s. 6d. _net_ (paper, 2s. _net_).

     For many singers there is only one method of becoming good
     sight-readers, viz., combining the tonic sol-fa with the staff
     notation.

=THE ART OF VOCAL EXPRESSION.= A Popular Handbook for Speakers, Singers,
Teachers and Elocutionists. By the REV. CHAS. GIB. Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s.
_net_; paper, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=VOICE PRODUCTION AND VOWEL ENUNCIATION.= By F. F. MEWBURN LEVIEN.
Diagrams by ARTHUR C. BEHREND. Post 8vo, sewed, 2s. _net_.

=THE THROAT IN ITS RELATION TO SINGING.= A Series of Popular Papers. By
WHITFIELD WARD, A.M., M.D. Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 5s. _net_; paper, 3s. _net_.

     CONTENTS: Anatomical Structure of the Throat; What we See with the
     Laryngoscope; How we Sing; How we Breathe; How to take Care of the
     Voice; Hints to Voice Builders; How the Voice is Destroyed; Common
     Throat Affections of Singers, together with their Treatment, etc.

=HOW TO ATTAIN THE SINGING VOICE=, or Singing Shorn of its Mysteries. A
Popular Handbook for those desirous of winning Success as Singers. By A.
RICHARDS BROAD. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_.

     This is the book which fitted Eva Turner to achieve for her
     wonderful successes in the operatic world (in Italy, Germany,
     Portugal, etc., as well as in her own country). It should help you
     to achieve great things too.

     "An immensely interesting book that has every right to be classed
     among those that are genuinely useful, and it should be prized by
     all vocalists from the highest to the lowest."--_The Musical
     Observer._

=TWELVE LESSONS ON BREATHING AND BREATH CONTROL.= For Singers, Speakers
and Teachers. By G. E. THORP. Crown 8vo, paper, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=TWENTY LESSONS ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE VOICE.= For Singers, Speakers
and Teachers. By G. E. THORP. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 2s.
6d. _net_.

     Mr. Thorp's two books have from time to time been recommended by
     various eminent vocal specialists as giving practical aid and
     advice for the training, care and development of the voice. They
     are free from any _biased "system" or "discovery."_

=TREATISE ON THE TRAINING OF BOYS' VOICES.= With Examples and Exercises
and Chapters on Choir-Organization. Compiled for the Use of
Choirmasters. By GEORGE T. FLEMING. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth,
5s. _net_; paper, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=GRADUATED COURSE OF EXERCISES FOR BOY CHORISTERS.= With Piano
Accompaniment. For Use in Conjunction with Above. By G. T. FLEMING. 4to
album, paper, 2s. _net_.

---- Ditto, Boy's Voice Part only, 1s. _net_.

=SIX SPIRITUAL SONGS FOR UNACCOMPANIED CHORUS=, with Piano Accomp. (for
Practice). By RUTLAND BOUGHTON. In one vol. Roy. 8vo, 2s. 6d. _net_.

     The songs are also issued separately.

=VOCAL EXERCISES FOR CHOIRS AND SCHOOLS.= By DR. WESTBROOK. Post 8vo,
paper, 2d. _net_.

=THE CENTRAL POINT IN BEAUTIFUL VOICE PRODUCTION.= By H. TRAVERS ADAMS,
M.A. Cloth, 2s. 6d. _net_ (paper, 1s. 6d. _net_).


THE MUSIC STORY SERIES.

"The Music Story" Series books are indispensable, authoritative,
interesting and educational. Specially designed cloth, crown 8vo, well
got up, at prices named below.

=CHAMBER MUSIC AND ITS MASTERS IN THE PAST AND IN THE PRESENT.= By DR.
N. KILBURN. New Edition, revised, and with additional chapters by G. E.
H. ABRAHAM. With Plates and Music Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 15s.
_net_.

     "Mr. Abraham has brought the work up to date and written several
     new chapters and the book now gives us a discussion on the most
     important writers and projectors of chamber music"--_Musical
     Opinion._

=ORGAN.= By C. F. ABDY-WILLIAMS, M.A., Mus.Bac. Told in Nine Chapters.
Thirty-eight Illustrations and Frontispiece. Illustrations of two
Instruments found at Pompeii; F. W. Galpin's Hydraulus; Organ Builders;
Stops; Technical Terms; Bibliography and Chronological List of Organ
Specifications, 21s. _net_.

=ENGLISH MUSIC= (1604-1904). Seventeen Lectures delivered at the Music
Loan Exhibition of the Worshipful Company of Musicians. By T. L.
SOUTHGATE, W. H. CUMMINGS, H. WATSON, E. MARKHAM LEE, J. FINN, SIR F.
BRIDGE, A. S. ROSE, A. H. D. PRENDERGAST, F. J. SAWYER, G. F. HUNTLY, D.
J. BLAIKLEY, REV. F. W. GALPIN, W. W. COBBETT, J. E. BORLAND, A. H.
LITTLETON and SIR E. CLARKE. Frontispiece and 115 Illustrations
(Portraits, Instruments, Title Pages, etc.). Musical Examples. 16s.
_net_.

=MINSTRELSY.= By EDMONDSTOUNE DUNCAN. The whole body of Secular Music
that has stood the test of time and which can be called national. Early
Gleemen, the Minstrels (church and social), Troubadours, the Tudor
period, the great Elizabethanists, etc. Pp. xvi, 337, 16s. _net_.

=MUSICAL FORM.= By C. LUCAS. The General Principles of the Art of
Composition and how they have been arrived at; explaining the
development of the scale, of tonic and dominant, cadences, phrases and
motives, counterpoint, canon and fugue, harmony, style, song form,
variations, sonata form. Pp. xvi, 226, 16s. _net_.

=BAGPIPE.= By W. H. GRATTAN FLOOD. Its History, Origin of Reed Pipes,
the Pipes of ancient Celtic Ireland and Wales, the Scottish scene and
Scottish melodies, changes from 16th to 19th centuries. 26
illustrations, glossary, bibliography, list of players, index. Pp. xx,
237, 15s. _net_.




WILLIAM REEVES

Bookseller Ltd.

SPECIALISTS IN MUSIC AND BOOKS ON MUSIC

In addition to our valuable series of publications listed in this
Catalogue, we hold an extensive stock of secondhand and out-of-print
books on music, especially on the Violin, Organ, and other Musical
Instruments, Lives of Composers and Criticisms of their Works, National,
Oriental and Primitive Music, Orchestration, Composition, and Technique,
etc., Orchestral Scores, Operas, Chamber Music, Miniature Scores,
Librettos, Facsimiles of Composers' MSS, Orchestral Material, Musical
Comedies, etc.

Librarians and Amateurs are invited to send us their lists of wants, as
we may have in stock just the items required.

Catalogues regularly issued, and sent on request, post free.

                WILLIAM REEVES BOOKSELLER LTD,
             1a Norbury Crescent, London, S.W.16.


MISCELLANEOUS.

=THE BIRTH OF ARTHUR= (Uther and Igraine), Choral Drama. The Libretto by
R. R. BUCKLEY and RUTLAND BOUGHTON. This work was performed at
Glastonbury, August, 1925, to the Music of RUTLAND BOUGHTON. 1s. 6d.
_net_.

=JOHN GAY'S "BEGGAR'S OPERA."= Piano Selection arranged by H. R. HOOD
from the original Music by DR. PEPUSCH. Performed at Drury Lane and
Covent Garden. Folio, 1s. _net_.

Ditto, arranged for Violin and Piano. By H. R. HOOD. 2s. _net_.

=BLEST BE THAT AGE.= Vocal Trio for Tenor, Baritone and Bass. Words from
Masonic Ritual. Music with Piano Accompaniment. By H. BOND. Folio, 2s.
_net_.

=MASONIC MUSICAL SERVICE BOOK FOR THE THREE DEGREES OF CRAFT MASONRY.=
The Whole Compiled and Edited by T. J. LINEKAR (_of St. Trillo, 2569_).
Royal 8vo, blue cloth, 7s. 6d. _net_ (or paper covers, 5s. _net_).

     _The Freemason_ says: "It contains all that is necessary for the
     degrees in the way of Psalms, Hymns, Kyries, etc."

=TRIO FOR PF., VN. AND 'CELLO.=--Beethoven's Celebrated Minuet in G, No.
2, Score and Parts. Folio, 2s. _net_. Also arranged for Vn. and Pf., 2s.
_net_, and Pf. Solo, 1s. 6d. _net_.

=EASY TRIOS.= Arranged from Classical Composers. By S. O. GOLDSMITH, for
Piano, Violin and Violoncello. Score and Parts. Two books, each 3s.
_net_.

     Book I: 1. Minuet (Beethoven); 2. Moment Musical (Schubert); 3.
     Largo (Tartini); 4. Chiarina (Schumann); 5. Minuet (Pugnani). Book
     II: 6. Bourree (Martini); 7. Chanson Triste (Tchaikovsky); 8.
     Scherzino (Schumann); 9. Song without Words, No. 3 (Mendelssohn).

=THE CREATION.= By HAYDN. Performing Edition. Edited by G. A. MACFARREN.
Paper, 3s. _net_, boards, 4s. _net_.

     The edition as conducted by Sir Henry Wood in 1926, etc.

=CHOIR ATTENDANCE REGISTER.=

     Ruled for a Choir of 60 or less, for One Year, beginning at any
     date, 4s. _net_.

     Ruled for a Choir of 20 or less, for One Year, beginning at any
     date, 3s. _net_.

=TWO SETS OF UNACCOMPANIED CHORAL VARIATIONS UPON ENGLISH FOLK SONGS=,
by RUTLAND BOUGHTON (with Piano Acomp. for practice only). 1s. 8d.

  (a) The Barkshire Tragedy.
  (b) King Arthur had Three Sons.

A Second Series by RUTLAND BOUGHTON. 1s. 8d.

  (a) William and Margaret.
  (b) Widdecombe Fair.

     King Arthur, separately from the First Set, 9d.


=RATIONAL ACCOMPANIMENT TO THE PSALMS.= By F. GILBERT WEBBE. Post 8vo,
1s. _net_.

=MODEST IDYLLS FOR MUSICAL SETTING.= By ERNEST ALFIERI. Crown 8vo,
sewed, 2s. 6d. _net_.

=SONGS FROM THE RAVEL.= (Words for Musical Setting.) A Book of
Prose-Lyrics from Life and Nature. By ERNEST AUSTIN. Op. 30. Crown 8vo,
sewed, 2s. 6d. net.

=PARTHENIA.= 21 Compositions by Three Famous Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Century Masters, William Byrd, Dr. John Bull and Orlando Gibbons, being
Parthenia, or the First Musick ever printed for the Virginals. Arranged
for the Piano and freed from the errors of Dr. Rimbault's edition by
accurate comparison with the original text by MARGARET H. GLYN (_author
of_ "Elizabethan Virginal Music and Composers"). Folio, 12s. 6d. _net_.

     This edition has been entirely re-engraved. The work contains eight
     compositions by Byrd, seven by Bull, and six by Gibbons.

=50 MUSICAL HINTS TO CLERGYMEN.= Management of Breath, Classification of
Male Voices, Management of the Voice, The Service. With Twenty specially
written Exercises. By GEO. F. GROVER. Cr. 8vo, paper, 1s. _net_.

=HOW TO MANAGE A CHORAL SOCIETY.= By N. KILBURN, Mus.Bac. Third Edition
Revised. Crown 8vo, paper, 1s. _net_.

=A CHAT WITH CHORAL SINGERS.= By H. W. SPARROW, A.R.C.O. 8vo, paper
cover, 1s. _net_.

     CONTENTS: Reading Music--Tone
     Production--Breathing--Phrasing--Expression--Enunciation--Blend of
     Voices--Tone, Attack, Release--Care of the Voice--Suggestions.

=HOW TO SING AN ENGLISH BALLAD.= By E. PHILP. Seventh Edition. Crown
8vo, paper, 1s. _net_.

     "It would be difficult to find a casket of brighter gems than those
     which lie within the cover of this little work."--_Illustrated
     London News._

=NATIONAL NURSERY RHYMES.= Arranged as a School Chorus for Boys and
Girls. By N. B. WOODD SMITH. With Pianoforte Accompaniment. 8vo, 1s. 6d.
_net_.


TUTORS AND EXERCISE BOOKS.

PIANO, ORGAN, HARMONIUM, VIOLIN, VIOLONCELLO, MANDOLINE AND GUITAR.

=THE POPULAR PIANO TUTOR=, folio, 2s. 6d. _net_. (For description see
Pianoforte Section of Catalogue.)

=DEPPE FINGER EXERCISES.= By AMY FAY. (See Pianoforte Section of this
Catalogue.)

=REEVES' VAMPING TUTOR.= By FRANCIS TAYLOR. (See Pianoforte Section of
this Catalogue.)

CZERNY'S 101 EXERCISES for the Pianoforte. Complete, 4s. _net_; or in 2
books, 2s. _net_ each.

=GRADUATED SCALE AND ARPEGGIO MANUAL.= By HENRY SAINT-GEORGE. (See
Pianoforte Section of this Catalogue.)

=ROYSTON'S PROGRESSIVE VIOLIN TUTOR= (with Illustrations giving Correct
Position for Hand, Wrist and Fingers.) Folio, 3s. _net_.

=VIOLONCELLO EXERCISES, SCALES AND ARPEGGIOS.= By E. GILLET. Complete in
one vol., 4s. _net_; or Part I, Exercises, 1s. 6d. _net_, Part II,
Scales, 1s. 6d. _net_, and Part III, Arpeggios, 1s. 6d. _net_.

=ART OF VIOLONCELLO PLAYING, TUTOR.= By E. VAN DER STRAETEN. Text in
French and English. Part I, 3s. 6d. _net_. Part II, 4s. _net_.

=TUTOR FOR THE AMERICAN ORGAN AND HARMONIUM.= By W. F. TAYLOR. 4to, 2s.
_net_.

=YOUNG VIOLINIST'S SCALE AND ARPEGGIO MANUAL=, with Directions. By
WILSON MANHIRE. Text and Music. Folio, 2s. _net_.

=70 PREPARATORY VIOLIN EXERCISES= for Beginners in the First Position.
Carefully Graduated. Supplementary to the First Instruction Book. By
WILSON MANHIRE. 2s. 6d. _net_.

=SINCLAIR'S VIOLIN TUTOR.= With Ample Instructions and a Variety of
Popular Melodies, and Plate designating the Notes on the Fingerboard.
Roy. 8vo, 1s. _net_.

=SCALES AND ARPEGGIOS.= Indispensable Studies for the Violin. Edited by
ALBERT GRAFF. 1s. 6d. _net_.

=ARPEGGIOS FOR THE VIOLIN.= By BASIL ALTHAUS. Folio, 3s. _net_.


ADVANCED MODERN VIOLIN TECHNICS.

=TONAL SCALES AND ARPEGGIOS FOR VIOLIN.= Introductory to the Unusual
Intonation and Finger-grouping of Advanced Modern Music. By SYDNEY
TWINN. 4to, 3s. _net_.

=MANDOLINE TUTOR.= By H. JOURNET. A Simple and Easy Method to Attain
Proficiency Rapidly without a Master. Folio, 3s. 6d. _net_.

Also =DIAGRAM OF THE MANDOLINE FINGERBOARD=, Showing the Position of
every Tone and Semitone. By H. JOURNET. Two-page music size, 1s. _net_.

=GUITAR TUTOR.= By H. JOURNET. A Simple and Easy Method to Attain
Proficiency Rapidly without a Master. Folio, 3s. _net_.

Also =GUITAR SCALE=. By H. JOURNET. Two-page music size, 1s. _net_.

=THE VIOLIN AND BOW.= A Treatise (in English, French and German), with
numerous Photographic Illustrations, supplemented by various Examples
and Original Studies, by I. B. POZNANSKI. 5s. _net_.

=REEVES' CATALOGUE OF MUSIC AND MUSICAL LITERATURE.= Ancient and Modern,
Second-hand and New; containing the Contents of Libraries recently
purchased, often with a large quantity of Curious, Scarce and Useful
Music, such as Full Scores, Organ Music, Duets, Trios, Quartets,
Quintets, etc.; Tutors, Historical, Theoretical and Biographical Works
in various languages; including rare and out-of-print works. This
Catalogue sent post free on request.




NOW READY.

Cr. 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. (or paper, ls. 6d. net) Postage, 2d.

_This Work is a Store of the Most Valuable and Practical Musical
Knowledge, so Condensed as to be of Immense Utility for its Purpose._

HOW TO COMPOSE.

A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO THE COMPOSITION OF ALL WORKS WITHIN THE LYRIC FORM

and which include the Valse, Gavotte, Mazurka, Polonaise, March, Minuet
and all Ordinary Dance Forms; as also the Nocturne, Impromptu, Berceuse,
Reverie and Similar Characteristic Pieces.

BY

EDWIN EVANS, Senr., F.R.C.O.

Author of "The Relation of Tchaikovsky to Art Questions of the Day," "A
Handbook to Brahms' Works," "The Modal Accompaniment to Plain Chant,"
etc.

_With 60 Musical Examples._

W. REEVES, 83, CHARING CROSS ROAD, W.C.


THREE SERIES. Crown 8vo, 1s. each.

WELL-KNOWN PIANO SOLOS.

HOW TO PLAY THEM WITH UNDERSTANDING EXPRESSION & EFFECT

BY

CHARLES W. WILKINSON.

_First Series_

Containing 26 Articles dealing with the Works of Sinding, Scarlatti,
Paderewski, Handel, Rubinstein, Scharwenka, Schumann, Godard, Delibes,
etc.

_Second Series._ Uniform with above. 1s.

_Third Series._ Uniform with above. 1s.

W. REEVES, 83, CHARING CROSS ROAD, W.C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Influence of the Organ in History, by
Dudley Buck

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN ***

***** This file should be named 37786.txt or 37786.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/7/8/37786/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Hunter Monroe, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
