The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heritage of the Kurts, Volume II (of 2), by
Bjoerstjerne Bjoernson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Heritage of the Kurts, Volume II (of 2)

Author: Bjoerstjerne Bjoernson

Translator: Cecil Fairfax

Release Date: October 19, 2011 [EBook #37802]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERITAGE OF THE KURTS, VOL II ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by Google Books










Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://books.google.com/books?id=b-UsAAAAMAAJ

   2. The diphthong oe is represented by [oe].






                             THE NOVELS OF

                         BJOeRNSTJERNE BJOeRNSON

                        _Edited by EDMUND GOSSE_

                               VOLUME XII






                            _THE NOVELS OF_

                        _BJOeRNSTJERNE BJOeRNSON_

                        _Edited by EDMUND GOSSE_

                           _Fcap. 8vo, cloth_

      _Synnoeve Solbakken_
      _Arne_
      _A Happy Boy_
      _A Fisher Lass_
      _The Bridal March, & One Day_
      _Magnhild, & Dust_
      _Captain Mansana, & Mother's Hands_
      _Absalom's Hair, & A Painful Memory_
      _In God's Way_ (2 _vols._)
      _Heritage of the Kurts_ (2 _vols._)

                               _NEW YORK_
                        _THE MACMILLAN COMPANY_






                            THE HERITAGE OF
                               THE KURTS


                                   BY

                         BJOeRNSTJERNE BJOeRNSON



                   _Translated from the Norwegian by_

                            _Cecil Fairfax_



                               VOLUME II




                                NEW YORK
                         THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                                  1908






                          _Printed in England_





_All rights reserved_




                                CONTENTS


                    IV.--_THE STAFF_--(_continued_)

CHAP.
      II. THE STAFF

     III. THE SOCIETY

      IV. ON THE STEPS


                             V.--_THE HUNT_

       I. THE HUNT

      II. IN THE DOVECOTE

     III. SEPARATED FROM THE OTHERS

      IV. THE HUNT


                     VI.--_WHAT FIDELITY WILL SAY_

       I. HAPPINESS

      II. A MISFORTUNE

     III. PEACE-MAKING WITHIN, PROPOSALS OF PEACE WITHOUT

      IV. WAR


                        VII.--_THE FIGHT ITSELF_

       I. IN BOTH CAMPS

      II. A GALA DAY IN TOWN AND HARBOUR




                               CHAPTER II

                               THE STAFF

                  Fair Milla and brown Tora,
                  Broad Tinka and slender Nora.


It was disputed where this remarkable verse with its rhythm and rhyme
was heard for the first time, whether in the senior Latin or senior
Commercial. The dispute can never be settled now, but when these girls
showed themselves it was often shouted, sung, and bawled after them--at
first in turns with another by Doesen, which ran, "_Nora, Tora, ora pro
nobis_;" but as it was incomplete, the names of Tinka and Milla not
being mentioned, it was dropped in favour of the former. This one was
also given up; it was perfectly well known who was father to the latest
name for them; Rendalen called them on a certain occasion "The Staff,"
and after him the whole school, after it the boys' school, and at last
all who were inclined to pay them a compliment. We know three of the
Staff already--that is to say, we know them from the others, not more
than that. "Fair Milla" is no other than Emilie Engel; she looked like
a picture in enamel in her mourning. Broad Tinka is Katinka Hansen,
Augusta's sister, the contralto; and slender Nora is the Sheriff's
daughter, the one who hid under the sail, the one with big eyes and
wavy hair.

Brown Tora, on the other hand, we do not know, and she shall remain a
little longer shrouded in mystery.

A year ago a new sheriff was appointed to that part of the country, a
secretary in a government office, called Jens Tue, otherwise known as
the ladies' man.[1] Instead of becoming resident he went abroad with
his wife, whose chest was rather delicate.

This lady had, by jealousy and insincerity, missed her true foothold in
life, and both in her thoughts and actions she flitted like a bird from
one interest to another; she wished to appear so immensely delighted,
so taken up with intellectual questions and music--until one day her
strength proved insufficient; she collapsed.

Her husband carried her off with him, and as during their tour he was
all that was pleasant and amiable, her bird-like nature required
nothing more. She came home again, well and happy.

It would have seemed more natural for Nora to remain at Christiania
with her friends and relations. It was said certainly that Fru
Rendalen's school was so very superior, but that could hardly be the
whole explanation; all were curious about the Sheriff's daughter when
she appeared. She was a fashionable young lady, tall and slender,
and if not exactly elegant, still stylish in dress and manner; a little
supercilious; still she did not give offence--she was too pliable for
that, too quick as well, entirely taken up with the fancy of the
moment. She gave an impetus to all she did, and people forgive a great
deal for that.

But no one would forgive her letter-writing, or the incredible number
of letters which she received weekly! Not the teachers, for she
neglected the school work; not her companions, for she neglected them;
nay, she had hardly looked at them! She went to sleep every night with
inky fingers and a heap of letters beside her bed; either she was
writing letters or reading letters, or crying over them. During every
recreation time she ran upstairs to add a few lines, or to read a
letter over again which she had just received. As she was worried by
the pursuit of the others, she disappeared after every meal. Where was
she? There was a hunt for her, and she was found up in the top attic,
writing of course, this time upon a large barrel; she was blue with
cold. She had left at least twenty particular friends behind her at
Christiania; all the twenty wrote to her, and all received answers,
long answers--one must never be shorter than the others. Happily, she
had another passion, and it often chances that one thing counteracts
another. She was crazy about music. She sang snatches of songs with
great feeling, but, partly because at her age she could not sing much
at a time, partly because she had not training enough to carry out a
delicate interpretation, she could never properly render anything as a
whole. But even so, she was much admired by her companions, and by none
more than Tinka Hansen. For Tinka was herself musical, but in another
and more unpretending fashion. Like her sister Augusta, she had
developed early, especially in her powers of conversation. Katinka was
even-tempered, bright, dependable; everything she played, and that was
a great deal, she knew by heart. It was therefore she who obediently
accompanied Nora's songs. But her execution was not worth much; Nora
very soon took her in hand, and was not satisfied until she had brought
her to the point she wished; Tinka was extremely grateful for all this.

One day Nora discovered Tinka's powerful contralto, and from that time
there were duets and duets. Their age suggested prudence, and if Nora
would not use moderation, Tinka both would and could. Nora was used to
command, so there were quarrels; but Tinka was so accustomed to conquer
when her conscience told her that she was right, that Nora was
completely vanquished. This was the foundation of their friendship. To
have a friend who at once admired and restrained her was especially
safe and good for Nora. But Nora acted upon Tinka like a succession of
impressions of art upon one who has seen nothing up to that time. As
Nora was absolutely confidential, it seemed to the conscientious Tinka
that this ought to be returned.

Every one knew it, but not to a living being would she have admitted
it: Tinka was engaged. He, the man, had just gone to college; she had a
letter from him once a week; for many reasons she did not wish to have
them oftener. He was called Frederik--Frederik Tygesen; his father was
the stipendiary judge Tygesen, here in the town. Nora was "the first
person in the world" whom she had told this to.

How delighted Nora was! Really, properly engaged, with letters every
week and the tacit consent of her parents. How had it come about? Well,
that was the odd thing about it; they neither of them knew. They had
once when she was eight years old, through an open door, heard Fru
Rendalen and her mother talking about Augusta and Tomas Rendalen, about
what _he_ had said to _his_ mother about Augusta, and what _she_ had
said to _her_ mother about Tomas. Ever since then these children had
been fond of each other, just as those other two had been; but they had
never spoken about it--never. A sincere friendship was founded between
Nora and Tinka upon this confidence, and Tinka's friendship brought
others with it. Nora was obliged to recall some of her interests from
Christiania, and by degrees to form a new circle of admirers.

She began to write less frequently to the friends in Christiania, and
the letters would begin, "It is a terribly long time since," or "I
really am a wretch who----," or "Procrastination is to blame."

But there was a limit to those whom she could conquer in the new senior
class, and this did not please her; in fact, she principally coveted
the friendship of those who withheld it, but all the same she could not
pass this boundary. The fact was that a queen had reigned there before
her--nay, was there still. Her ways of gaining power were different
from Nora's; whether they were less or not, depended on who it was who
measured them. First of all, she was the richest heiress in the town;
secondly, if there were the slightest sign of rain, snow, or cold wind,
a servant drove up to fetch her home, and then it was a question who
should drive home with her.

She had almost always something good with her; her pocket-money was of
that description that the more she spent, the more she had; the
resources of her dainty little purse were incredible in this respect.
She got money from her mother, from her father, from two unmarried
uncles. As well as this she was pretty, discreet, attentive; no one had
ever known her to use a hasty word, or be rough, even at the gymnasium;
she was always very polite and a little subdued. In her eyes, to forget
yourself was the worst of crimes. She had lived, so to say, wrapped up
in cotton wool, and one felt this whenever one approached her. We know
her already; she is Emilie Engel.

She was not specially gifted, but was industrious; she really worked
hard when there was anything on foot. Every one liked her, several paid
court to her, one or two absolutely raved about her.

Tinka Hansen belonged to none of these groups; if ever she devoted
herself to any one it would be to her opposite; quiet, dutiful Milla
was too like herself.

As Nora first attached herself to Tinka, and through Tinka to others,
Milla was offended. When Nora turned to her it was too late; there was
plenty of politeness and willingness to oblige, but not a word for her
singing, not a smile for her Christiania witticisms; never so much as a
glance when the whole class, during one of her lively descriptions,
hung admiringly on her words.

Nora could not endure this indifference; she condescended to pay court
to her in all those ways which are only known to a young girl. In vain.
At last they divided into parties. Nora considered Milla insignificant,
egotistic, cold, prim, missish; Milla considered Nora--no, Milla did
not consider Nora anything, she let her friends talk and she listened.
Nora's jaunty Christiania style of manner and speech were unbecoming,
her caprices could not be endured by any one who respected herself; her
accomplishments were all superficial, she was characterless; besides,
it was considered that some of her remarks showed a want of religion,
and Milla's party was religious.

Milla had been confirmed at Easter. The increasing weakness of Fru
Engel had given a tone of enthusiasm to her religious thoughts and to
the aspect of her mind; she found comfort through it, and need for it,
and she endeavoured to lead her daughter in the same direction.

At the time of her confirmation Milla found a confidant in the niece of
the Froekener Jensens, little Anna Rogne, who was extremely religious;
she was two years her elder, but she was small and delicate; indeed, on
more than one occasion her life had been despaired of. Anna had more
religious knowledge than most grown people, and she enraptured Karl
Vangen at the confirmation classes. Milla, whom she had imbued with
some of her enthusiasm, had no objection to share in it to a slight
degree. As soon as little Anna observed this reflection of her own
thoughts, she rejoiced from the bottom of her heart, and declared Milla
to be "spiritually minded." She was astonished that they had not
discovered each other before.

Then came the time when Milla's mother was given up by the doctors.
Little Anna's energy was more than natural; she watched beside the
sick-bed with her friend, she read, she sang, she prayed; for Fru
Engel's life must and should be saved; the doctor could not save her,
but prayer could--how confident she was, how enraptured! And then when
Fru Engel died notwithstanding, she would literally have rejoiced to
have given her life for Milla; it was so beautiful to her to see the
rich heiress, surrounded with all the comforts of life, pleading on her
knees to Jesus; and now, when the prayers had not availed, she still
trusted--nay, in the midst of her sorrow she thanked God with her,
entirely submissive to His will. Little Anna felt from the bottom of
her heart that a bond had been twined between them which death alone
could sever.

Milla returned to school three weeks later than the others; she took a
place next to Anna Rogne. They drove up together nearly every day, and
they returned together in the carriage, for Milla was still living in
the country, and Anna was almost always with her.

Milla's return made a stir. Her mourning suited her to perfection; her
pale face and subdued manner accorded with it like dull silver work on
velvet. The quiet gentleness with which she accepted everything, even
Nora's eager worship, gained her much considerate kindness.

The first day or two seemed devoted to expressing sympathy with Milla.

But there was a new face among them, a new figure there on the form in
front of her, a new voice, fresh ways--and what was not less important
to Milla--a new dress. Especially when the new hat and mantle were
added to it, a more daring choice of colours was presented, a more
delicate cut, richer details, than she had ever seen before. She knew
who the new-comer was--the daughter of the chief custom-house officer
Holm, from Bergen, the one with the brown face, large dark eyes, and
curly white hair: a curiously shy man, who drank, drank so that it was
only through forbearance that he retained his post; he had ten
children!

Tora was the eldest, and had been brought up, from her twelfth year,
partly in England, partly in France, by an uncle who had been a
shipbroker, first in the one country, then in the other; he had just
died, leaving his adopted daughter a small annuity. Milla knew all
this. Anna had also incidentally observed that Tora Holm was pretty.

But this was not the right word. Where were Anna's eyes? Tora was a
beauty, and her beauty was singular and "foreign." Anna had used her
ears as little as her eyes, for there was but one opinion about it.

Milla did nothing the whole of the first day but look at Tora, who,
although her back was turned towards her, could not keep quiet, but
twisted and turned as though she could feel the other's eyes on her
neck. The more restless Tora became, the more calmly Milla studied her.
At home, in the sitting-room, stood a head of the young Augustus in
marble; it had been Milla's admiration from childhood. And now, there
it was, on a girl's body, on the bench before her, moving in brightness
and colour.

The brow was exactly the same, the whole shape of the head, broad
above; the curve of the cheeks and chin, the arch of the eyebrows the
same, all the same! The eyes were different and more full of life, for
those of the Augustus gave the impression of dulness, or at least
heaviness. These sparkled incessantly in changing shades of blue-grey,
under long dark eyelashes. The mouth was full and curved, the hair
black-brown, or brown-black, as the light fell upon it. The complexion
was a sort of pale olive. Milla had no words to express it; it was a
combination she had never seen before. There was a large, very large
birth-mark on her cheek, perhaps it was that which disturbed her, for
she never turned that cheek when she looked round at Milla. Her figure
was developed, very strong and statuesque. Apparently she was a little
over sixteen. She did not look well at the moment, she was flushed and
had dark lines under her eyes; the perspiration stood on her face.

Her whole appearance was striking; Milla looked at her without a trace
of envy. What taste this new girl had, beyond anything she had ever
seen; how much she must know!

Every now and then Milla looked at her next neighbour. Anna sat there,
spare and angular; her thin, blue, and inordinately long fingers
especially occupied Milla to-day. What a contrast!

Should she speak to the new-comer, be friendly to her? Perhaps it would
be a little forward. From the moment that she saw her during the next
"recreation," walking arm in arm with Nora, this idea was dropped as a
matter of course.

During the three weeks which preceded Milla's return, a good deal had
happened; a revolution had silently begun which was not yet at an end.

Tora Holm made her appearance in the school rather untowardly. She
arrived late, met no one in the hall, and did not know where to go;
every one was assembled in the "laboratory" for morning prayers. At
that moment Karl Vangen, who had been detained at the bedside of a sick
person, rushed in and almost overturned her; then became as confused as
only a young clergyman can, mistook her for the new teacher, and
bewildered himself and her by his embarrassment. It was therefore some
little time before she, in her Bergen sing-song, could explain who she
was, and when he heard it, and it flashed into his mind that she was in
trouble for her uncle's death and had returned to an unhappy home, he
broke out, "We will all be so kind to you here; so"--he seized her
hand--"welcome, welcome!" Before he could say more she began to cry.
She was nervous and timid, everything was new and strange. He could
think of nothing else to do than to open the door and call out
"Mother."

And out came Fru Rendalen with her spectacles awry, and asked rather
shortly (for Fru Rendalen was particular, and this should not have
happened), "What is it, Karl?"

"Here is Froeken Holm, custom-house officer Holm's daughter, mother."

"Very well, let her come in," answered Fru Rendalen, opening the door
wide. "How do you do?" she said, as she stood in the doorway and held
out her hand to Tora in the half-lighted hall. There was far too much
of a command in her tone for Tora not to advance. Fru Rendalen then saw
that she had come crying to school like a little thing of five years
old. She was surprised; she showed her a place, which Tora shyly took,
and asked one of the teachers to help her off with her hat and cloak,
which the little donkey had kept on--thought Fru Rendalen to herself.

They sang a hymn and Karl spoke about meeting--whenever one discovers
anything good in a person, one meets God--that was his subject.

At the moment Tora was only conscious of the sound of a powerful voice,
she was tormented by the remembrance of her unlucky entrance and the
impression it had made; first and foremost upon Fru Rendalen, but also
on the others; she had seen that plainly. She could not keep quiet; she
turned away when any one looked at her, turned this way and that as
though she wished both to be looked at and not to be looked at. If any
one spoke to her, which happened after a while, she coloured, and
answered something which she at once contradicted. This went on during
the first three days. She knew neither Norwegian geography nor
Norwegian history--indeed, she did not know a single thing except
English and French, and coloured up when this was discovered; but when
it was also discovered that she spoke both these languages fluently,
she coloured up just as much. She would not do gymnastics on any
consideration--at last she said she had no dress. She made herself one
which was a masterpiece of coquetry; but this she denied, and declared
it to be purely and simply ugly. She could not go on long with the
gymnastics, strongly built as she was, but gave in completely and began
to cry. Miss Hall, who superintended the gymnastics and introduced
special exercises for some of the girls, led her towards the window and
looked at her. Miss Hall had partly forgotten her Norse, and did not
remember at the moment that Tora spoke English; she tried to find a
word while she examined her. Tora misunderstood this and ran away from
her, put on her things and went straight home, refusing to return to
school. It required no little trouble before she could be brought back,
not only to school but as a boarder; she needed better food than she
got at home, for she was beginning in _chlorosis_; this was the word
that Miss Hall could not remember. Tora now shared Miss Hall's room;
she was the first, though afterwards one of the pupils always did so.

Little by little the new-comer forgot herself so far as to be able to
sit still, but never if any one looked at her steadily, or talked about
her. She must feel it in her back, her companions said. They tried
experiments, and laughed when she really did by degrees become uneasy,
and at last turned round and looked at them.

Nora had been a boarder during the past year, and was often up at the
school. She did not speak to Tora except just in passing, but one
Sunday Tora asked her if she might do her hair for her. This made as
much stir among the boarders as though she had offered Nora some new
hair. Word was sent from room to room; they all collected, big ones and
little ones, to see Nora with new hair. They stood there, they leaned
over one another, while the great work went on.

For what was done was nothing less; laughter soon changed to
astonishment, to admiration, to applause.

One day, when Nora's hair was untidy, Tora had suddenly noticed that
this was becoming to her. It suited the large, wide-open eyes, by far
the most striking part of her little face. She had next to no forehead,
very small cheeks, a little mouth with cherry lips, and a rather large
nose, a real family nose; but it only seemed to set off the eyes, so
that it was the eyes all the same--nothing but eyes. Now what was
wanted was some way of raising the hair, so that it should help the
eyes as well. Tora had seen a great deal, and often had "inspirations,"
but never as yet in hair-dressing. She had one now. Naturally she began
by letting it all down and combing it out, then took the front hair and
made it into two large rolls, one on each side, lightly twisted; it was
very little in itself, and not at all striking, but the effect in this
case was amazing. When her eyes grew large, the hair looked as though
it would spread its wings and fly away, sometimes almost as though it
flickered--the hair was naturally a little wavy.

Up to this time Nora had never been thought pretty, there were other
qualities in her which one noticed; but now Rendalen himself, who very
rarely looked closely at any one, stopped short as he was reading
aloud, when, chancing to raise his eyes, he caught sight of Nora; the
whole class knew what he thought. The one who was least concerned was
perhaps Nora herself; now she had settled about her hair, and she need
not think anything more about it; but when Tora Holm, as their
friendship increased, began to rave about her talents, and, with her
tendency towards exaggeration, declared that Nora was "all soul," that
her music "absolutely carried one away," and that her chance remarks
always "hit the right nail on the head," that really was something! She
longed for more with insatiable voracity, and cultivated the
friendship. Tora Holm constantly made discoveries; the most important
one was that Nora was always right, even if she had been capricious
towards others, hasty--nay, even when she had had a slight fit of
untruthfulness, Nora was right, quite right--_at the bottom_.

It now struck Nora that Tora Holm was the first person who had ever
thoroughly understood her: to think that a stranger who looked at her
with fresh impartial eyes should have discovered this at once! The more
they saw of each other, the more gifted they thought each other. Tora's
talent for telling stories was the "greatest" Nora had "ever known;"
she gathered all her set round her to listen, and the story-telling
began. Fairy tales and romances by turns--what had not Tora read, what
did she not remember? The girls would listen over and over again to the
"Thousand and One Nights" (not the condensed edition, but the full one)
as though they were little children. As well as this, they liked
pictures of real life which did not go beyond their comprehension,
though they preferred that the lovers (and by inference also
themselves) should be noble and unhappy. These girls of fifteen,
sixteen, and seventeen (Tora herself was nearly seventeen), for various
reasons had, outside their school subjects, read only by stealth, with
the results which naturally follow. The books which Rendalen had read
to them had greatly widened their horizon and increased their desire to
know more, so that Tora was doubly welcome.

But between the story-telling times Nora wished to have her to herself,
really to possess her; Nora-Tora, Tora-Nora, wove themselves together,
no one else could approach them. Nora announced this openly; they two
preferred being by themselves.

Every one knew Nora, and understood that in a few days it would be
over; they only laughed, but there was one who did not laugh.

Tinka Hansen could not endure faithlessness; she had taken Nora to task
on one or two occasions and warned her. This time she was silent, and
allowed the penalty to consist in punctiliously respecting their wish
to remain apart. Nora could never get her to come with her.

Very soon Nora began to feel lonely among all these delightful Oriental
palaces; she did not realise this till she discovered that without
Tinka she did not feel free to do as she liked; without her she dared
not always listen. Tora's romances were often very "French." For more
than a year Nora had been used to the limits which Tinka imposed. She
was not sure if she were now inside or outside them, and an uneasy
conscience was the result. Tora had to suffer for this; Nora did not
know what they ought to do; she peremptorily cut short a story which
had been begun, ordered another, but stopped that as well; made
promises and did not keep them, and felt bored. And it was just at the
beginning of this period that Milla returned to school.

One Thursday evening, in Fru Rendalen's room, Tom as was going to read
a new play to them. Tora Holm, who chanced to be near Milla, looked at
her new black dress, which was a different one from that she wore in
the schoolroom. Without touching the dress she said, showing with her
fingers what she meant, the "trimming ought to have gone so, not so,
and had better have been narrower." She did not wait for an answer, but
walked farther on and sat down.

The day after, before morning prayers began, Milla came up to her and
thanked her; she had tried it, and found that Tora was right. There was
no time for more, but during the first "recreation" they involuntarily
sought each other out. "How could you see that at once?" asked Milla.

"I tried it the other day on a doll," answered Tora.

"On a doll?" asked Milla with a slight blush. Tora felt that she ought
not to have let this out; she was always doubtful about what she ought
to do. What a delicate instinct Milla Engel must have, to blush on her
account!

"So you dress dolls, do you?" said Milla, smiling, as she passed her
the next day. Tora protested; it really was not clear what she
protested, whether it were that she had one or two dolls, or that it
was her sisters who had them, or that even married women often have
dolls, so that there could be nothing odd in that, or else that she
quite saw how unbecoming it was, since every age ought to suit with
its.... She said all this, and a great deal more, in her Bergen
sing-song, and Milla smiled. "Won't you come in and see me this
afternoon? We are back from the country now."

Tora had not refused before Milla had said good-bye, but afterwards she
felt dreadfully embarrassed about it. Nevertheless at six o'clock she
was there.

Tora had a great wish to get up in the world--she would not be chained
to a home such as hers was, to such a fate as threatened her.

Consul Engel's house was almost the only one in the town where the door
was kept closed all day. When one rang, either a man-servant or a maid
opened the door, and one entered a house where there was Brussels
carpet in the passages and on the stairs, as well as in the rooms, and
where, to begin with, one found oneself between two mirrors where one
could see oneself from head to foot.

Tora was shown upstairs. "Froeken Engel's" room was there. She was
heartily welcomed. The rooms were those which Fru Engel had occupied
during the last years of her life; she had very rarely left them.

She had died here, and it was for that reason that the family had gone
so late into the country this year, and had only just returned to the
house.

Every comfort which a room can possess was there; the chairs and
couches were all as soft as the cushions of an invalid, you seemed to
sink into them; they were upholstered in moss-green silk, and the
curtains and portieres were of the same material and colour, the walls
were a dark indefinite colour. There was an old-fashioned rosewood
cabinet in inlaid work, with a number of small pigeon-holes and
receptacles in it. Tora never wearied of looking at it. An Erard piano
with carved heads and emblems, a bookcase in the same style. Pictures,
especially landscapes, which made one long for the evening sun, with
its hazy light and almost sultry heat.

Tora went from one to another; she looked at every single thing as
though it were a person with whom she wished to make friends. From
there she went to the bedroom, and admired the soft carpet into which
her feet sank, the little _chaise-longue_ in one corner, the bed with
its rich hangings, the variety and elegance of the toilette apparatus.
Milla's pleasure at seeing her was expressed in the one remark that she
had never before taken any one up into her mother's rooms.

There was only one piece of furniture which did not please Tora; at
last she could no longer contain herself, it assorted so ill with its
surroundings. "What is there in that press, dear? Why is it here?"
Milla replied, smiling, that it was very incongruous, she knew; it had
not been there before--in fact, it was her own; she had had it ever
since she was a child.

"But can't it stand in another place?"

"No, not very well."

There was something of reserve in this answer, she could not inquire
further. As Tora was leaving Milla asked her to come again soon,
but she had better let her know beforehand, so that they might be
alone--that would be the pleasantest. Tora understood that this was
meant for Anna Rogne, but that was no affair of hers.

It so chanced that the next time she sat telling stories in the
twilight to Nora and her friends, who for convenience had settled
themselves on the floor on some carpets and eider-downs, she let fall
the remark, that "Of all the people I know, the one who is most like
Gulnare is Milla Engel." This, to her audience, was much like saying
before the king that he was not the wisest man in the kingdom. Nora was
amazed, her friends almost broke out into open anger. Tora felt that
she had done a foolish thing; she tried to explain herself by ascribing
that "passive" beauty to Milla which was here implied. The expressions
active and passive were at that time war cries in the senior class;
there were "active" people and "passive" people, "active" eyes and
"passive" eyes, "active" and "passive" colours.

"But, good gracious," said one of the girls, "Milla has not dark hair;
she is fair."

"So is Nora," answered the thoughtless Tora.

"I certainly have no wish to be a passive beauty, or an Eastern
princess," answered Nora angrily. "No, I did not mean that at all, I
only meant ----" she stopped short, for she really did not know why she
had said it.

"That was sheer nonsense," the others declared, and pressed Tora so
hard that she declared, with tears in her eyes, that Milla was the most
refined and the prettiest girl in the school. She (Tora) was only too
happy to know any one who was so considerate, so full of tact; it was
more than could be said of every one.

This was too much. Gina Krog herself, who was always forbearing, did
not now scruple to announce that she had known for two days, but had
not wished to tell, that Tora went to see Milla, and that they were
bosom friends. There was a dead silence. Soon afterwards Nora left, and
the others dispersed. Tora tried to explain, but they would not listen
to her.

None of the boarders belonged to Milla's party; not a girl there had
set her foot inside Milla Engel's door--for the reason that they had
never been asked.

However much Tora tossed about and turned herself and her pillow that
night, she could not sleep; it vexed and hurt her that she could not be
friends with one without losing the friendship of the other. Now the
whole school would look on her as a faithless wretch. Heaven knew that
she was not, yet she might be sent to Coventry for it, it might always
be remembered against her. It was a question of the future for her. She
had been so tossed about, she felt so insecure; she was always
stretching out her arms for something solid to cling to, which as
constantly eluded her grasp. She cried bitterly; she liked them both so
much, each in her own way, though they were so different. Why should
she not if she liked? What could she do? She did not wish to sacrifice
either of them.

The next day was Sunday; she had to go to church, but she would not
wait for the others, who were going as well--so she went straight off
to Milla. Milla was dressed for church; they met in the hall, but she
was surprised when Tora asked if she might speak to her. She took her
into her room and locked the door. Tora began to cry and told her
everything exactly as it had happened; she did not conceal that she was
fond of them both and why she was so, nor how lonely she felt, and what
an effect this might have on her future. Nora had so much influence
both among the boarders and the day girls.

In the midst of the story, just as Tora had paused for a moment to cry,
Milla heard someone at the door; there was a knock, she opened it just
wide enough to step through; in a little time she returned and said
that she and Anna Rogne had made an engagement to go to church
together, but that she had excused herself on the score of a headache;
it was certainly the second Sunday that she had done so, but it could
not be helped. Milla was sorry for Tora; she really was fond of her, it
showed itself now. She promised not to take anything in bad part which
Tora might devise, so as to keep on good terms with Nora and her
numerous friends. Milla really was very sweet.

Tora had only time to put her arms round her and kiss her for this, for
she must show herself in church. But might she come again in the
afternoon? She was very much consoled, but she longed for more; she was
so frightened, she must manage to talk everything over with her. Milla
asked her to come again as early as ever she could.

Tora came again after coffee; as soon as she had locked the door, Milla
whispered, as she put her arm round Tora's neck, that now she was going
to give her a treat, she felt certain that it would please her. To no
one, absolutely to no one, had she shown what Tora was going to see.
The press there----

"The press, well----?"

"Once it held my dolls."

"Your dolls!"

"Every one knows that it does not now," said Milla; as she spoke she
flung it open. The large double doors, both the upper and lower ones,
flew back together, and the girls could see four storeys of a house;
the bottom one a complete and marvellously dainty kitchen, scullery,
and dining-room, above a drawing-room, a large elegant apartment with
the most lovely furniture upholstered in silk, a black rosewood table,
fireplace, looking-glass, clock. On the third storey a bedroom, with
the sweetest little beds--real actual beds--and a wash-hand stand,
where everything was to be found, down to the most minute details. On
the fourth storey was the wardrobe, a magnificent doll's wardrobe.
There were changes in silk, velvet, _moire antique_, in different
colours; a whole collection of materials which had not yet been made
up; scraps of every description evidently collected with diligence and
care during many years. All linen, even stockings, and other
underclothing, all in duplicate, as well as hats, mantles, ornaments,
belts.

Tora shrieked; she was down on her knees and up on tiptoe; she did not
at first lay a finger on them, but devoured them with her eyes, unable
to take in the whole--it could not be grasped all at once; there was
too much, too great a variety, it was too wonderfully minute. She had
not even counted the dolls yet. "One, two, three, four--five--six!
seven!! eight!!!"

She had begun softly, but her voice rose at every number, so that Milla
hastened to say, "Twelve, twelve, there are twelve."

"Twelve! actually twelve! Oh dear! oh dear! Have you kept all the dolls
you have ever had in your life, never spoilt a single one?"

Well, yes she had, but never one since she was seven.

"Wait a minute." And solemnly, as though she were afraid they might
disappear, Tora carefully put in her hand and took up the very, very
sweetest doll in light red silk, with shoes and hat of the same colour,
a dark red parasol, and a little fan stuck into her belt; her
underclothes were made like a real person's, with lace and embroidery,
a pocket in her dress with a pocket-handkerchief in it, and elegant
French gloves which fitted her hands; as well a little brooch shaped
like a forget-me-not, and bracelets and watch in the same style. Tora
stood dumb with admiration, while she turned the doll round, inspected
the cut and make of the dress, the underclothes; held it away from her,
then close to her. At that moment there was a knock at the door. Some
one had come right upstairs without the preoccupied girls having heard
the least sound. They were startled. Milla held up her finger. She
turned red and white. Of course it was Anna. But Anna had never seen
the dolls, she would not understand.

There were, she explained later, two more dolls in mourning, but Anna
had been with her so much lately that she had not been able to dress
many of them, otherwise her plan had been to have them all in mourning,
that would have been charming. Another knock, low and hesitating. They
held their breaths; Milla was quite unnerved. They heard her go; they
listened so intently that they could hear her step on the stairs. It
was a most unlucky chance. Milla had given orders that if any one
besides Tora came they were to say that she had gone out for a walk on
account of her headache. But the maid who had received the order,
Milla's own maid, could not have answered the door, although it was her
time for doing so. What should Milla do? But from this consideration
she was swept away by a whirlwind.


Nora lay on the bed in Tinka Hansen's room; a little wainscoted,
blue-painted attic in shoemaker Hansen's new house in the market-place.
As well as the bed there was an open bookshelf painted brown, one or
two chairs, a large washstand intended for two, but for which no other
place could be found; a high short sofa on which Tinka now sat, looking
across at the bed, her right arm resting on her little desk which stood
on the table before her.

Nora lay sobbing loudly, and Tinka sat calmly by and looked at her;
Nora knew now what faithlessness was, how it tasted to be deserted for
the sake of another.

But it was more than being forsaken--she was abandoned, deposed, made
nothing of. Tora had lifted her up to the skies; she was "all mind,"
"could not make a mistake." And now this very Tora had dropped her--for
Milla Engel! The world was nothing but lies and delusions. "Oh dear!
Tinka, why cannot you be kind to me? You do not know how unhappy I am."
But Tinka was silent. "I cannot do without you, Tinka--no, I cannot. I
have discovered since this morning that I made nothing but mistakes. I
have no stability--no, not a bit."

"No, that is it," said Tinka soothingly.

"Not a bit; oh dear, what shall I do? Won't you talk to me?" She cried
dreadfully now.

"You only care for adoration, Nora."

"Not 'only,' Tinka; don't say 'only.'"

"No, no; but you are never happy unless you are adored, and one tires
of that."

"What shall I do, Tinka? Goodness knows I am tired of it myself. Ah,
you do not believe it, but it's true, especially now since Milla is
adored as well. Ugh! it is disgusting to think of."

"That is merely because it is Milla, and not you."

"No indeed, Tinka," and she raised herself on her elbow. "Tora has
given me so much of it that I am tired of it; yes, I am; and to think
that she is with Milla now." She flung herself down again and cried,
with anger and vexation. She raised herself again suddenly: "But I must
get rid of all this; it is disgusting; I despise myself; you do not
know what I have been thinking since this morning. Help me, Tinka; you
are the only one of them all who speaks the truth to me."

Tinka was unmoved: Nora flung herself down again, turned away and
cried.

"I cannot understand," said Tinka at length, "that you who rave so
for----"

"Do not use that word"--Nora interrupted her while she made a gesture
with her hand behind her--"it has become loathsome now that Milla does
it too. Milla 'raves.' Can you imagine anything so----?"

"Well, well, I will not say 'rave.'"

"No, don't."

"Very well, I will say 'interest yourself--you who interest yourself so
much in all that is just and great, and who are also so brave, for you
would cheerfully die for what you think right----"

"Yes, I could, Tinka; I believe I could do that; ah, how nice it is to
hear something good again, and especially from you; I feel quite
astray."

"Yes, but now I am coming to what I want to say--do you understand? Is
it not a shame that any one so excellent should all the same be such a
peacock?"

"A peacock, Tinka?"

"Yes, a peacock; you are just like a peacock!"

"Am I? I think you are----"

"It was not I who said so."

"I thought as much."

"It was Tora who said so."

"Tora! the ungrateful----"

"Yes, but Tora is right; you are dreadfully like a peacock, Nora; that
thin little face of yours, and then you are so slender."

"Come, I say, Tinka."

"Yes, it's true. All we friends agree as to that. We are all to be the
eyes in your tail. Yes, that is it."

Nora threw herself down and howled, with her head and hands in the
eider-down quilt.

"Yes, of course you have offended Tora--you offend every one. You are
so capricious, you are so spoilt."

"Yes, that is what I am!" came from the eider-down.

"That is what you are. Frederik says so as well."

"What does Frederik say?"

Nora raised her red face quickly up from the eider-down. Frederik was
an authority.

"I will read it to you," answered the other, opening the desk, and
taking out a letter of at least five sheets.

"He writes," she said, as she turned to the fourth side of the fourth
sheet, with the same calm deliberation with which she had opened the
desk, looked for the letter, closed the desk again, and now read: "You
must not be too severe with her either, for if that were her real
nature, she would behave differently, and understand how to retain her
worshippers. As it is, she is only a spoilt child, who has never done
anything without being praised for it, and has besides become so
capricious that she is tired to-day of those who praised her
yesterday."

"Oh dear! how true that is, Tinka."

"But perhaps she will weary of caprice as well, for she certainly
desires something more than that. I was impressed by that in the
summer. But you must help her, Tinka."

"Yes, you must."

Nora had raised herself, and now sat on the edge of the bed. She had
folded her hands, and looked at Tinka. "You must always be with me. I
am not content with myself, when you are not with me. Oh, Tinka! I will
never, never, never be like that again. If you see the slightest sign
of it, you must take me to task for it. You know I do want to be
something more than this. I want to be remarkable. Ah! don't laugh; in
reality I have no wish to sing and make fun for the others, and be
flattered and flattered; but it came so, I can't understand why. I
don't want it; I wish to be able to do something, to take up something
with an object. _Yes, that is what I want_. Sometimes I believe I must
go off to the wars, or die with the Nihilists in Russia. Yes, I do
believe it. Or else travel about and lecture; be hissed down and
wounded. Yes, I could. I don't know why it should be, but I long for
it. I don't say it to boast, Tinka, I only say it because I feel it so.
Believe me, I do feel it in that way. If I fail, it will be because it
is nothing but wishing; perhaps I am incapable of it. Well, all the
same I have the wish. I have no wish for the sort of thing I do now,
and for which I am praised. I have such an unconquerably strong,
strong, strong longing."

She raised herself, her eyes sparkled through her tears; her hair stood
on end, she had dishevelled it with her long arms whilst she was
crying. She threw herself down again. Tinka could not resist all the
pleasant remembrances which Nora had awakened. She walked across and
bent her broad full figure over her. And there they sat for some time
together, talking that endearing nonsense which is proper to the
happiness of reconciliation. Tinka did not forget all that she had
treasured in her memory for Nora's benefit, but the sting of it was
gone. Nora's lively answers made it all appear stupid, and at last she
was ready to laugh at what a little time before had seemed something
very serious, immensely important.

In the midst of this, some one rushed up the stairs, step by step, up
the first flight, like the beat of a drum. Then up the second, then the
third, across to the attic, in the same wild unflagging whirl. There
was only one who ever came in that fashion, but it could not very well
be she. The door was not locked; there was no knock; it was pushed
open. Yes, it was Tora! Good heavens!

The amazement, vexation, dignity of the two girls! It could not have
been done better at Court, Tinka's perfect unconsciousness that there
could be such a person as Tora Holm in the world, or Nora's noble and
spiritual, "Don't disturb me," without a word spoken. It was splendid!
Never did so fine a representation more utterly break down. Tora was
beaming with delight, victory, and rejoicing. She talked about _twelve_
dolls, some of which were as big as an ordinary child; of--she really
believed---_fifty_ dolls' dresses of different sorts, _moire antique_,
silk, and velvet, besides morning dresses, embroidered skirts and
drawers, silk stockings, gloves and parasols; of beds and curtains; of
a wash-hand stand, with all belonging to it, down to the most minute
details; of everything from the kitchen to the drawing-room, and the
drawing-room furniture; of a splendid plan about the dolls, who were
all to go to a Court Ball on the King's birthday; about Milla, who was
a hundred thousand times better than they dreamed of, who did not
object, nay wished, that they should both come up with her and see it
all now, at once, and help about the Court Ball--of course as the
deepest of secrets. Yes, it was true; on her word of honour it was
true. She told them how it had all happened; about Milla's room, what
it was like, and that she had been there a number of times without
hearing a word about the dolls. But to-day Milla had shown them to her,
merely out of the goodness of her heart to comfort her. Now she wanted
to show them to the others, if it could be managed, and all four be
friends from this time forward.

Tora had proposed it; Milla had been startled, but she had come round,
and at last thought it a capital plan. Milla was so good, and they must
be so too; no hesitation--they must. Why should there be two parties?
Milla had her ways, Nora hers.

They had never really done each other any harm, not the least bit; if
they would only try to grasp the fact: "we can talk more about it as we
go."

The two looked at each other, but Tora gave them no breathing time. "We
must tell them at home that we are going to stay to tea, for that was
what was meant. It would never do to refuse an invitation, a formal
invitation, to the Engels."

Tora was a perfect whirlwind, carrying all before her, and the storm of
excitement had brought fire to her eyes, her movements--she seemed to
sparkle. She took possession of them.

Not long afterwards they all four stood before the press; the
introduction, the embarrassment from the change of circumstances,
apologies, counter-apologies, occupied the first few minutes; Tora took
hold of Milla and pushed her gently forward to the front of the press.

"Open! open!--we can talk afterwards--open!" Milla herself felt that
here action was better than words, and opened the door.

The cry of delight which was given by the newcomers fully rewarded her.

There was an amount of industry, order, loyalty, and sense of beauty in
this little collection which she was aware of herself, and which made
it dear to her heart. It was her treasure, never seen by many people,
and for the last two or three years only by herself; there was
therefore a special charm of secrecy in it; it would be enjoyed when
some day it was opened before the astonished eyes of others. And now,
how it was enjoyed!

Each one found a special pleasure in it. Tinka looked upon the dolls as
so many little children, she talked baby talk to them: "Doodnes
dacious" for "Goodness gracious," and "tweet" for "sweet." She began to
undress one for the pleasure of dressing it again.

Tora delighted in the stuffs, felt each one, held them up against the
light, laid them one against the other. There was a special piece of
brocade which she now saw for the first time (Milla looked it out for
her), which absolutely enraptured her; it suggested plan upon plan, she
talked without a pause. Nora regarded the press as a collection of
works of art. Milla became a new person in her eyes. It was evident
what she thought of her now, one saw it in Milla's slightly heightened
colour.

They treated each other the whole evening with a distinction which the
others considered as only natural.

They were soon all sitting round the table with the dolls shared among
them; the materials and everything which could be of use for this great
object, a Court Ball, lay scattered before them, and eight eyes and
forty fingers rummaged among them. They could not agree; Tora wished to
have a costume ball, her endless chatter filled the air with fancies
and varying colours, a perfect whirl of figures of damsels and _rococo_
dames with ribbons, feathers, and hats. Milla preferred the present
day, the fashion plates, especially some quite new ones.

Nora was sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, according as
some special thing took her fancy. Tinka opposed the idea; they could
each one dress her doll according to her own fancy. Nora and Tora
rebelled against this; there ought to be some style in it. Milla dealt
with the proposal with more deliberation, but was against it. Nora
quickly grew impatient at this, and then, by a sleight of hand
which only girls understand, this discussion turned into a dispute
about--Tomas Rendalen and Karl Vangen! Not between Tinka and the
others, but Tora against Nora and Tinka. Tora being herself nervous,
could not endure Rendalen's nervousness. It was either this, or that
she was inclined to be in opposition; otherwise it cannot be explained
how it was that from the first day she had been unable to get on with
Rendalen. A speaking resemblance between a red-spotted stuff and
Rendalen's hands had started the dispute. Nora had hastily answered
that his hands were clever, really speaking hands; Vangen's, on the
contrary, were "big and stupid, as broad at one end as the other."

When there are only two masculine teachers in a girls' school, the
pupils very rarely praise both--one must be censured when the other is
applauded; and at school it was generally honest Karl Vangen who was
used as a foil whenever any one felt inclined to become enthusiastic
over the intellectual Rendalen.

But on this point Tora was in opposition from the moment when Karl
Vangen had grasped her hand in warm welcome, and had beamed down at her
with his kind eyes, and besides had made their meeting the text of his
address that day--since then she had been fond of him. And the more
awkward and simple he was, the more she liked him--she fought for him
until the others were forced to respect her.

This time it began very mildly; they merely taunted her with Karl
Vangen's "thick head," his wide mouth, his long fingers, long legs and
big feet; and she replied with allusions to Rendalen's red hair,
screwed-up eyes, his feminine preciseness, his scented handkerchief;
but it soon became more serious. Tora's quick wit cited instances of
Rendalen's uncontrolled impetuosity, and what mistakes he made in
consequence. Instances of his uneven temper--how sometimes he rushed up
and down the class without speaking, without hearing, without seeing;
at other times he was nothing but life, absolutely given up to fun--far
too much so. The others considered that this was unjust, because if
this were mentioned by itself, no one would have the least idea of
Rendalen, who was, for all that, the best and cleverest teacher in the
world. Tinka had a capricious talent for mimicry and not the slightest
leaning towards piety, so that Karl Vangen very easily appeared to her
in a ludicrous light; she now began to preach, or rather to bleat, like
him, with eyes gazing fixedly heavenwards. Nora laughed violently, Tora
cried, Milla could not prevent herself from laughing, but all the same,
she now took Karl Vangen's part; she quietly remarked that she thought
him "delightful"; she did not mention Rendalen. As Milla was the
hostess and Nora and Tinka at her house for the first time, they said
no more; but Tora would not give in; she now seriously began to sing
Karl Vangen's praises. In order not to answer and admit that there
might be some truth in it, Nora walked away humming and looked out of
the window. "Good gracious! why, there goes Anna Rogne," she said.

"Has she been here?" asked Milla, turning pale; she got up and came
towards the window. Yes, certainly she saw Anna hurrying away, she must
be much disturbed; she herself, with as much speed as was becoming,
hastened out of the door and down the stairs. Some time elapsed before
she returned. She was silent and really upset; Anna had been right
upstairs and therefore outside their door. There was general
astonishment. Milla told them what had happened that morning, and how
innocent she really was in the matter. Tora at once took it upon
herself, and was terribly unhappy.

"No, the blame is mine alone," said Milla.

What should she do? She had ordered the carriage.

No one answered, but they looked involuntarily at Tinka.

"Yes," said Tinka, "we will all go together to fetch Anna and explain
to her how it happened." Nora and Tora agreed at once that that was the
only right thing to do. Milla, too, admitted that this would be best,
but she had never said anything to Anna about the dolls; Anna did not
care for such things, and now it could not very well be explained to
her without offence. Nora and Tora were sensible of this; it would not
do.

Tinka held to her opinion; she would gladly undertake it by herself.

No; if any one were to do so it should be Milla.

This put the idea into Milla's head to write. Simply say to Anna that
the others were here, would she not come too? She sent the carriage.
Yes, the others thought that would do.

"Go yourself!" said Tinka.

"No, I am not so discourteous as that to my guests," laughed Milla. She
sat down to write.

The others were quiet for a time; at last Nora broke in with, "Tinka is
certainly right; go yourself, we can easily go out just for that time."

"No," answered Milla, looking up from her letter; "Anna need not know
that we saw her. Then it would be the most natural thing in the world
for me to send a message to her when you are here." The others could
not contradict this. She finished off the note and hurried down with
it; as she came up again they heard the carriage drive out of the gate,
at the side of the house. Milla smiled; "I said I would explain another
time why you had come. I told Hans to be quick and to drive a little
way round so as not to pass Anna; perhaps the carriage will be there
before she is." It was evident that she was pleased at having proved
equal to a difficult occasion.

They resumed their discussion on the dolls' festival; but before the
carriage returned with Anna, the dolls and their things must be back in
the press.

Suddenly Nora broke out: "If we are not to mention the dolls to Anna,
why in the world could we not have all gone to her together?"

They looked puzzled at each other for a moment. It was true! They burst
out laughing. What had given them the mad idea that for them all to go
together would be to let out the secret of the dolls. They tried to
recall the course of their conversation, but could not determine it; at
all events, it showed that they had uneasy consciences. Tinka proposed
in good time to put away the dolls, their wardrobe and stuffs, under
Milla's superintendence; but Milla undertook to put the whole thing
tidy later on, they could sit quiet while she did so. They all objected
to this; it would be awfully amusing to put them away. And so it was
settled.

The carriage returned without Anna--she had a headache. Tora looked at
Milla, and Milla at Tora; this was a final good-bye. It put them all
out of tune for a little while, but when they remembered that at all
events they could take the dolls out again, the three guests soon
consoled themselves.

As soon as they had got to work, the conversation naturally turned upon
Anna; none of the three liked her; they thought her artificial,
_pretentieuse_, as Tora expressed it in rather affected French; Anna
was always trying to take up some special line; everything she said, or
did, must be so dreadfully thorough. But they all agreed that she wrote
well; it was true, for the two things went naturally together.

They then began to make fun of her extreme piety. Milla had said
nothing about the first; as regarded the second, she contented herself
by remarking that she had perhaps a little too much of it.

Nora was the first to forsake the table. She could not go on any
longer; she must have a little music, she said. The grand piano was
tried. Milla was afraid that it was not quite in tune; nor was it, but
what a tone! Nora sang, while the others dressed dolls; then she
worried Tinka to join her, but at first Tinka would not leave her blue
doll; at last Milla asked her to do so. They had sung one or two songs
when there was a knock at the door. Milla's maid announced that the
Consul had arrived; there was great surprise, he was not expected.
Milla hurried down. The others all agreed at once that they must go, it
would be dull work having tea with the Consul. Tora especially shrank
from it; her cuffs were not quite clean; would it do to ask Milla to
lend her a pair? During this discussion the door was opened, in came
Milla, quicker than any one believed it possible for her to move.
"Father's coming," she whispered, and hurried to the table with the
others after her. From there to the press, from the press to the table,
from the table to the press; heads and shoulders were knocked together,
toes trodden on, amid smothered cries, laughter, and scolding;
everything was off the table and locked up as the Consul knocked at the
door. Nora had pushed Tinka on to the sofa, she herself sat gravely on
a chair, Milla and Tora stood by the press. The Consul came in, elegant
and smiling as usual. He saw the four girls red with suppressed
laughter, or whatever it might be, embarrassed, constrained. "What the
deuce is it?" he thought, and came forward to Nora, the Sheriff's
daughter, bowed politely, bade her welcome, and asked after her
parents; then to the others as Milla introduced them, and then back
again to Nora; he asked merrily if he might have the pleasure of taking
her downstairs. He had just come from the steamer, and was as hungry as
one only can be after a sea voyage.

She took his arm, but he wished the others to go first, which they
hesitated to do; it seemed as though one were waiting for the other.
Tinka could not understand why Tora did not move, and when the Consul
turned towards her again she came forward, although it was rather
embarrassing. Why did not Milla help her? She stood there too, as
though she had taken root. The Consul gave his daughter a little push:
"_Avancez, mesdemoiselles_." She was obliged to come a little forward,
and the lower part of a doll become visible! It lay there, "naked and
face downwards," as the song says. Tora tried to cover it up, but the
Consul had caught sight of it, and with a "Pardon me, Froeken," he
stooped and picked it up. Tora ran, Tinka ran, Milla ran, Nora let go
his arm and ran, and the Consul after them with the doll. "What is
this--what in the world is this?"

They all rushed into the dining-room and stood there in a group,
convulsed with laughter, as the Consul followed them with the doll in
the air like a flag. It was the blue doll which Tinka had undressed for
the third time, and was going to put to bed just as the Consul came and
everything was hurry-scurry. It must have slipped down and bashfully
hidden itself under a skirt at the time the press was closed. Milla and
Tora had discovered it at the same moment, and both placed themselves
over it.

The Consul sat down with the doll in his arms; then he laid it down in
his table napkin, and after looking at it once or twice he put it on
the table with a teacup under its head. Milla snatched it from him.

"Do you really play with dolls?"

No, indeed; they had come to consult together about Christmas presents.
Milla gave this answer.

"Why should you hide such a harmless thing?" asked the Consul.

"Because the doll was undressed, of course," answered his daughter.
Nora soon joined in; she was used to this sort of thing. She also had a
father who loved to tease girls.

The other two took but little part, but as against that the Consul kept
his eyes on them almost continually. Tinka could quite understand that
Tora might attract his attention, but why should she? She grew uneasy
by degrees. Her dress might have come unsewn somewhere near the arm, it
happened so to her sometimes; she looked as well as she could, but
failed to discover anything; she felt as though she had no dress on at
all.

The Consul was very merry; suddenly he turned all his attention to
Tora, they had only been a short time at table and she had finished
already! The fact was that the unlucky cuffs worried Tora to such an
extent that they ran between her and her wits. The Consul looked at her
suddenly; it was not the birth-mark that he was looking at, for she had
been careful to have that side next to Milla; it was certainly not her
face, his looks were directed lower than that. She put down her knife
and fork and hid her hands under the table.

"You are not eating, my dear Froeken Holm; are you not well, missie?
What's amiss with you? Or is there anything particular you want? Just
say what it is. Milla, give Froeken Holm another cup of tea. No tea
either? A glass of wine? Come now, just a glass of wine. Your good
health, Froeken! But you won't drink any? Do you prefer Madeira? Good
gracious, are you blushing about it? Headache? Dear, dear! Perhaps you
would like----? Shall Milla help you? Not that either? Just say what
you want, my dear. Have you often a headache, Froeken Holm? What, you
have not got one? I once knew a girl who would have a headache merely
if something were amiss with her cuffs. But, my dear Milla, I do not
want to tease Froeken Holm. Is that what it is, Froeken Holm?"

Tora was overcome by a feeling of helplessness which would seize her
for even a smaller cause than this, and which always made her cry. She
had to leave the table and hasten upstairs.

Milla rose with a dignity which her friends admired, and followed her.
When the others joined her, Tora was gone. Milla looked pale, but was
completely silent as to what had passed. Nora and Tinka began to put on
their things, Milla making no objection. She kissed them and begged
them to come again, repeating her invitation down in the hall. It was
only when she was upstairs alone, and had locked the door, that she
burst into tears. Such a thing would never have happened if her mother
had been at table, she could not fill her place; her father had vexed
her terribly. Her mother had left her so much too soon. "Oh, mother,
mother, mother!" There was a knock at the door. She asked who it was.
Her father; of course she had to open, but she went back to the sofa
and flung herself crying into the furthermost corner. He sat down
quietly, and after a few moments he said very gently, almost in a
whisper, "Listen, Milla; I am sorry for what has happened; I wish I
knew better how it had come about. But it is annoying, of course,
chiefly for your sake. I never thought she could take it so to heart. I
was so pleased that your friends should come to see you. Especially
these girls. All the same, and perhaps it was that feeling which
influenced me, have you been careful enough in the choice of one of
them, Milla?"

"What do you mean?"

"Nothing particular; don't be so vehement, my dear! You do not quite
understand me. A girl who is so uncertain of herself and--well--whom
one can so easily confuse--there might come a time when you would
repent that you had been intimate with her."

Milla got up, literally as white as a sheet. She felt exactly as though
he had spoken of her; there are very few girls of her age who would not
have felt so. But she did not say a word. She cried bitterly as she
went into her bedroom, shutting the door behind her.

The next day, the moment the time for recreation was sounded, Milla
took Tora by the arm, and during every recreation it was the same
thing. They were both beaming with good-humour; Nora and Tinka greatly
admired Milla for this. They had not thought that she had so much heart
and spirit.

This little occurrence, more than anything else laid the foundation of
their friendship.

The Staff was formed.




                              CHAPTER III

                              THE SOCIETY


It was soon noticed that the whole of the senior class and that next to
it had come under a single influence.

Rendalen was so much struck by the alteration, without understanding
the ground for it, that at last he made inquiries, and it was explained
to him. He was much amused, gave the four girls their celebrated name,
and at the same time suggested that they should form a "Society." It
was true that they already had social evenings at his mother's, and
they would continue these, but it would be better if they took the
whole affair into their own hands; select the subjects for readings and
lectures, or for discussion, among themselves. The last especially.
Girls had so many "fancies" in their heads that they ought to learn in
early life to be able to carry out a thought, to pursue a special
interest. A Society! The senior class is to institute a Society. They
may invite their friends from the town or the elder girls from the
second class. They will be allowed to speak at the meetings on what
subjects they choose, invite whom they like to take part in the
readings and music, they and no one else. They were to be empowered to
make rules, elect a president and secretary, impose fines! What fancies
this awakened, not in the senior class alone, but in all of them, down
to the little ones who learned to spell and sing songs about the cat.
What a stir at meal-times, what a whispering during lessons, what
commotions at play-time! When a school is excited by a question which
must not be openly discussed in lesson hours, it causes despair among
the teachers. No one studies, no one listens, no one keeps order or
remembers anything. If one wishes really to be amused by the suppressed
excitement of the class, one must not stand in front of them; there
they restrain themselves.

No, take up your position behind them and observe their plaits; you
might imagine that they had gained an independent life--they jump, they
dance, they curl and uncurl themselves. The changes of colour during
this extreme restlessness are comical. All the fiery red, sandy and
brown-red, up to black, look as though they were wet or shining with
oil, or take a dead colour like coffee grounds. There are locks which
are black above and brown underneath, and those of absolute raven
black; there are light ones in every shade of ashen, of yellow, or an
ugly mixture of both, with green for a foundation. All these assume the
wonderful changes of colour which belong to their years. The braids are
as excited as though they were chattering to each other, playing tricks
on one another, springing towards each other. The life behind is a
perfect reflex of that in front.

At the first--that is to say, the preliminary--meeting of the Society,
Nora was elected president; Tinka was so accustomed to have all the
work put upon her that she knew beforehand that she would be chosen
secretary; she was right, she was chosen unanimously.

It had this advantage, Nora considered, that she would thus be able to
copy the minutes of the proceedings for Frederik. It was true that
their earliest determination was that the proceedings should not be
made public, but then Tinka was engaged.

Otherwise they began without written rules, but Frederik wrote from
Christiania requiring the most clearly defined ones. He sent a draft.
There were fines for non-attendance, fines for disregarding the rules
therein set down, fines for every other kind of disorder, fines for
omitting to vote. But the girls took it more practically than he--the
donkey--as Tinka called him on this occasion. Nora and she worked out,
quite quietly, a new set of rules; they were discussed at the next
meeting amid some disorder; rules did not appear to be to their taste.

A great deal of fun was made in the town over the "Society;" there were
some, however, who considered it unbecoming, some thought it dangerous,
but when a theatrical company visited the town and its most select
representation fell on the same day as a meeting of the Society, and
the members, with a few exceptions, were with difficulty persuaded to
sacrifice this meeting, it was allowed that a proof had been given of
their zeal. No one thought it worth while to raise the question again
as regarded the chief representation; they were left in peace.

Very soon a serious error showed itself in the rules of the Society.
Any one might anonymously propose a subject for discussion to the
president, and it was decided by vote whether it should be placed on
the agenda.

Thus it was anonymously proposed to discuss "Immortality," but this did
not obtain a single vote. The proposer was evidently not a member.
Another proposal ran, "Ought men to be allowed to wear moustaches?" and
this was written in the same hand. It was now suggested that no notice
should be taken of any communication which was not laid on the
secretary's table during the course of the meeting. It was objected
that the proposal in this case would no longer remain anonymous, but
they were sufficiently confident in their own adroitness, for it was
adopted.

Although the discussions were absolutely private, it was maintained in
the town that one young lady in the course of her lecture had declared
that it was most pitiful of men that they could not keep their vows of
chastity so well as women. It was then that Doesen composed his famous
"_Nora, Tora, ora pro nobis_."

With this exception it was not certain what the girls discussed, they
had agreed to pretend that everything that was said about them was
true, a roguish Freemasonry kept this joke going.

One of those who teased them the most was Consul Engel. He had soon
made his peace with the Staff, having sent his apologies through his
daughter. Besides this, he had presented Tora with a nest of Japanese
boxes, in the smallest of which was a charming pin. In order to make
everything smooth again, he gave a "Reconciliation Dinner," to which
Milla invited several of her friends. An enormous doll had been sent by
_grande vitesse_, which he set up on the table and ceremoniously
introduced to the four girls. It was magnificent; Tinka had put on her
stoutest dress; Tora, who was in a wild mood, sat next to Milla. She
chattered without stopping for a moment, so that Milla had to pinch her
under the table to make her be silent, at which Tora laughed as though
she were mad. Nora ran to the piano in the middle of dessert, to sing a
song which the Consul had never heard. He declared afterwards that he
had never amused himself more innocently. His only notion of talking to
them was to tease them, his favourite theme was the Society. They
laughed at his jokes and kept them up, but they would not give in; for
women are used to having the things they are fond of held up to
contempt. The Society was a new thing in their lives, soon it became
something more. But to show this we must return to one who is waiting
for us. Anna Rogne did not come to school that Monday; Milla came up to
muster with her heart full of self-reproach. Directly after school she
drove round to see her, but Anna was ill; her aunts came out smiling
and told her that she could not be disturbed. The next day Milla came
again. She asked if she might not at least be allowed to see the
invalid. Anna and she had begun to read Fabiola together; might she not
read aloud to her? "Little Anna hoped she would excuse her," they said
smiling, and Milla went away. Anna was away three weeks, and Milla
called two or three times more, but did not see her. After that she
gave up the attempt.

Anna was not ill, she told her aunts openly what was the matter; she
had been deceived and slighted--nay, more than that, she had been
robbed. What she meant by this last she would not explain for a long
time; she could not. She must be quite alone. They could hear her the
whole day walking about in the attic, and sometimes in the night as
well; they were terribly frightened, but did as she wished. They always
told her when they were going to have prayers, but she would never join
them; when she noticed their increasing astonishment and anxiety, she
at last told them that _that_ had been her greatest loss; for all that
she valued most she had shared with Milla. Not to speak of their mutual
profession, there was not a prayer, not a hymn, not a favourite passage
of Scripture which had not been exchanged between her and her friend,
as lovers exchange their betrothal rings, make presents to each other,
and kiss each other's portraits.

She could no longer bear to see, to be present, to hear or think any
more about the subject.

She did not cry, at all events not when any one saw her; little Anna
had a strong will. She looked on what had happened as one foe looks at
another. Her feelings did not take the form of _pain_, but of _anger_.
She hated the others, she pitied herself. The misapprehension she had
laboured under, up to the last hour of that last day when she stood
before Milla's door and heard the others laughing inside--could
anything more absurd be imagined! What had she not, in utmost
seriousness, shared with a girl like that, and the inward strength with
which she had credited her; there were no bounds to her sense of shame
when she thought of it, and yet she was obliged to think of it. She
forced herself to confess it to her aunts, she forced herself to probe
down into the most remote causes; it became an employment which brought
others in its train. She roused herself, began to stir about, to take
long lonely walks, and at last to read. At the end of three weeks she
returned to school, rather paler than usual and a little thinner, but
in all other respects, apparently, just as before. She did not take her
old place, but was still friendly with every one, even with Milla.
Milla made no further attempts at explanation, though it was not
perhaps without her knowledge that Tora did so. Anna listened to her,
and asked for a little yellow cotton; she would return it the next day.
She attended all the meetings of the Society most regularly; it was
evident that it interested her, but she took no active part.

Just before Christmas Rendalen was invited, on a suggestion of Nora, to
tell them something about Henrik Ibsen's "Ghosts." He refused this, but
asked leave to speak to them a little on hereditary responsibility; he
considered that in this, when it had been thoroughly worked out and
realised, were contained several new moral laws--indeed, that a
revolution would be caused by it in many things.

There was great eagerness over this; they looked forward to a quiet and
interesting account, but were given a wild though stirring lecture. The
girls were not less frightened by Rendalen's personal agitation than by
his words. At the end he shouted out that those who passed on an
hereditary disease to their children--those, for example, who had
frequent insanity in their families, and nevertheless, married; those
who, though weakened by debauchery, brought children into the world;
those who, for the sake of money, married cripples or unhealthy people
and endowed their children with these afflictions--were worse than the
greatest scoundrels, worse than thieves, forgers, robbers, murderers;
that he would maintain.

Something must have happened: for several days Fru Rendalen had gone
about with red eyes, and he himself had been away, probably to
Christiania. Anna came forward and thanked him for his lecture in her
own _pretentieuse_ manner; after he had gone, she said it was the best
she had heard. Only one person agreed with her, and that was Miss Hall;
the others said nothing, there was a painful silence. At last some one
said that the lecture appeared to her to be terribly violent. Little
Anna replied that people must be roused, everything was made into an
_amusement_. There was too much of that in the Society itself. This
caused still greater discord; Nora was annoyed, and asked if Anna would
not in that case do something to help it. Anna coloured, but to every
one's astonishment she replied: "Yes, she would try."

She disappeared from school for several days; but she announced that
she would give a lecture at the next meeting. She wished that Rendalen,
Fru Rendalen, and Karl Vangen should hear it; this was certainly not
hiding her light under a bushel, her companions thought. Of course the
invited guests came.

When little Anna arrived she looked overstrung, her hands trembled as
her thin fingers turned the pages of her manuscript and arranged the
lights on the tribune. Her voice and delivery were measured, sometimes
almost sharp; she did not often raise her large eyes, but when she did
so it was with a significance which was most irritating. She read her
lecture--the opening was especially pointed:

"Woman does not labour to improve herself in the same degree that she
expects man to do. She does not lay aside the failings which she
acquired when in another and worse position. I will this evening
mention one fault--lying. In her position as the weaker, woman has
accustomed herself to lying, but she is no longer so defenceless as to
need this. Thus I consider that in making herself appear so gentle, so
pious, so modest, so lovable before strangers, even if only one is
present, she lies. It is the same thing when, a straight course being
disagreeable to her, she at once takes a crooked one; she gives a false
reason, she makes excuses. If there is anything to be done which has
grown distasteful she pleads a headache; if any one calls whom she does
not wish to see, she is 'out,' though she is sitting in the parlour. It
does not disturb her in the least to make her servant, her daughter, or
her friend lie for her when she cannot do so herself.

"Some ladies, possibly a large proportion, have so accustomed
themselves to giving untrue reasons, or to concealing the real ones, to
making up excuses, that they do it without any necessity; they delight
in it as in a kind of coquetry.

"Would this were only in their relations with mankind, but it is the
same towards God. I will quote a writer on the subject; he says, 'It is
difficult to judge woman's religious faith so long as religion remains
her single intellectual interest; but when one sees a hundred, two
hundred, three hundred ladies round one fashionable preacher, one
suspects mischief. The easiest thing to think of is to allow oneself to
be guided by another's words; it is only a step further to be
enthusiastic about the preacher himself, easiest of all to feign an
enthusiasm which others feel.

"'The faith which has lost its ideals on earth, and therefore transfers
them to heaven, is certainly not so secure of a good reception there as
the clergy promise. As a rule, there does not remain much more than a
vague need.

"'There are besides many women who are very cautious; it is best to
make things safe for them and theirs. I often wonder what our Lord says
when they begin.'"

She quoted further, and many of the quotations aroused laughter. Karl
Vangen was especially amused. From this she passed on to woman's share
in societies for charitable objects; how the needs of the poor
furnished an excuse for gay dances ("the proceeds for the poor," as
they say); how amusing balls and even theatrical performances are
organised in aid of the sufferers from shipwreck or fire.

She described how a society such as this trifled with great questions
and raved about particular lecturers. Anna was severe, as young people
generally are when they take upon themselves to criticise.

When she left the tribune she did not grasp what was said to her; she
answered at cross purposes, or asked them what they had said, but
little by little she recovered herself; when she looked for Rendalen he
was gone.

She was utterly astonished; she slipped across to Fru Rendalen to hear
the reason. Of course, she had to begin by asking her what _she_ had
thought of it.

"Yes, my child, there is a great deal of right in what you say, but I
fear that you will all inflate it into something to be taken seriously.
Poor things, you will learn then to lie to some purpose. Few women can
take this seriously, my child, but they can affect to do so and
overstrain themselves as well--ah yes, they often become horribly
unnatural----"

At last, slowly and cautiously, came Anna's question, "Why did Herr
Rendalen go?"

"Heaven knows!" She sighed, looked towards the door where he had
disappeared, got up, and left the room.

Karl Vangen was talking to Tora; he now saw that Anna was disengaged,
and came up to her to say that he had been "very much delighted" with
some of the quotations; he knew the book. Karl Vangen had been on the
high road to become a fashionable preacher; happily he had escaped, but
the terror still remained with him. Anna knew this from her aunts, so
she had the secret key to his remarks. He believed entirely in woman's
religious convictions, he said, and did not quite agree with her.

She asked him his opinion in other respects. "I know so little about
women in other ways," he said, colouring slightly, "I dare not enter
into it."

As soon as ever the elders were gone, the enthusiasm of the girls broke
out. "Little Anna" was the eldest of them, a thing people very easily
forgot--she was so undeveloped in appearance. They had never thought
her capable of such an effort. "What a remarkable point of view! how
well expressed! and that by one of ourselves."

Nora and Tora were especially charmed. "That is just what we are, just
as untruthful, principally in little things of course. And how we play
with serious questions. We must have deeds as well, or if not deeds,
then----"

"Snuff," said somebody, and the whole party burst into roars of
laughter, but they began again: "It is true, Heaven knows it is true.
It must be altered; it is shameful to be as we are."

As a beginning they would all escort Anna home. Yes, they would! And so
they did, and the two crooked old aunts were startled out of their
sleep when, between eleven and twelve at night, they heard the swarm
buzzing before the house, and the call of "Good-night, good-night,
good-night," from twenty ringing girls' voices. And little Anna
herself! She had to go in and tell them what it was all about, but she
merely said they had come home with her. She could not say more just
then. She felt so uncertain. She had written this lecture with her
heart's blood; she had turned her bitterest feelings into an assault;
she had felt certain that she would be assailed for it, hated for it,
and lo and behold, she had been thanked for it over and over again;
nothing had been heard but exultation and praise.

She lay in bed, but could not sleep. Was it from pleasure? Was it from
fear? Or had she been for the first time moved by them? It was not
disagreeable.

At the same time more than one little head lay pondering what course
should be pursued. The impulse to take this seriously, to be terribly
truthful, must have nourishment, otherwise it would certainly die. And
they found something real to do!

Milla was in mourning; Milla could not go to balls this Christmas. They
would none of them go to balls this Christmas either. Yes, laugh if you
like, but it was unanimously determined upon. One does not desert a
friend in sorrow: not one of the Staff would go to a dance the whole
winter through. Milla felt flattered by so much sympathy, but---- "No
buts!" Immovable, unanimous determination.

And that should not be all, they would think of something more.

The young fellows of the town mourned over the loss of so many merry
young partners that Christmas, but all unavailingly. Indeed, it pleased
the girls that their absence was regretted.

As has been said, it was not to end here.




                               CHAPTER IV

                              ON THE STEPS


This union of the leaders among the girls, this real desire for
knowledge and independent thought, even if it had to endure criticism
and even a little derision, was still an incontrovertible proof that
the school was now on the high road to success. Even if there were
derision expressed in the town, there could be no doubt that every one
was struck by the decided, and above all intelligent, comprehension
which the superiority of the apparatus, experiments, and method aroused
in the scholars on subjects which every one understood, and which
belonged to the most special needs of life.

At home the girls overflowed with narrations and desire for
information, and constantly asked permission to buy materials for
experiments in chemistry and physics, microscopes, and historical
pictures which illustrated beliefs and habits of life through all ages.

There was no longer any comparison between girls and boys when energy
and information were in question.

This made the lesson hours happy; the great gatherings for "breakfast"
at twelve o'clock were feasts, and the pupils ran down the slope in the
afternoon without books, unburdened by lessons--free, free, free!

But the happiest of them all remained behind, Fru Rendalen and Karl
Vangen.

How Fru Rendalen hurried about with her spectacles awry, a habit she
had acquired in later years; it was like meeting a load of hay at
hay-harvest, it smells so sweet from such a distance, and one so gladly
stands aside to let the mighty, useful, close-packed object pass. Karl
Vangen was one constant smile; he had no time to leave off. He beamed
with delight if any one so much as looked towards the school, and would
tell, over and over again, all the little incidents which occurred
there: they were every one either remarkable or amusing.

It was only Tomas who was not quite in accord with them, but there
never was much "comfort" about him, if by that one understands
confidential intercourse, and even good temper. He either wanted tall
Vangen to "give him a back" out in the garden walks, or even sometimes
in the sitting-room, while he jumped over him as one boy jumps over
another; or he walked up and down, up and down, generally whistling,
with his hands in his pockets, till it made one giddy to look at him;
or else he would play the piano by the hour together. Sometimes he
worked for, and in, the school without intermission; or read a new book
regardless of any interruption; or he took endless walks or read aloud,
and amused himself with the girls as though they were all comrades; or
else he could not bear them, or the school, or anything which belonged
to it.

At such times his mother had to take the literature lesson for him,
Miss Hall the chemistry and physics, Nora the singing; he would not, he
could not.

Then he would come back again, brighter and happier than ever, and do
the work of two. His mother put this down as the result of all the
years he had lived without regular employment. If they had company he
did not appear at all, or else came and carried everything before him,
or came and sat silent. If he spoke to any one, it was "Yes, just so,"
"Quite right." And then he would leave the room and not return. Looked
at in a certain way, this showed genius: there was something of a
genius about Tomas Rendalen.

Before he went to America he had "discovered" a history teacher: he was
very great at "discoveries." She was called Karen Lote, and taught
needlework, writing, and drawing. Rendalen had noticed her acquirements
in the different kinds of drawing, and found out that the girl
possessed a by no means insignificant knowledge of history. "Extend
that into the history of civilisation," he said. He was never tired of
giving this advice. "Here at home the history of civilisation is worse
than meagre, and it is the only one which is worth anything in a
school."

He had then begun to make the large collection of historical pictures
which the school now possessed, and through these he captivated her
interest; he kept it, while he was abroad, by sending a number of these
pictures to her, as well as books and advice; and he was hardly home
again before he undertook the history lessons of the whole school to
explain to her what his ideas were; he sought to show development and
connection by a clear historical summary accompanied by maps and
pictures; he made it slight for the younger, and more elaborate
for the elder ones; only using details as characteristics. He made it
one-sided, but there was power and colour in its historical
representations. Karen Lote was captivated; the novelty of his
appearance, his opinions, his wonderful talent for teaching, his
inimitable way of making one believe there was nothing in the world for
him beyond what was before him at the moment; his exquisite taste in
dress, his well-ordered person, even the slight odour of delicate scent
which always followed him, all gave the girl a deep interest in him.
Nothing in the six-and-twenty years of her life had ever in the
slightest degree approached it. To think of being helped in her work by
him every day! The misunderstandings and persecutions which he went
through, and his sufferings under them, brought her feelings to a pitch
of enthusiasm. But she did not trouble any one with it. Then came the
time when he became the principal of the school. He would come and
listen to her teaching whenever he had a spare moment, share eagerly in
it, or go away without saying a word; remain away for a long time, then
come again every day, and take the whole lesson out of her hands; or
else walk up and down, up and down, and then remain away again.

Just before Christmas Karen Lote went to Fru Rendalen, and told her
that she could not stay a day longer in the school. If she merely heard
Rendalen's step in the passage she trembled; when he was near she could
not relate the simplest occurrence or give an explanation. "But why?"
He treated her with the greatest contempt; she burst into tears.
"Contempt?" Yes! either he continually interrupted her, took the whole
lesson away from her, or else he did not consider her worth correcting,
turned his back on her, did not bow, did not come at all. There was no
end to her complaints.

Fru Rendalen assembled the teachers and laid Froeken Lote's complaint
before them, convinced that it must be the most extraordinary
misunderstanding. But the teacher who had succeeded Froeken Lote as
drawing mistress assured her that if she had not had a mother to
support, she would have left long ago; she would not have borne his
continual corrections in the children's hearing; he was an unbearable
tyrant.

Everything must be done in one particular way, without the least
variation. He had made her so nervous that she trembled if she even
heard him in the passage. And she cried too.

The startled Fru Rendalen turned quickly to the others. "What could
this mean? The teachers of languages, her pupils from their childhood,
her friends, who through her help had improved themselves abroad, they
must speak." They felt sure that Rendalen had not the least idea that
he "set people right," and as little that he offended people by
interfering, so that the children noticed his immense air of
superiority, but all the same it was often very annoying. He was so
uncertain both with teachers and children, he never took things twice
in the same way, it was always according to his temper. The conclusion
which they all came to was that he was most unfit to direct a school.
Miss Hall herself, who otherwise had no complaint to make, agreed with
this.

Fru Rendalen implored them, for God's sake, to reconsider it; surely
they did not wish to ruin the school; she was much agitated, and said
that provisionally she would resume the direction. But they must not
let this be known. She broke down with all the violence which was
natural to her. The others were frightened, there was a touching scene;
they praised her son, one against the other; nay, any one who had not
heard what had gone before, would have believed that they were all
glowing with enthusiasm for him. After all, to form a wonderful plan
for a school, according to all the best examples of modern times, and
himself to be an exceptional teacher, was something quite different,
and a great deal more than to be an able principal. They and his mother
soon agreed over this, and consoled themselves with it as well as they
could.

But this school had been the object of Rendalen's life; if he were to
lose this there would be nothing left for him. From the time that
Augusta died, and he learned that it would be better that he should not
found a family, the idea of taking his mother's school, and making it
all that she had dreamed of, but had not accomplished, had been
betrothal, marriage, and the foundation of a family to him. He was
proud of it. This gave the intense energy to his early youth, to his
work, to his sense of right. It was the object of Karl Vangen's
unfailing admiration, the secret text for Fru Rendalen's conversations
and letters.

Notwithstanding this, temptations came, and his unruly nature did not
always emerge victorious from them, but each time he was seized with a
feeling of shame for his ideal, which amounted to dread--that awful
dread which his mother had felt while she bore him under her bosom. She
had often described this in vivid colours, but it was nothing compared
to what he had gone through; it had been terrible. This drove him back
to his mother's confidence, and made him hold that confidence fast.
There was sober earnest between these two, they had a common aim in
life. It might have been that he would have cast her, his aim of life,
and this dread to the winds, if his passions had concentrated
themselves on, or been seized by, any one person, for there was a wild
energy in him which would have made him cling closely to another; but
the hereditary restlessness in his nature mingled one impression with
another, his dread had time to come between them with ever stronger
force, and it became at last the most powerful of all. The aim of life
was saved. From the time that he had conquered, a dissatisfied feeling
developed itself; it had always been there; it reminded one of his
father's power of imagination, his love of perfection.

His studies were forced. Never one thing at a time, but one clashing
with the other. If the examination subjects had not in such a special
degree been necessary for him, he would never have passed one at all;
he was ready long before the time with some things, and was as much
behind with others. He was always in advance with the subject he was
full of at the moment, it was a link in a visible or ideal entirety. To
Karl Vangen, who knew his method of study, it was amazing what he
accomplished. It was the same thing with his intercourse with his
fellow-creatures; he often seemed to be inattentive, and yet he
received original impressions, but they were all on the same lines. He
saw images and demonstrations in any thing he was engaged in; not
people, but phenomena; not facts, but ideas. As long as Karen Lote was
learning his historical method she interested him deeply, but
afterwards not in the least; it was much the same with the other
teachers, excepting Miss Hall; her teaching was new, and he was eager
to see the result of it--first intellectually, then morally.

But _his own work?_ When the long restless rush about the world after
appliances and methods was over, after the plans for the school,
conceived years ago, and since then endlessly arranged and drafted,
were at last set going; especially after the rude resistance from
without was overcome, what was it that gradually came over him? Could
he not? Would he not? Was it no longer enough for him?

Everyone round him rejoiced in the school, his mother's delight in
especial was touching. "This is the school that I have dreamed of, my
son, my dear Tomas!" He heard it nearly every day, he thanked her and
kissed her for it, he needed it; but all the same.... As for teaching,
his principal talent, he could interest himself in making a thing
absolutely clear, and in having the main points properly remembered,
the most difficult ones understood; it could delight him to give a new
view of something to the elder pupils, or to direct their attention to
a question of the day. Whenever a problem presented itself, he would
take it up with patient ingenuity; beyond that there was nothing--no,
nothing! He realised his failings thoroughly, self-occupied though he
was; they harassed him more and more. There were times when he could
not endure the school. Then he felt himself without spirit, without
aspiration, without--he could almost have said without affection--if
his mother had not been there, and Karl as well; he was deeply attached
to Karl.

This was no longing for a wife and family, at all events in no special
degree; indeed, he felt no particular attraction to anything.

Was this the cause of his unhappiness--that he could not attach himself
firmly to any conditions? He had been able to do so as a child.

A man who has deliberated in this way from one day to another, and at
last, one evening, receives his mother's tears and lamentations because
the teachers can no longer endure him as principal, does not start up
as at something unexpected. Tomas remained at the piano, where he had
been seated when she came in; he touched it with one finger now and
then during her long and interrupted narration; he saw her despair and
concealed his own. He felt as though now he had nothing more to do
here.

He observed quietly that perhaps she had better resume the direction of
the school for a time; he went on strumming as he said this, as though
it had no further significance. She answered that she had already
promised them to-do so. He grew as white as a sheet. She hastened to
add, that of course only he could superintend his own plan; she begged
him to speak to the teachers at once; he never would speak to any one,
they entirely misunderstood him; he offended them by showing no
confidence in them, and he was not always considerate. Did he not like
them?

This was too much for Tomas; he flung himself down on the piano and
cried, got up hastily, put on his hat and coat and went out, heedless
of his mother's prayers to him to stay and talk it over with her, as
they used to do in old days. He could not do it; for there was
something in his mother's behaviour towards him which wounded him. When
he had come home she had received him with the greatest admiration,
everything he said and did was right; but after the lecture she began
to doubt. This had gradually increased, until now she put a note of
interrogation to everything he said. At the first complaint from the
teachers she had taken the school from him; and she could reconcile
this with her pride in his way of ordering it, and a crooning quiet
delight over its success.

Not that her doubt was greater than a practical understanding like hers
had perhaps a right to; he did not blame her for it, but he could not
bear it.

This affair with the teachers was dreadful. He really considered them
most excellent, none more so than Karen Lote, otherwise he would never
have troubled himself about her.

There must be something at the very root of his behaviour towards
people, which was terribly astray when he could be thus utterly
misunderstood. Perhaps his own feeling of emptiness and distaste arose
from the same cause.

These ladies had raved about him. They and the senior class, and....
Was that, too, nothing but a delusion, or was it past and gone?

"Raved about him." What is that? He drove it from him with contempt,
yet once it pleased and deluded him. He had believed it would always
continue.

No, he who would have the affection of others must show affection to
them. And he could not do it--in the way that others could.

After all that was not strange. His race had perhaps exhausted its
power of winning human affection.

Was not that the natural result when generation after generation broke
down mankind's precepts of fidelity, and flung aside man's good
opinion? The race itself had been ruined, as each one weakened himself
and his offspring--ay, and others and their offspring as well.

He walked into the country to the left--the same walk that he had taken
that spring evening after he had given his lecture. He recalled to his
mind how happy had been his return from America, how he had dreamed of
giving his countrymen an example which, if they would follow it, would
shine throughout the world. What was nobler for a small country than to
centre its greatest powers on the teaching of its children, to expend
its surplus there; let the great nations waste theirs on armies!

He remembered how it then delighted him to think that in this way the
sins of his forefathers might be expiated.

Everything on earth had been thus developed.

Awakening had come to the strongest races. Instinctively they had felt
their failings, and had sought to combat them by an admixture of fresh
blood. Everything, therefore, that is strong and good has some family
for its progenitor, whose sufferings have been the foundation of
its needs, its needs the foundation of its work; its work, its
self-command, the foundation of its discoveries--all gathering round
the original discovery. When the school should be alive with a hundred
young creatures; when sparkling eyes gazed upon the aim which he had
set up; when the elder ones among them, influenced by him, and in their
turn influenced others--hoisted their colours--it would be remembered
that they had lived in the house of one particular family, from that
family they would have received their instruction. It was _he_ who had
made the school.

But there lay an inherent weakness in its inmost recesses. The germs of
destruction lay in him who had built it up. He could not advance it
further. He did not possess the necessary long-suffering gentleness.
Plenty of foresight, energy, ambition, but--talents for war, perhaps,
but not for peace.

As he had walked along that evening after the lecture, sick at heart,
anxious--ah! how anxious! because the certainty of years had been
baffled, Karl Vangen had trudged silently by his side like a great
long-legged dog with honest eyes. He went the same way now, only it was
winter, and he was alone; he was ashamed to have any one with him. The
suspicion of insecurity which had shaken him the first time was now a
certainty. He could not go on--O God! he could not: he was a blight in
the school.

The snow in the fields had melted, but farther away it lay in patches,
looking ghostly in the moonlight. It still lay thick under the
fir-woods; and here and there on the road, which had frozen hard with
deep ruts in it, and small sharp stones and solid horse-dung. Where it
was bare, or partly bare, it was difficult to walk. He came back so
weary in body and mind that he never remembered to have felt more
tired. By the new churchyard, where his father and grandfather lay, and
where the sea washed up to the other side of the roadway, rolling and
black, he felt that a little might bring him into the one or beyond the
other--or perhaps to both--they were not incompatible.

It was past twelve, as on the night of the lecture; he would not go
home before he felt certain that his mother had given up waiting for
him. Under ordinary circumstances she went to bed between nine and ten.
But as he struggled up the avenue, he saw that there was a light in the
sitting-room; and as he got a little further, that there was one in
Karl's room as well. If he had not been so utterly weary he would have
turned back, but now things must go as they could.

His mother met him in the hall with a light in her hand. "Oh, Tomas,
how you have frightened me!" she whispered.

What did she mean by that? He looked at her; poor thing, she appeared
at least ten years older, with such red eyes--so upset, so miserably
overdone.

She began, "Tomas, just let us----"

"No, mother," he waved her away with his hand; "I am so fearfully, oh,
so fearfully tired." He went slowly across her room to the inner
passage without a good-night, without looking round.

She heard his step in the passage, heard him open the door of his room,
shut it, and turn the key on the inside! It always awakened memories,
that dreadful sound!

Why did he do it? It seemed as though he were shutting her away from
him.

As he was lighting his candle he heard Karl at the door between their
rooms. Tomas set down the candle, came out from behind the curtain, and
saw Karl's pale, anxious face looking in from the doorway.

Why had he and his mother sat up, each in their own room? Evidently so
that the mother should be able to talk to her son alone when he came
in.

Tomas flung himself on Karl's neck and sobbed violently. All that he
had held back, when he saw his mother, now found vent. Karl's firm
confidence in him was his chief support. That confidence was there now,
he could see it through all his distress precisely as he saw the light
streaming behind Karl's head and body in the doorway. It was dark
between them. "No, dear Karl, not to-night, I am so tired." Slowly,
noiselessly, Karl drew his long legs back again and shut the door
behind him. The door-handle was turned, oh, so gently.

Tomas went straight to bed, and slept at once and without interruption
through the night. When he woke, raised himself and looked at the
clock, it was past eight. The sorrows of yesterday, which had at once
rushed upon him, yielded before this proof of a long sound sleep.
"There cannot possibly be so much the matter as I believed, if I am not
worse than this." He jumped up. "There must be some other work in life
reserved for me, if this is not to be the one." He dressed himself
quickly, and while doing so determined to go away for several days. He
wished to consider, and to be calm while he did so.

This was all the information which his mother received when she came in
as he sat at breakfast. He sent a message to Karl, and left at ten
o'clock. This was not altogether disagreeable to Fru Rendalen. "He has
such sudden changes," she thought. "He will very likely return home a
different man." His great failing, of talking and acting according to
the temper of the moment, made her take this view, made her question
all he said. He was conscious of this now. He hated it.

This time, however, she was mistaken; he returned exactly the same as
he had gone away, only she noticed the first time that she talked to
him that he was a little bitter against the teachers: "ungrateful
asses," he called them. He had taught them more than it was in the
power of any human being to do who had not travelled as he had done,
and had his experience and reading; he would have nothing to do with
them. He annoyed them by his elegant courtliness. This amused him; he
was really dreadful with them. He resumed his teaching, with the
exception of the singing, which was given over to Nora, who was now
both pupil and teacher. He declared that she possessed the gift of
teaching in the highest degree.

"Perhaps he could interest himself in the school again," thought Karl,
"if there were a new staff of teachers." He spoke of this to Fru
Rendalen. She would try to find out, and began by talking to Tomas
about the observatory which they had arranged in a small way in the
tower. They had been obliged to stop for want of money. By next summer
she hoped to have the means to set it going.

"God knows where I shall be then," he answered, and hurried away. "If I
were to speak plainly to the teachers," thought his indefatigable
mother, "if I could induce them to beg his pardon." She assembled them
one day just before Christmas, and told them, betraying emotion as she
did so, that her son had repeatedly let fall remarks which showed that
he intended to go away. There was a movement of dismay.

Froeken Lote, on whom all eyes were fixed, at last broke the silence.
She had not meant it in that way, she had only meant--she had really
not meant anything--but she was so dreadfully nervous. She thought he
was not pleased with her. The drawing and needle-work mistress, a
clear-headed, tall, fair woman, coloured furiously. The Spenser method
of drawing which Rendalen had introduced was not clear to begin with,
she said, but he was always beyond her; but for all that she ought not
to have said anything, indeed she ought not. She began to cry.

The teachers all protested that they felt the greatest gratitude; he
had, of course, seen and heard so much on every subject, but it was
most embarrassing that he treated them like dirt beneath his feet.

Fru Rendalen took off her spectacles, wiped them, and put them on
again; pulled them off again, rubbed them, and put them on.

Well then, Miss Hall would say what was the matter. It was that he
treated everything and everybody so unevenly. This made the teachers
uncertain, and destroyed the children's sense of justice, and that was
almost the greatest loss that a child could sustain. She would so
gladly have spoken to Rendalen, said the little American, but he made
himself so unapproachable. To-day, too, she felt nervous.

This destroyed Fru Rendalen's plan; she did not know what to answer.
All further negotiations were meanwhile broken off.

A loud chorus of joyous girls' voices sounded from the steps, and they
all hurried to the window. It was Nora and her pupils. These last few
days before Christmas, the pupils had but few lessons to do, and
therefore had employed themselves in practising some part songs, the
practice always concluding out on the steps--one of Nora's many
fancies.

This gave such immense pleasure, that not only all the little ones, who
did not join in the singing, waited up there till the great moment, but
people would collect in the avenue. As soon as the girls came racing
round the corner in walking dress and mounted the steps, the crowd in
the avenue increased and drew nearer; Fru Rendalen and the teachers had
put on their things, and were now standing at the open windows. The
girls had arranged themselves from top to bottom of the steps; the
little ones, who did not sing, occupied the sides. Right at the bottom
stood Nora, with her fair hair turned back under the hood which was
always on the back of her neck.

She had adopted Rendalen's method of conducting--the only thing that
restless being did quietly; he merely moved his right wrist, and gave
the sign with his left hand. Nora carefully held her right hand in the
same place as he did, before her breast. She heard about it often
enough.

The song sounded grandly from the steps, the notes were powerfully
given. It might be, too, that the view before them heightened the
effect by its beauty; perhaps, too, "An Old Manuscript,"[2] which had
just been printed in a Christmas number, and which every third person
in the town, from twelve years old knew, at first, second, or third
hand, may also have enhanced it, for perhaps those dark voices from the
past were heard at the same time, and by the power of contrast made the
girls' song brighter, and the moment fairer.

Below them lay the town, with the harbour between the two points of
land; now that winter was here, full of ships from side to side. At the
head of the bay, along the clay banks, were all the workshops and the
great timber-yards. To the left, the mountain, with the crowd of houses
at the top, the boat harbour below, and out beyond the mountain and the
town, the islands and the open sea. Weather on the coast is uncertain;
generally, as they looked out, taking in the view as they sang, there
were either driving clouds or gleams of sunlight over the landscape, or
if it were peaceful and bright inland, it was threatening out to sea.
Perhaps this may explain why the girls generally chose melancholy
songs.

For the teachers as well as for the pupils, the singing on the steps,
from its first beginning, had been the glory of the school. If the work
from every class during every week in the year could have woven itself
into a thousand delicate threads, and fallen on them as crowns; if all
the fruitful incentives, small determinations, uncertain beginnings,
could have joined in harmony in those voices, the singing could not
have made them happier. As far as the teachers were concerned, perhaps
for the very reason that, at the same time, something had occurred to
pain them.

The elder girls, especially the members of the Society, looked upon
this time as one for exchange of thought. All those higher ideas which
one has in common with others, come to the front when there is singing;
all strivings after the ideal, have a natural relationship to
harmonised notes.

But he who felt it the most was one who had hidden himself behind a
closed window, because he would on no account be seen.

He saw Nora beating time, standing there in her light cloak, her hood
flung back on her neck.

The song, which sounded out over the town, the one which had first been
heard by Fru Engel's grave, contained, as it sounded from these girlish
voices, all that he wished for on earth.

How miserable it made him now! He tried, as a counterpoise, to remember
all that he had conquered before in many a hard struggle. It was
something to remember.

It was not an ordinary victory which he had achieved: was it to end in
sorrow? Would the singing soon cease, or sound again after he was gone?
He thought of his mother. It was he in reality who was "on the steps."
Was it to be in or out?

The whole troop tore away in merry groups down the avenue. The Staff
last of all, for Tora had something either to tell or propose; they
walked slowly, often pausing. Yes, that was what it all depended upon;
to be able to share one's joys and sorrows with others.





                                   V

                                THE HUNT




                               CHAPTER I

                  Child or woman, which is she?
                  Hard to answer that will be.
                  Wouldst thou then a woman snare?
                  See a child in captive there!
                  And when thou bidd'st the child to stay,
                  A woman from thee flies away.


Spring had come betimes, and great rejoicing thereat rose, from all the
pupils, to the soft skies.

The spring was in their blood, bringing a restless feeling, a power of
invention, glorious plans, subdued noise, effervescing spirits in its
train; these were days when the whole school routine threatened to be
destroyed, and when orders seemed a mere joke. Much commotion, with
scoldings, smacks, increased attention, and many arts were required
before this small sphere could be guided through the dangerous region
of spring without too severe collisions and shocks.

Even the Society itself was shaken. It was not possible, when the trees
in the garden were bursting into leaf, to go off to the back premises
and pretend that there was something in a friend's composition on
ladies' modern dress. If the meeting had been held in the wood, they
might have allowed modern dress to roll about in the heather till it
was torn to pieces, or they could have hung it up in a tree. They could
have let the birds sing songs over it. Now they gave modern dress to
the deuce, it could all be learned from a fashion book; they simply
held no meetings.

Nora employed all her powers of persuasion, all her inventive genius,
in vain. A great event, however, occurred, also perhaps born of the
spring and spring impulses, and the Society recovered itself.

Miss Hall had energetically sought to lay some foundation, in the
senior class, for the lectures which she delivered to them on her
special subject. Both she and the eldest girls in the class had really
all been obliged to exert themselves. But a further result was, that
during this hard work they had gained confidence in the little lady;
everything belonging to women's constitution and health, and to the
tending of children, was spoken of with perfect openness. The mothers
kept up as long as possible an appearance of shamefacedness on behalf
of their children, who would not be shamefaced themselves. The fathers
helped their better halves in this; they were bashful to a degree. But
as the shameless maidens continued to acquire knowledge, this answered
no purpose.

As concerned the Society, this information, and especially this
confidence with Miss Hall, had the result that, by degrees, the woman
question began to be looked at in its physical aspect, and its real
foundations were sought there.

A book in our literature was again brought forward, which asserts that
the freedom which man allows himself before marriage, and sometimes
afterwards, destroys his character and woman's position, carrying
faithlessness and tyranny from generation to generation.

Karen Lote had, in her studies in the history of civilisation,
especially noted the history of the development of races. She knew now
that the compromise which was often proposed, of giving woman the same
freedom that man took for himself, would be a step in the wrong
direction, an unheard-of breach of development. She advocated strongly
that inviolable monogamy should be as sacred for men as for women. Miss
Hall took up the subject at the next meeting, from its physical side.
Can it be physically proved that man has stronger temptation than
woman, and therefore has a greater excuse? She declared, on the
contrary, that woman's temptation might be very much greater.
Notwithstanding which, the rule was that woman respected marriage in a
chaste life, while for man's part the rule might still be said to be
the contrary.

This aroused violent feeling.

Man had therefore here as well, used the right of the strongest for his
own advantage, but in reality with the result of rendering himself and
the community depraved. Woman, on the contrary, has in civilised
society, through hundreds of generations, only belonged to one man,
therefore she has an inherited power of remaining faithful. It follows,
of course, that man could gain this power as well.

During the conversation which followed the lecture, the excitement
increased; and in the course of the week so many thoughts had gathered
around this subject, that they had to fix an earlier date for the next
meeting.

For the first time since the institution of the Society, Tinka Hansen
spoke. The woman who married a man who had led an immoral life joined
herself in his guilt; she condoned the ill-treatment of her sex, and
was herself punished for it.

Did any woman persuade herself that a man who had accustomed himself to
such a life would give it up? At all events, they could not so deceive
themselves, who had during the last few years heard a series of
lectures which made it plain that habit is a nerve-question; not more
than one in a hundred can conquer a habit of his own free will; there
must, as a rule, be some hard necessity as well.

Tinka had, as usual, discussed the subject with Frederik; it was
therefore not surprising that, as she stood there, she had the
authority of two.

Rarely had such noise and commotion been heard since the institution of
the Society. From all sides came exclamations which clearly showed what
they felt, such as, "Fancy being kissed by a man who----! Fancy being
married to a man who----!"

Nora gave voice to these whispered expressions of disgust as she went
up to the tribune, and said that they must not separate that evening
without promising each other that _they_, at least, would do what they
could here to give woman responsibility and self-respect.

She had not finished speaking before they all stood up to express their
acquiescence.

Some days later they had another meeting: something had occurred to
divide their opinions.

It will be remembered that Tora was fond of telling fantastic fairy
tales, and romances scarcely less so; her favourite was "A Strange
Story," by Bulwer. Her little Augustus head--which was crammed with
ideas of rich stuffs, of sweeping garments, of foreign speech, and home
gossip, and every earthly vanity--delighted in the mysterious.

From a certain day none of her friends were allowed to hear a word more
on these subjects; only one, one single one, should henceforth see this
obscure side of her varied nature.

Was it because she wished to share this with but one alone, as girls so
often do; or was there a little sense of mystery here as well, that he
was the only one for whom this was suited?

Whenever, after this, she met Karl Vangen, whether they were alone, or
if twenty were present, she always contrived that they should converse
in whispers. Her friends were greatly astonished. What on earth had she
to whisper about with the parson? He had recently lent her a book about
John Wesley, which she devoured, as she did all books, and they had
many conversations about his sudden conversions. People who came under
the spell of his looks, his words, his presence, yielded to them at
once, and were his from that moment. John Wesley came of a long race of
clergymen, both on his father's and mother's side; naturally this had
in a high degree strengthened his faith and power of preaching. It was
like an electric shock, certain natures could not stand against it.

How this was made to lead up to the Kurts, who interested Tora
immensely at that time, is her secret; but honest Karl began at once to
speak with animation of Tomas's struggle to free himself from the Kurt
inheritance. There had been an infusion of new blood into the family
before, and a struggle against its sins; but Tomas Rendalen's bringing
up and the struggle he had gone through, were worthy of his energetic
character.

Vangen asked her confidentially if she had not noticed Tomas's
neatness, his careful toilette? If she had perceived the slight, hardly
perceptible, odour of a delicate and very expensive scent? It always
followed him. He was always washing and bathing, added the young
clergyman, blushing; most people believed that this arose from vanity,
and vain he certainly was; but could she not guess what it meant? Tomas
Rendalen had gained in the course of his struggle the same need for,
the same sacred feeling about, cleanliness with which girls are born.
For him all cares for the body; dress, scent, were a species of service
for the temple; just as it is to young women, when they have the means
and time to perform it.

Some remarks of Tomas had made him understand this; he was certain that
such was the fact. But it was curious that it should take that
particular form, was it not? Perhaps it was because he had been brought
up among girls. What did she think about it? Karl Vangen hazarded this
conjecture with great bashfulness. For some reason or other, it was of
great importance that she should understand at once that a man might be
an excellent member of society, without being exactly a dandy, and
using scent.

From that moment Tora Holm had one more person to rave about, added to
her rich collection!

Now she persuaded herself that she understood Rendalen's theory of life
and work among them. She did not understand, or rather did not think
about, the reasons for his restless moods, his want of steadfastness;
her image of this "energetic" nature was not disturbed by them. She
loved him. There was no other word for it. There was nothing that she
would not do for him if she could, and it was thus that she expressed
herself, first to her dearest friends, then to her next dearest, then
to those next to them. With unflagging energy the same story, to the
same tune, was repeated for the twentieth time to the last of her chain
of friends before the next day was past. Such enthusiasm was
infectious; those who had not raved about Tomas Rendalen before, raved
about him now. Notwithstanding the red hair, the freckled skin, the
broad nose, and pale screwed-up eyes, the absence of eyebrows, the
restless expression--he was an ideal man! He damped their ardour a
little when he came into the classrooms and strode past the forms,
without looking at a single one of them; or when he hastily pitched
upon something which interfered with the lesson, with such violence as
to make them jump! for he was not to be trifled with! He nevertheless
became their ideal again as soon as he was gone, or, better still, if
he were in the humour for teaching, and stayed and took part in it, in
his clear energetic style. He had not his equal then.

But just because there was one Tomas Rendalen, it naturally happened
that some of the weaker natures began to reflect: "Good heavens, he is
only one, and there are so many of us." Yes, there was the question. We
will not say who they were, or how many there were, who began to feel
this doubt. The question is the smallest part of the affair; it is the
answer which is the serious matter. The answer! For we may as well
confess, soon as late, that some of the girls had gone a little beyond
themselves that evening, when they all said "yes" to Tinka Hansen's
high-minded views and Nora's proposition. These ones acknowledged
afterwards that when one came to think quietly about the one whom one
almost loves, or at least would willingly be loved by, and even if one
knows that he has already ... Yes, the old Kurt town was a terrible
place for scandals.

One at last begins to doubt the sincerity of these expressions. Might
not the young man in question, no matter what he had done, be depended
upon, when he had promised _her_ anything? And when she had made him a
promise in return, of course he might! He would be a good boy, that he
would, if only she got hold of him. One cannot live upon grand
theories.

There were some, however, who considered that this was treachery; they
were very angry and a new meeting was called. Those who had dared to
change their opinions since the last meeting were called upon to
explain themselves. For a long time no one would do so, but at last a
courageous dark-haired girl declared openly that it seemed to her that
they had gone too far the last time. "If all men were--as one could
wish them to be--well, then. But they are not so by any means. So what
is to be done? That is just how we stand."

"And so we will stand," was the answer. This heroic response elicited
another in its turn, so that two parties were formed, with a third set
of moderates; no one felt certain about these last, as is often the
case with a third party. Tinka Hansen (and Frederik) and all who agreed
with her and him ("The Frederikers," as they were called), were for
absolute equality between the sexes. Infidelity ought from henceforth
to be condemned equally severely--no matter whether man or woman were
guilty of it. Miss Hall was the only one among the teachers who took
part in this debate, and she was a very enthusiastic Frederiker.
According as our knowledge becomes more acute, she declared, the
punishment of unchasteness should be the same for the two sexes.
Neither ought this sin to be any longer held up as a special accusation
against women. Those who made the distinction that woman's offence
injured the home, while man's injured another home, another's wife or
daughter, must for very shame hold their tongues.

Miss Hall brought this forward at least twice, for there was no answer
made to it. The opposite party entirely put that on one side. They
repeated over and over again that a man might be excessively worthy
even if, things standing as they did at present, he had offended in
this particular. Only notorious immorality made a marriage impossible.
The Frederikers were scandalised at this "light-minded" talk. That was
to open the door to the extension of immorality. They made use of such
strong expressions, that the others became angry. There was a perfect
hubbub; every one talked, no one would listen.

This was on a Thursday. The following evening, "The Staff" was
assembled in Milla's room. They had begun on the same subject, but by
degrees had wandered back to Rendalen, who was still of more unfailing
interest than the other. Tinka was imitating Rendalen's handwriting on
a large sheet of paper. The others watched her efforts with attention,
his large handwriting was just the opposite to his careful toilette; it
was all run together without any division, each letter and each word
absolutely joined on to the others. Tinka's caricatured attempts were
like so many embroidery patterns. She wrote: "I can bear it no longer;
meet me in the market-place at nine o'clock." She wrote it as a
commentary on what they had been talking about--namely, how delightful
it would be to receive such a letter. She wrote this closely across a
whole sheet of letter-paper. She decorated one sheet after another in
this fashion.

Who was it who first proposed what now followed? They never could agree
upon this afterwards. _One_ thing is certain, that Milla alone raised
any objection, but it was so feebly and laughingly made, that it might
well be taken for the opposite of what it purported to be. Each one of
them took charge of a note on Saturday morning; one was put into Karen
Lote's cloak, one into the pocket of the drawing mistress's long faded
blue wrap, the third and fourth were slipped down, one into Miss Hall's
mantle, and the other into that of one of the teachers of languages.

The letters were not signed, the envelopes open and bearing no address;
the request was written in so extravagant a style that the whole might
pass for a joke, but that was just where the temptation lay. For, on
the other side, it could not be denied that the hasty writing could
very easily be mistaken for Rendalen's style when he was worried and in
a hurry to finish.

At nine o'clock on Saturday evening the last of the worthy townsfolk
came home from their romantic evening walks on both sides of the town,
looking so peaceful and inoffensive that not even a cat could have
suspected treachery. Most of them went soberly across the market-place
into the town. At this time, too, the boarders who had been out in
search of amusement in the town were returning disappointed up the
avenue. It had been calculated that if the Staff could join one of
these parties, they would be free from suspicion while they watched
their snares. Of course they were all four there; they met several
ill-humoured friends from among the boarders a little way down, and
joined company with them.

They arranged it so that they should not cross the market-place till
just at the time named. And truly, gracious powers! At the top of the
marketplace, just a little to the right of the avenue, at that moment
appeared _Karen Lote_; no one could mistake her erect figure, her grey
cloak, and the feather in her hat. The four had so little expected to
meet _her_, that if the boarders had not been so sulky and tired, they
would have noticed their embarrassment. Could it really be Karen Lote!

She turned back to the left; it was patent to all the world that she
had come here to wait for some one.

They looked from her to each other; they did not laugh, they did not
make a sign--they were frightened.

But there was a revulsion of feeling when they saw the tall drawing
mistress come swinging across, and turn into the avenue. She came
quickly towards them; she had been given an appointment there at the
same time.

Milla crept behind Tora; Tora would gladly have got behind some one;
they had to find some excuse to account for their laughter. As the
drawing mistress passed them, hurried and excited, they had just
contrived to push Tinka into a ditch, which fortunately was dry.

And now they were eager to spy on the two other traps. They went up
into the boarders' rooms, whence they could see out over the courtyard;
they had given Miss Hall a rendezvous behind the gymnasium, but, unless
she were standing absolutely still behind it, she had not come. It did
not fare much better with their flight across the garden towards the
right, where they had given the language teacher rendezvous; they met
her, certainly, coming down the path, but it was with several others;
running quickly up from the wood, she never so much as looked round. If
she had read the letter, she had taken it as a joke. The four girls
slipped through the garden-gate and along the same way; they did not
want to meet Karen Lote again.

Something, however, had happened a few hours before, which if it had
not been stopped would have brought the whole affair to light, in which
case not one of the four would ever have set foot in the school again.

On her return from her walk at about six, Miss Hall, very nervous but
very determined, had asked to be allowed to speak to Herr Rendalen. She
gave him the letter directly he came in. He took it, read it, held it a
little way from him, and began to laugh; and when she took it
seriously, he laughed still more, quite uncontrollably at last. Ten
minutes later he received a note from Miss Hall, in which she informed
him that she should leave by the next steamer. On this he rushed off
for his mother, whom he found at last in the cow-house. He explained
the whole matter contemptuously to her, declaring that Miss Hall must
be mad. Fru Rendalen at once went to her. Miss Hall was greatly
exasperated; she cried, and gave confused, hasty explanations, while
Fru Rendalen pulled off her spectacles, and rubbed and rubbed them; she
could not comprehend it in the least. Perhaps, if we were to talk
English, she thought; but it all remained as obscure as ever. Plainly
and shortly, what was she angry about? Why did she wish to go? What had
happened? What redress did she demand?

She demanded that the culprits should be _punished_.

Nothing more than that! They both set off to the boarders' room, which
was now empty; they began to search through the exercise books,
portfolios, bookshelves; they wished to find out who it was who was so
abominable as to copy Rendalen's handwriting. From thence they went
into the class-rooms. That of the senior class stood just as it had
been left; for the cleaning day for this room was Thursday, and the
evening sweeping had not yet been done. There they carefully collected
all the bits of paper which had been thrown away, straightened them
out, and examined them; they peeped into exercise books, lesson books,
and desks. They must find out who the unhappy person was who imitated
Rendalen's handwriting.

_They all did it!_

As soon as the fact became clear that every senior girl in the school
had been occupied with _Rendalen_ and _Rendalen_, and again _Rendalen_,
Miss Hall gave in; at last they both left the schoolroom--neither of
them said a word to the other.

Miss Hall never said anything more about it. But Fru Rendalen talked it
over with Karl Vangen. His discourse on Monday had for its subject how
wrong it was to do to others, what they would not like others to do to
them. This was often the case with young people, "who found great
pleasure in discovering the weakness and tender points of others, and
playing upon them."

The four dare not look up, but they gave side-glances at the drawing
mistress, who chanced that day to be sitting near the laboratory table,
facing the others. She rested her long arms on it. Her hands toyed with
something standing there, which she looked at intently; but tear after
tear rolled down her cheeks, without her making an attempt to dry them.
She was quite absent.

All four girls noticed it, and when at the third recreation she was
still inconsolable and cried as much as ever. Nora could bear it no
longer, but drew her into one of the rooms, and with her arms round her
neck whispered, "Pardon, pardon, pardon:" she did not say for what.

They gave each other a confidential hug--regret, sympathy,
shamefacedness all mingled together. The poor girl, whom they had
befooled out of her most precious secret, was comforted at last by such
boundless repentance, such thorough comprehension, such heartfelt
devotion.

The same day Tora and Tinka heard what Nora had done; they wanted to do
the same, but she forbade them; the poor girl must not on any account
know that there was more than one who knew her secret.

Karen Lote was ill; Rendalen had to take her place, and give some of
his work to Miss Hall. All three felt that Karen Lote must not be
approached by any one.

How could they have thought of anything so disgusting as what they had
done! And that, too, in the midst of serious discussions on woman's
position, on woman's honour and responsibility.

Milla would not talk to the others; at school she held aloof, and when
any one went to see her at home, her door was fastened. They all felt
as though a storm were brewing.

That Milla should hold back from them as though _they_ were the guilty
ones and not she, Nora would not endure; one day, therefore, they all
surrounded her, and asked for an explanation. Milla was offended and
tried to get away, but it did no good. She then told them that they had
led her into doing what was not right, and she would have nothing more
to do with it. The only answer she got was from Nora's great eyes, but
she reddened under them. Of course she had taken part in what had been
done, she did not deny it; but she did not wish to feel as ashamed of
herself again as she had done during the last few days. The others
asked if she thought they had been less ashamed than she?

Milla now told them, with a slight air of superiority, that in her
first fright at Karl Vangen's discourse, she had asked her father if
she might accompany him when he went to the South German Baths. He had
consented with great pleasure. She could not draw back now, they were
to start in a few days.

At first, all the friends felt Milla's coldness in having proposed to
go away without telling them. But Milla now felt this herself, for she
altered her demeanour from that moment, and tried to do away with the
impression. It was _she_ now who was most amiable about everything.
When the drawing mistress appeared in a very pretty cloak and hat,
without any one being able to find out who "the kind friend" was from
whom she had received them, it was at once clear to the three friends
that they came from Milla. She denied it certainly, but that was all
the nicer of her. So the short resentment changed on both sides to a
closer friendship during the few days that she still had with them. Her
father gave a "farewell dinner," the great event at which was the
unveiling of a cake, on the top of which four sugar girls held each
other with fingerless hands as they danced round a red flag with
"Emancipation" on it; round the plinth was written "The Society." But
derision was useless. This same Society gave a farewell entertainment
to Milla the next day. All good spirits hovered over this, their last
meeting, with its many short speeches, its music and songs--over its
whole tone.

A girl of a serious turn of mind recalled that all the pleasure that
they had had together during their school year had been begun beside
Fru Engel's grave; it was closing with Milla's farewell entertainment.
Milla was touched, quite overwhelmed; she declared that she was
altogether unworthy, she did not deserve the kindness which they showed
her; she was not all they thought her.

Tora came up and embraced her, and they all felt that this was genuine.
Tora was grateful for the happiest days of her life; she whispered this
to Milla, which had a good effect. They ended by seeing Milla home; she
took Tora's arm. "Bad times are beginning for me," sobbed Tora.

"But I shall come back again, Tora."

Tinka scolded her for her extravagant way of speaking, it was making
the whole thing into a caricature and an absurdity; but this was not
the first time that Tora had done so.

When they said good-bye before Milla's door, Tora ran after her up the
steps and into the hall; she was never satisfied. When inside she took
out a box which Milla knew at once--it contained her one ornament; she
had inherited it from her uncle, who had brought it in his youth from
California. It was some pieces of rough gold made into a heavy chain, a
beautiful piece of work; she pressed it into Milla's hand; she had
never worn it herself. But Milla would not think of taking it from her,
she did not know how she could justify herself to her father if she
were to do so; she refused it decidedly, coldly at last, so that Tora
was vexed and ran off. But Milla fetched her in again, held her tightly
in her arms, and kissed her. Did she not believe that Milla realised
what a great thing it was which she wished to do? But it was a matter
of conscience for Milla to say no. They must not part in this way; Tora
should stay with her, she should stay the night there. And it was so
settled. When girls are really fond of each other, they love to sleep
together.

The others, who had remained outside, waited a while. As Tora did not
rejoin them, they walked on a little way; they were annoyed with her.
They all returned, however, and came quietly through the garden-gate
and past the office. A little while afterwards the two friends up in
the bedroom heard a subdued chorus of girls' voices under the window,
led by Tinka's contralto: they sang "Sleep in peace."

The curtain was half raised; they saw two figures in white; two
heads--one dark, one fair-looked, nodding and laughing, out.

The whole school was down at the customhouse the next day; Fru
Rendalen, all the teachers, male and female, every one--with the
exception of Anna Rogne, who had not been at the meeting the previous
day.

There was universal crying, and kissing, and admiration over Milla's
travelling dress. The little ones thought they must join in; they could
not cry, but they could kiss. First one little mouth was offered, then
two, then five. At last they all insisted on being kissed by Milla, and
then sprang back tittering.

The stewardess had all the vases in the cabin, and some dishes as well,
filled with flowers. She really toiled over them. Tora, her eyes red
with crying, had come with Milla and Consul Engel, and had been the
object of all the latter's attentions, but she now kept quite in the
background. Milla had to look for her to press her hand for the last
time, to give her a last kiss. As the steamer swung round and left the
quay, the slender black figure waved her handkerchief to her friends,
her veil, which had become loosened, waving with it. In a moment the
whole quay was white; the little ones in front, the elder ones behind
them, all waved their handkerchiefs. From the steamer, it looked like
the foam from a waterfall dashing down into the sea.




                               CHAPTER II

                            IN THE DOVECOTE


One morning in the gymnasium, when the senior class was practising
rather reluctantly because the weather was splendid, and two panes were
open in the big window that looked towards the mountain, letting the
air pour in, laden with the scent of trees and flowers;--one morning in
the gymnasium, just as Miss Hall had joined them, and had, as usual,
interrupted the ordinary practice by taking away a few of the pupils
for special exercises;--one morning in the gymnasium, when, as the
result of all this, some of the girls had gone over to the window for a
moment to give a glance at the hundreds of fruit-trees in full blossom,
whose dense masses like an amphitheatre covered the opposite hillside
with a single thick crown;--one morning in the gymnasium, when these
same girls could not utilise the moment as fully as they wished,
because a number of impertinent young trees had that year shot up in
such a marvellous manner, that it was impossible to see the glory of
the hillside, except where these young trees allowed it; nay, worse
still, the trees attracted the bees from the hives on the right, and
they were more impertinent still, for they buzzed in at the open
window, and frightened the girls when they were trying to see out
between the trees;--one morning in the gymnasium, just as all those
small labourers in the garden, who in lieu of steel spades, hoes, or
forks, use their own small legs, who begin their work at sunrise so as
to end betimes, working by no forced contract, but also with no
supervision or inspection, through the whole summer and autumn, they
and their wives and children feeding at Fru Rendalen's expense, friends
with all, except the cat;--yes, one morning in the gymnasium, just when
all these tiny workers--oh, hundreds of them--gathered from all parts,
rising high in the air to settle down again and hide themselves in the
bushes in every direction, the girls stood looking on in wonderment.

All at once the trees in the wood bowed their heads, and deeply bowed
those to the left, in front of the garden, while sand and seeds whirled
up in a menacing cloud; a sudden squall from inland had come over the
hill, and without warning drove across from right to left. Almost
before it had reached the garden it was no longer the trees, but the
wind which possessed the blossom; every single petal of every opening
flower was lifted up, strewn far and wide, and carried away lighter,
more lively than the snowflakes, for these are attracted by the earth.
Millions and millions of flower wings--a flashing, whirling atmosphere,
as of white butterflies, through which patches of green appeared like
islands in a sea of cloud, like islets in a mirage.

The girls screamed with delight, shouted, and clapped their hands, all
exclaiming as this marvel was driven gleaming across the garden.

From the wood came a darker shower in pursuit of it, following the same
course; it soon reached the place where the glittering petals had
passed; its track was narrower, but its rush heavier and more rapid.

The girls rushed towards the great door, which was half open; they
wanted to follow the bright moving mass, the fugitives from the
fruit-trees. They forgot that they were in gymnasium dress--besides, at
the back of the house it did not matter; they screamed, they jumped.
Just then the door was pushed right open from outside; on the steps
stood a young man in white trousers and a naval uniform coat and cap.
He laughed and bowed, he bowed and laughed. It was Niels Fuerst.

Behind him, down in the courtyard stood Kaja Groendal, who wore a light
hat and carried a violet parasol. She looked remarkably smart. She
laughed too.

"Is not Elisa here?" asked Fuerst. No one in either of the senior
classes was called Elisa, no one knew any Elisa in the whole school.
"No, not Elisa," he said; "Olava!" There was no Olava in either of the
classes. "Olava?" No one knew any Olava in the whole school. He was
sure that they all took it for a joke. He looked at them in their
gymnasium dress, turning from one to another. He had both hands full of
flowers, he had to put the ones he held in his right hand against his
breast and press them with his left arm when he wanted to raise his
cap. Fru Groendal was carrying flowers as well; they had evidently just
bought them, and having heard that the senior classes were at the
gymnasium at that moment, he had wished to see them. "Pardon," he said;
"perhaps she was called Petrea, or it may be that she was not here at
all." He raised his cap, his light curls seemed to laugh with him, and
the girls all laughed till the walls of the gymnasium re-echoed. He
sprang down. Fru Groendal turned and went with him; as they passed round
the corner he nodded back at them.

The laughter of the girls sounded round and round the lofty building.
They were most of them in a state of excitement, they kept running to
each other, asking questions without waiting for an answer; if three of
them were standing in a group, others joined them; if some were
laughing more than the others, they all rushed in that direction. Two
began to dispute, and the dispute increased; one or two more joined in,
then several others, all of them at last: the dispute was about the
disturber of the dovecote who had been at the door.

Tinka was one of those who was disputing. She was simply shocked at his
shamelessness; she looked round for supporters. She thus caught sight
of Tora, who was sitting on a bench by the door, as white as a sheet.
Miss Hall was attending to her. Tinka sprang across, calling as she did
so, "What is the matter?" "What has happened?" Tora had continued her
gymnastics by herself, for she had become an enthusiastic gymnast, and
pursued a special system. As she was at the height of her practising,
she caught sight, through the half-open door, of a pair of little birds
which were flitting backwards and forwards about a bush. Was any one
under the bush? Had they a nest there? Was it only their usual antics?
Then she saw Kaja Groendal's light dress come between her and the bush,
a large bouquet and a parasol instead of the birds; a young man in
naval uniform, with his hands full of flowers. She did not know him.
Kaja just then caught sight of her, and either Tora imagined it or she
really did say, "There she is!" The officer looked at Tora and kept his
eyes intently fixed on hers, his eyes both laughed and stabbed. Kaja
Groendal tried to hold him back and then fell behind, but he kept
advancing, did not even stop at the steps, but came up them and still
on, without removing his eyes a single moment from hers. She could not
move. The noise by the window, the squall, which lifted Fru Groendal's
veil and threatened to turn her parasol inside out, the waving of the
bushes, the whistling in the trees; she saw, she heard, but as if at a
great distance. She could not properly understand it, she could not
put it together; a strange weakness came over her, especially in her
knees--they would not support her.

Just then the girls screamed out, and the whole group flew by to the
door, while he pushed it quite open with his foot. She felt as though
she were breathing fresh air, as though some one were supporting her
trembling limbs; but so long as he stood there she could not go away,
although she longed to do so; she _must_ stay.

It was not until after he had gone that she tried to find the bench,
and only when she sat down did she begin to feel ill. She tried to
struggle against the feeling; Miss Hall came to her, and now Tinka as
well; and when Tinka asked what it was, firmly and decidedly, it helped
her--she was able to cry. The others came running up, but they became
quiet at the sight of the deadly white face. They did not ask a single
question.

"She has been doing her gymnastics too violently," whispered Miss Hall.

"She does everything so energetically," added Nora kindly, sitting down
beside Tora, and drawing her head towards her.

The others went away; Miss Hall asked them to do so. One could hear in
the little room, where they changed their dress, the sound of their
returning merriment--one heard them go away, group after group.
Although the dinner-bell was ringing, Tora sat there, with Tinka on one
side and Nora on the other, and Miss Hall in front of them. Tora had
spoken to them several times, and assured them that she was well again
now. They all three believed that she had worked too hard at her
gymnastics--she believed so herself; but she said, "Oh, what an ugly,
horrid man!"

The others looked at each other: "Do you mean Niels Fuerst?"

She did not answer at first: "So that was Niels Fuerst?"

A little time afterwards she shivered as if from cold, but she did not
give any further explanation. She understood what had happened so far
as that the gymnastics had been the cause of it. That, being weakened,
he had had a singular influence upon her. She would not say a word
about it.

Miss Hall now went away. The two others sat there still: Tora asked
them to do so. It was so nice to hold their hands.




                              CHAPTER III

                       SEPARATED FROM THE OTHERS


By the next day Tora had heard that Niels Fuerst said she was "out and
away the handsomest girl he had seen in Norway." She would not believe
it at first, but she heard it on all sides during the next few days.
The next time she met Kaja Groendal she told her the same thing. Tora
knew her through Milla, and always spoke to her. She had so far
recovered her usual flippancy that she answered that, "If Lieutenant
Fuerst had not such bad taste, it would have been embarrassing for the
rest of the Norwegian girls."

The summer came in with great heat; every one who could, went into the
country, to different places on the coast, or up to the houses on the
mountains. As soon as ever the school closed they were off; only a few
of the poorer ones remained behind, and Tora among them. Nora went to
the Baths with her mother; Tinka's relations were well to do, and had a
country house. Anna Rogne was in the town; with Rendalen's help she was
preparing herself for the post of history teacher in place of Karen
Lote, who was leaving the school. But Anna was not easy of access, more
especially for Tora, on account of her friendship with Milla. Even
when, for all that, Tora did go to see her, she found her so occupied
and anxious (she was to take the junior classes after the holidays)
that Tora became tired of her. Tora was now again living down at the
Point with her mother (her father was never mentioned), where she
shared an attic with two of her sisters. She lived in a hurry-scurry
and disorder, and had a feeling of self-reproach and disgust for
herself, which she shook off whenever she could cross the ferry and run
up into the wood above "The Estate," or along the road to the right
from the market-place, to the "Groves." This was a pleasure-ground in
the wood near the road, a large open space with a number of small
"groves"--that is to say, levelled patches, sometimes with benches and
tables; an elaborate network of paths went in and out among them.

One Saturday afternoon she wished to go there to listen to the band,
but on the way to the Froeckener Jensens, where she was going to try to
get a companion, she met Kaja Groendal; she had come into the town to
meet her husband, but he had not arrived. "Would not Tora come back
with her instead? The steamer left in an hour's time."

Tora had a great weakness for invitations. Within the hour she was back
again with a large hat-box, in which she had put her night-things and a
white dress.

The next morning, Sunday, she was standing on the terrace before the
Groendals' little country house. On her right were all the flowers from
the house, which had just been brought out to have the benefit of the
rain--as yet it was only wet fog; behind the garden, on the right, it
was drifting among the fir-woods; she could see the nearest trees and a
little of the bare hillside lower down towards the sea, a faintly
gleaming strip of which, was also to be seen. The fog lay very low,
there was not a breath of wind. She could hear the steamer, which had
just whistled, away to the left where the pier was; now she could see
her passing quickly--a vague outline, a thicker, darker, moving
cloud--through the white fog. She did not concern herself further about
her, but looked towards the path which led up from the landing-place
between this garden and the next. Just opposite was a low yellow
railing, a very handsome one, of cast-iron; behind it, some old trees
in a garden blotted out by the fog; there, she knew, stood several
houses which she could not see from here. One of them was the
Wingaards', where there was to be a party to-day.

Who would she meet there? She stood and thought about it. Fru Wingaard
had been a Fuerst; would Niels Fuerst be there? She stood thinking. He
was in the reserve fleet, which was lying in the Channel.

Why should he not come? It was Sunday; why should he not bring several
of the officers with him?

If Tora had known this before she went on board the steamer yesterday,
would she have come? She asked herself the question to-day. Directly
she had heard it she had felt a trembling sensation, she felt it at
times again to-day; but the disagreeable feeling was gone, oddly
enough, she thought. Did she really wish to meet him? She did not want
to be disturbed by him--no, nor yet to be looked at as she had been
before. But to see him, to be seen by him, if it should so chance? Yes,
she did wish that--she wished it very much.

When she went along the terrace, to the steps which led up from the
left, she could see quite into the sitting-room, and also, in a
looking-glass, whether the door of the inner room, where Fru Groendal
slept, was open. No, it was still shut; so she went back to where she
had been before.

She could still follow the steamer--that is to say, a dark moving cloud
among the fog which hung on every side. The balustrade of the terrace
was wet; she dried her hands, forgot, and put them on it again.

She need not have brought the white dress; it was fine rain now. The
birds enjoyed the damp, they were singing all round her. Trees,
flowers, and grass enjoyed it too.

She noticed their different scents; one of these carried her thoughts
far, far away to a country house near Havre, close by the sea; clear
blue air, ships, steamers, a long strip of sand, the lazy wash of the
waves upon it; close to the sea a country house, low and grey; there
they lived. The narrow gate into the garden was open; she stood there
on a stone bench, in a short frock and with bare arms; she could see
herself in the long striped stockings which she had admired so much the
first time she had put them on; she peered over the hedge, and the
scent of the flowers was wafted to her again and again, just as it was
now. It was nearly evening, her uncle would be coming from the town.
The path through the gloomy orchard was gravelled--she heard his step.

Here to the left, in the fine rain, she saw an immense umbrella and
white trousers below it. It was not raised enough for her to see who
was coming; even now, when the garden-gate had to be opened, it was not
lifted, it was only held more forward; but she knew now that the step
on the gravel was coming, not towards the country house at Havre, but
here; it was not her uncle, but----?

The umbrella was raised, its owner stood inside the garden. A dark
coat, a straw hat, and a very puzzled face were seen; she felt
something of the uneasiness from which she had thought herself free,
but as he looked at her it passed off; just the reverse of what had
occurred the last time.

He had evidently not expected to see a dark lady on the terrace,
perhaps no one at all, so early in the day. But it was by no means
disagreeable to him; he smiled and raised his hat, there was nothing in
his eyes to-day which hurt her. He paused at the steps, the umbrella
lay on his right shoulder while he laid his left arm on the balustrade
and leaned against it. That was a well-formed hand with the signet-ring
on it. He was slight and active; his head was noticeable for three
things; a nervous sensuous mouth, which was constantly moving, the lips
twitching backwards and forwards, in and out, as though moved by a
string--the lips themselves being short and full; a pair of large eyes,
roguish and gentle, though they stabbed when he put his head a little
backward and half shut them: excessively curly hair of a golden colour,
and long reddish whiskers. As he leaned over the balustrade, there was
a repose about him full of careless enjoyment. But this mood was not to
be depended upon, nor would one readily do so, for there was something
in the head, body, and hands which, behind the gentle, lazy, pliable
manner, reminded one of a cat.

Tora both felt and saw this, but to-day it was with more curiosity than
fear.

"What an unexpected pleasure to meet you here; have you been here
long?"

"I came here yesterday evening with Fru Groendal; she was in the town."

"Was she, indeed?"

And the two slipped into a conversation about the journey here, the
weather, the place, without having been introduced to each other--a
conversation without any other object than to have an excuse for
looking at one another. The conversation was in short, disjointed
sentences, without colour or calculation, except in so far that the
last remark never remained the last.

He stood below and studied her with growing pleasure; the shape of her
head, her features, her manners and expression. The eyes really shone
under the long thick lashes--what colour were they? They looked black,
but---- And her figure! her neck, arms, complexion, her dark hair, her
dress; he put himself quite on one side, he was entirely occupied with
her. How long this continued, they neither of them knew--it was a
considerable time; he did not wish to disturb himself, she did not wish
to disturb him. She saw herself in a living mirror, but the pleasure
was not an innocent one, for by degrees it made her feel giddy. She
collected herself and broke off the conversation; walked across the
terrace to some flowers, and occupied herself with their petals, among
which she made havoc. He came slowly up, with his umbrella over his
shoulder, drawing his left hand along the balustrade.

"Of course you are going to my sister's this afternoon?"

"Fru Groendal will get an invitation for me," she said.

"Of course; we shall have some dancing--will you give me the first
waltz?"

She did not look up. "Will you not dance the first waltz with me?"

She felt through her whole being that she ought not to answer him. "I
beg your pardon, I forgot that we had not been introduced; but as you
know who my sister is, you must have some idea who I am."

He smiled and came nearer, always with the big umbrella, and with his
left hand gliding along the balustrade. She raised herself, but did not
answer. "So there is some agreement about the first waltz?" He said it
a little carelessly, in rather a patronising way, almost as though he
were offended.

He put down the umbrella and turned towards the entrance. "Of course
Fru Groendal is at home." He went in. Tora was about to add, "But she is
not up." But that would look rather like asking him to stay here.
Besides, Fru Groendal must be so nearly dressed that she could warn him
off herself, when she heard him in the sitting-room.

He went in there, but did not come out again. Had Fru Groendal gone
there? No, there was no talking. She went towards the steps and looked
into the mirror; the bedroom door was wide open.

Down the steps she flew, and through the garden, away into the wood,
out of it again, for it was too wet; and out on to the mountain towards
the sea, under the lee of the wood; there she sat down on a large
stone. She was trembling: her breast heaved as though it would burst.

"Froeken Holm!" called Fru Groendal; "Froeken Holm!" She really was
dressed, then. That call must be either from the terrace or the garden.
Perhaps Fru Groendal had been out when he went into the sitting-room,
that was why there had been no talking. Tora could not collect herself
sufficiently to answer Fru Groendal, and as she had not answered the
first time, it seemed to her that she must disregard the other calls as
well. Very soon she heard no more.

What time was it? Could he have come to make a call on a lady at that
early hour? And to come straight from the landing-place, not to his
sister's, but to Fru Groendal's. What was the time? But she had not her
watch with her, she had forgotten it.

There were the white trousers coming up the hill towards her, and the
umbrella as well! She was pursued and discovered. "Dear me, did you
not hear Fru Groendal call you?" Tora did not answer. "And you are so
wet--without an umbrella too; pray come under mine. Why did you run
away?" No answer. "Fru Groendal has been making egg-flip for us the
whole morning."

"Has she really?"

"Yes, really; her husband was to have been here this morning, and he
owes me some egg-flip. But he has not come."

"What time is it?"

"What on earth do you want to know for? It is just eleven."

"Just eleven?"

"Yes, see for yourself." He held out a massive American gold watch
towards her, opening the case as he did so. She was silent and walked
on. As they approached the garden, she asked him how he had found her
so quickly. Why, he had seen her footprint in the sand here, and he had
drawn his own conclusion. No one would go into the wood when it was so
wet, so she must be on the hill.

They eat egg-flip together very merrily; but an hour later Tora was
sitting alone in her room, in the attics--she had fastened the door;
and at six o'clock the same evening, as the guests were assembling at
the Wingaards', she was on board the steamer, which was returning to
the town.

What had happened? Nothing! Absolutely nothing! But like the fog over
the landscape, which still hung there, although not so low as in the
morning, there lay something over all this, which was vague and
puzzling to her. She could not bear to be with Fuerst and Fru Groendal.
She could not be natural with them; everything she said or did seemed
preposterous.

She did not therefore venture to go to the party; the mere thought of
waltzing with Fuerst made her tremble.

It would not do. There was nothing for it but to fly. She made herself
appear terribly foolish, in trying to find reasons for her flight; such
a one as that she had crumpled her white dress in her hat-box, could be
answered by a hot iron; that her mother expected her, presupposed a
letter by carrier pigeon.

All the same here she was on board the steamer. It was really an
achievement. She was delighted. The rest of the passengers were up on
the bridge, or in the deck cabin; the windows were open. She went
forward where there were two or three work-people. She sat down a long
way from them. It thoroughly delighted her when the steamer swept past
the islets at the entrance; it seemed as though she were leaving
something oppressive.

The evening was fine, notwithstanding the fog; it was mild, and the
rain had ceased. The islands among which they steamed stood out clear,
their many tinted hills, the green patches of grass, the gardens and
houses--for almost all were inhabited--were seen with unusual
distinctness, as well as the people who sat or stood about, and watched
the steamer as she passed. Tora thought she would like to live in such
a place; she made a day-dream that she did so; she sat there and
arranged her house according to her taste--this time with great
simplicity, that soothed her after what she had left.

All at once the discomfort began again, a feeling of depression, the
old sense of insecurity--only a recollection, of course, she thought,
and drew a long breath, but she felt impelled to turn round and look
behind her.

There he stood on the deck, four or five steps away from her. He bowed
and smiled. Deadly white, then crimson, she turned angrily away.

"Come, you must not be angry with me; I would rather go back to the
town with you, than dance till five o'clock in the morning. Is that so
strange? I am not so contemptible for that, am I?"

He sat down behind her; she knew it, and moved a little way from him.

"Why do you do that now? Of course it is only to talk to you that I
have come with you; you can see that."

A feeling of both shame and fear came over her; she was alone now,
separate from all the others. She felt as though she could have called
to them by name. Whenever Tora felt how solitary she was, she began to
cry.

He noticed it, and in quite another tone of voice he said, "Dear Froeken
Holm, you must not misunderstand me; I do not want to annoy you,
anything rather than that. It would give me great pleasure to talk to
you, I confess; may I not be allowed to do so? Why may I not?" She did
not answer, but she ceased crying.

He slipped into conversation on indifferent topics, and calmed her,
lamenting that they had not become acquainted earlier. "The first time
I saw you I said to myself--well, no matter what I said, but I had just
a little wish to see you again; it was fulfilled quite unexpectedly
to-day; but we did not have any conversation, you were so strange; why
was that? Well perhaps you were not strange, but why did you go away? I
might imagine that I was to blame for that. You certainly did not want
to go before I came--eh? You have made me quite curious, I assure you.
If I really did drive you away, I should like to hear what I frightened
you with; was it with the big umbrella--by chance? Ah, now you are
laughing! But why will you insist in travelling about _par tout_,
Froeken? Just tell me that." He moved a little nearer, and she remained
sitting; he chatted and joked without any pause. She once turned half
round to look at his roguish face, and then she laughed with him. He
was very amusing.

Close by one of the numerous stopping-places was a red house, where a
number of young people were gathered round some gymnastic apparatus. A
young man and a young woman each held a rope in a "giant's strides." He
set off after her with all his strength; a few steps on the ground, and
then a long swing in the air; then again a few steps, and another long
swing. Would he reach her? Never! She was the lighter, the more active,
and she had undoubtedly stronger legs--she ran trip, trip, trip, trip;
her legs hardly seemed to be apart, and how she flew swinging through
the air! Her hair, her dress streaming after her, a very Iris! Both
Fuerst and Tora followed this chase, silent but eager. Tora felt his
presence at her back, like fire; he had come nearer; and, turning
abruptly, she went into the cabin and sat down among the others. He was
standing on the landing-place when she went on shore at the Point; he
offered her his hand, but she turned away; he wanted to carry her box,
but she ran off. He went on board again to go up into the harbour.




                               CHAPTER IV

                                THE HUNT


Tora reached home about the same time as her father, who had been out
sailing with some friends. He was helped on shore, and his reception at
home was warm. The children fled, Tora locked herself into the attic,
and dare not even go down to supper, although she was hungry. She had
to open the door at last for her sisters; she soon began to quarrel
with them, they had been wearing her best shoes and had almost spoiled
them. It ended in one of them flinging the shoes at her, and they came
to blows over it. Complaints followed, which brought the angry mother
upstairs. Tora cried herself to sleep like a child.

The next day she tried to help her mother in the house, not without
some hard words and sarcasms about such fine elegant ladies only being
in the way. Still she set her will to the task of being a help to her
mother, especially in mending the clothes. She gave what she could from
her little annuity, so that they were on fairly friendly terms; but it
seemed to Tora that she had a right to have some time to herself. A
little while before supper, she would take the ferry across to the
other side and go up either into the wood above "The Estate" or into
the "Groves." There was no peace at home. Whether she went to the wood
or "The Estate," she always landed at Bommen, and went up that way,
though it was not exactly the most direct one; but she did not know a
prettier place in the town than the house in the large garden there, so
she gave herself the pleasure of looking at it every day.

Both house and garden had belonged to the Wingaard family, but they had
exchanged them for the Fuersts' house in the market-place, where the
Wingaards carried on the Fuerst business. The brother-in-law, Niels
Fuerst, therefore now owned the house in the large garden at Bommen.

Tora passed it with a little apprehension, although the man she dreaded
was certainly not there, but on board his ship. This became a change
and occupation, and formed, as it were, an incident in her walk.

Every time it was over, she went more carelessly up to the wood, or out
to the "Groves." In a little Norwegian town like this, all the girls go
about as they like. She met others and joined them, or went on by
herself; generally she wished to be alone for an hour or two; she went,
as a rule, to some particular spot, and when there took out her book,
if she had one, or else she wove day-dreams without the aid of books.
Or else, and this was now almost always the case, she wrote long
letters, one every day, about any curious experience. She had her
portfolio with her and an ink-bottle in her pocket; she lay on the
grass with the portfolio on a stone, or she sat on a stone with the
portfolio spread out on her lap and the ink-bottle by her side. That
did splendidly: true open-air letters, where the words seemed to fly
before the wind, and every varying thought found ready utterance. And
how delightful it was in the thicket, just dappled by the sunbeams,
enlivened by the twittering of the birds, a little startled by the
rustle of a squirrel in the boughs! The distant sounds from the
harbour, from the works by the river-bank, the voices in the "Groves"
and on the road, with every now and then a strain of music, only made
the silence of the place where she was sitting the deeper. This was her
one bit of summer poetry. As soon as she opened her eyes in the
morning, she began to long for it; the noise and quarrelling in the
house passed by her as though they did not concern her--it was here
that she lived. Her great expedition to Fru Groendal, and her remarkable
return home in the steamer, were of course recorded up here in letters
to Milla, Nora, and Tinka; on the fourth day, she read over the work of
the three previous ones; she was very pleased, she knew she had
successfully varied the theme. She became, however, somewhat thoughtful
as she read the first letter, for she remembered the others, and the
difference had become by degrees too great. If the girls were by chance
to compare them, one of those tiresome scenes might easily result when
she would have to pay the reckoning. No, she would have no more of
that. In the first letter she had treated the matter seriously,
described her confusion, her blunders, her fright; no one who read it
could doubt that she had been with a person of whom she had been
frightened. In the second letter she made fun of herself, of him, and
the whole affair. In the third, she described how a maiden with dark
hair was wandering on a foreign strand, when a merman rose from the sea
who had fair whiskers and curly hair. In her terror, the dark maiden
fled on board a ship, to return to her own country. But the merman swam
after the ship the whole way, with his hand on his heart; when she got
to land he gave a wail of sorrow, she heard it still in her dreams at
night.

She tore up all the letters, and did not write any others.

Still she continued her walks. She had not the slightest idea that
Niels Fuerst had returned to the town, that a friend had taken his duty
for him, and that he was quietly studying languages to prepare himself
for a new career, more brilliant than his earlier one, and that he was
living in his own house. Still less did she know that on the first day
of his return to the town he had seen her, in the looking-glass fixed
outside his window, look shyly across at the house as she passed, and
that he saw the same thing happen the next day. He knew that this was
not the shortest way up to the wood, which was where she went the first
day, or out to the "Groves," where she had gone on the second; on both
occasions he had put on his hat and gone out, the third day he sat
ready to follow her; now he thought he understood. He knew something
about girls who will and will not; they acted exactly in this way.

To-day she came as usual, glanced apprehensively across, and strolled
on with her portfolio under her arm. Some one stopped her, and she thus
chanced to look round and so detected him. He was already advancing
quickly; he was in pursuit, he had struck the trail.

She said good-bye, and as soon as she could do so unobserved, she
quickened her ordinary pace to the quickest of which she was capable.
She was frightened, unaccountably frightened. Perhaps it would have
been wiser to have turned back, but to-day she could not endure his
gaze, and there was no one else about. So she walked on, and on, and
on, but suspected that he was gaining on her--she almost knew it. She
dare not run on the high-road, but she trusted to the fact that she was
more at home in the "Groves" than he was, and that she could slip away.
She therefore left the road and made her way through the wood; she saw
to her terror that he plunged into it as well, so she ventured to run
up the hill, but in the direction from which he came; then she stooped
down behind a large stone. She was quite successful, for almost
directly afterwards she saw him pass by a little below the place
where she crouched, her heart beating as though it would burst her
dress. Here, where no one could see him, he ran, he climbed, he
jumped--nothing checked his straight upward course. She waited till he
was out of sight, and then ran off through the wood in the opposite
direction from that in which he had gone; she did not stop till she
found herself far above "The Estate" on a rock under a fir-tree, with
leafy trees all round, and, while hot and panting she looked round her,
thinking how wonderful the view was which she took in in a rapid
glance, he rose before her mind's eye as he had looked when he hurried
past the stone. He was horrible! That man could do anything!

After that, she could never get rid of him. It was always he, nothing
but he; or rather every moment of the day she fled from him, but he
always reappeared.

Her sisters reported to her that he hung about the house and looked in;
walked past and looked in, talked to them, asked them to remember him
to her. This immensely excited them, they were proud of it; his remark
that Tora was "the handsomest girl" had reached them too. But Tora's
terror increased; she was pursued. She knew that he would not give up.

Where could she go to? None of the Rendalens were at home. She could go
to them after the holidays, but nearly three weeks still remained. She
could not speak to any one else, she was too much ashamed. She did not
think once of shoemaker Hansen, but Fru Hansen was severe, she would
not exactly understand. Her mother she never once thought of. But after
all it was a thing which entirely concerned herself; she need be in no
man's power if she did not choose.

No, but when she could not by any means get him out of her thoughts?

On Saturday evening she had flung herself upon her bed, as weary as
though she had passed the day in the hardest manual labour. She lay
there and looked at the yards of a ship which was being towed past. She
watched the folds in the loosely hanging sails which were swaying in
the wind. The vessel was so near that she could almost have touched
her. Outside there was a heavy sea, the storm driving the swell up into
the harbour: she, too, longed to find a haven! It was Saturday evening,
to-morrow she would have to go to church. Karl Vangen's face smiled to
her as she remembered this, and she felt happy before she fell asleep.
If he had been a girl she would have gone to him--just to _him_--with
the trouble which oppressed her.

The next day she occupied a seat at the furthest end of the church.
Karl Vangen had met her, and said how nice it was that she was coming
up to them again to help Fru Rendalen. On account of this remark she
had chosen the most remote seat; she did not feel sure that she might
not begin to cry.

She did not, however; there was something soothing in the church and
the stillness and the people, which was unlike the summer day outside.
But when Karl Vangen went into the pulpit, and his prayer was the one
which he had used on her first school-day--that on meeting, almost word
for word the same--it disturbed her: that even Karl Vangen's prayer
should be a lesson from earlier days. This little coincidence occupied
her, and she did not follow him. She gathered that the sermon dealt
with conversion, and that Karl Vangen, as was his custom, illustrated
what he was saying by examples from real life. But she had heard these
examples at school, every one of them.

She was roused by the name of John Wesley. His conversion, Vangen
considered, was the most thorough, the fullest in every particular,
that he knew of. He related it, and then passed on to give examples of
sudden conversions, especially some by Wesley himself; other natures
with different pasts, with different kinds of knowledge, influenced by
other fears. He wished to speak of these sudden conversions separately
to-day. He had known a young girl who had a burning desire for grace
for her sins, which she could by no means obtain, until one day she saw
Rubens' picture of the Crucifixion, and Mary Magdalene standing with
long flowing hair at the foot of the cross. She would be Mary
Magdalene. And all at once it was a joy to her to imagine herself at
the foot of the cross in the place of Mary Magdalene; her thoughts
dwelt on this so powerfully that it seemed as though she, and no one
else, stood there. At once she received the knowledge that it was for
_her_ that Jesus was crucified, _her_ sins were forgiven. She was
seized with a great, great joy. The preacher knew several such examples
especially among women. They had clung so persistently to some single
incident in the life of Jesus, some single word of His, something
special in the mystery of grace, and had gazed upon it until it had the
effect of a strong light, a special knowledge. From that time all
became clear to them, their sins were taken from them; their will
became stronger from that day and hour.

Tora did not hear more, least of all that it was _against_ this that
Vangen wished to speak. Then and there her mind was occupied with an
attempt to follow these examples. His too familiar voice murmured on;
everything round her seemed to fade away. She saw Jesus on the cross in
a strange country, with driving black clouds above Him, each height,
each valley, each tree veiled and mourning. She saw His eyes close, His
chest rise and fall, and it all became night. She felt her own small
sorrows hidden in that awful moment. How long she remained in this
condition she did not know. The sermon was not over, she could not
therefore go; but she could not listen, she did not desire to do so.

When at length she left the church she had only one wish--to be able to
renew that vision as soon as she could.

Through all these days she had not been outside the door, she must go
this afternoon. From fear of Fuerst she went over towards the mountain,
and from there up into the wood along by the churchyard, and then on to
the big fir-tree on the right, and sat down on the stone under it--it
was smooth and flat. She had not come to dream or to enjoy herself, but
for real help to consecrate her life. These weary days had enlightened
her; she knew now that her character combined a little of everything;
that she wished for a little of everything, even of what was wrong, so
that she would be an easy prey for a rogue. She had not been
sufficiently guarded from the first; she had been completely
unprepared--nay, the danger had had something attractive in it.

This must now be changed; she would do any kind of work, if only it
would be a restraint on her. She had no more ambition now, nothing but
dread.

She fell upon her knees, and with her blood coursing the faster from
her hurried ascent, she offered her prayer in her abasement. It was the
most humble, piteous pleading. Her distress was extreme. Power to
resist the will which conquered hers! She did not doubt for a moment
that her petition would be instantly and literally granted.

Mentally she saw herself endowed with strength, she saw herself without
fear--even with a mission; no matter what it was, so that it continued.
And that should regulate her life. Willingly! Always! She could not
picture to herself greater joy, honour, or riches than to give herself
to some hard task; it was her nature to wish for extremes.

And now she began to contemplate herself--no, she came to a stand, her
mind was disturbed when she thought of her friends. Milla's greatest
anxiety in her last letter had been lest the weather should not
continue fine, and Nora had feared that they might forget to send her
some new music. Why should she alone, who was hiding here, have such
dreadful trouble? Her desolate position ought to have made people pity
her, but it only encouraged them.

She sat, turned away from the view, leaning against the big fir-tree.
Before her she saw alder woods, nothing but young luxuriant alder
woods, and fronds of bracken in a thick mass. Ah! how impotent all that
was, that they had discussed together at the Society's meetings, and at
other places. Only a few weeks ago, and now she must hide herself here.
If this became known, she would no doubt lose the small status she had
gained for herself. She would hardly go again to the Engels, she would
not be allowed to be Milla's friend, perhaps not be able even to go up
to Fru Rendalen's again; she began to cry, but she tried to collect
herself. The image of the sly, excited, accursed face that she had seen
from behind the stone down below, seemed to stab her--to thrill through
her; she understood that the dread with which she terrified herself was
greater danger to her than the actual man.

She ought to have gone home again, but it was a shame not to test her
strength, and so she stayed there.


As Tora, a short time before, was climbing the hill, Niels Fuerst was
sauntering up and down the deck of a vessel, the captain of which he
knew, and just as she reached the flat stone under the fir-tree he had
taken up the new ship's telescope to try it; he focussed it and turned
it towards the river-bank, and from there gradually upwards across the
wooden slopes. Tora had just seated herself on the stone as the
telescope was turned to that point, and he recognised her.

He took a short cut across the market-place, and turned up to the right
of "The Estate" gardens.

Latterly he had thought of nothing but her, he could not occupy
himself, and he slept badly. He had never been in pursuit of so
beautiful a girl before.

Although day after day she passed his house, she constantly eluded his
pursuit, and all his efforts were still fruitless. All that was needed
was to find her in her hiding-place; one could not do her a greater
service. Nay, the oftener she hid herself, the greater would be the
refinement of her pleasure in being discovered. Now he understood why
she had left Fru Groendal's that day--now he saw why she had cried on
board the steamer. Ah, these little girls! But the pursuit would become
wearisome if it continued much longer. His own credit was at stake as
well; no one must suppose that they could befool _him_. His character,
too, would be safer when this was all settled; she would be silent
then. If only she did not see him too soon, if he could only get near
enough to hold her with his eyes!

Notwithstanding his intense excitement, he advanced skilfully, not by
the path, but straight up through the wood under cover of the leaves.
He scrambled where he could not walk, he climbed where he could not
scramble. She sat there, searching for some definite idea which might
be extended until it entirely occupied and engrossed her mind; but she
was not successful--there was something which always distracted her.
Just then a branch snapped down below. She had constantly felt tempted
to turn round. Was there really anything behind her? She looked down
below her. At first she saw nothing; yes, the branches moved and she
heard the leaves rustle. That might be a horse or cow from "The
Estate"; they came up here for pasture. All the same, she felt very
hot; she wanted to get up and go away; but her eyes continued fixed on
the branches below, there was something dark beneath them. A head
pushed its way through, a man--_he!_ How in the world----? Did he know
that she----? How did he come to----? She bewildered herself with
useless, frightened questions. He looked up. With all her power she
raised herself, though her feet felt as heavy as lead; but she did not
turn from him, or attempt to go away, and by degrees she lost the
desire to do so. Now there was only the stone between them, a wave of
terror swept over her and roused her; she turned her head now,
staggered a few steps--and met him. She leaned forward, he took her
hand, his arm slipped under hers--she felt as though a burning band
were round her. She fell so unexpectedly and so heavily that he nearly
fell with her.





                                   VI

                         WHAT FIDELITY WILL SAY




                               CHAPTER I

                               HAPPINESS


"Dear Nora,

"I know beforehand that this will not be a regular letter, I have no
time for one. I almost think that you had better not show it to the
others, they will hardly understand my feelings. Last, but not least,
there is something which divides the others from us two; I feel that
instinctively. If only I could do away with some of what I--feel, I had
almost written again. You must know that I have passed the greatest,
the most beautiful, the most enchanting day in my life.

"Ah! now you are curious. I will not bother you, but all the same I
must begin with how and why I came to do so.

"When we arrived at Copenhagen, who should meet us at the station but
Niels Fuerst! Of course it had been arranged between him and papa. I saw
that at once, but papa is so clever at keeping a secret. Do you know
where Niels Fuerst came from? From Sofiero. Yes, now it is written, and
you understand the whole thing. I told you that, long ago, papa had had
the honour of being invited by his Majesty to come and see Sofiero the
next time he went abroad. There are not many Norwegians to whom that
has happened, so it was very flattering to papa.

"He had said nothing to me; he did not wish to make me nervous before
the time, he said. Fuerst came straight from Sofiero--fancy, he is
perhaps to be made orderly officer to the prince who is a sailor--his
Royal Highness Prince Oscar, that is to say. Fuerst told us at what time
the train would leave the next day. Good heavens! actually the next
day. We were expected, then! I was not allowed to make any toilette, I
was to appear just in my travelling dress, as papa was to do as well.
That naughty Lieutenant Fuerst--you know he is related to us--he calls
me cousin, though I am not one. He said I was pretty enough as I was.
Do you know him?

"It was now a question of getting some sleep after the journey--one
does not look well when one has not slept. I have never struggled so
hard to go to sleep before. I was terribly startled, you see. I thought
about the stupidest things in the world. Do you remember chief
custom-house officer Jacobsen's nose? I lay and stared at his nose,
till I really fell asleep thinking of it and of the town bailiff; and I
can tell you I was so tired, that when I was once asleep, I slept like
a top. I was, thank goodness, none the worse when I got up. But it was
awful, really awful later on. You have never been in such
circumstances, so perhaps it may seem odd to you that the more I
thought of the important moment, and that I had no lady to refer to
(men can never tell one anything, and so they laugh), the more
terrified I became. It was rather a cold morning, and one thing with
the other, the cold and the fright--Fuerst called it cannon fever--I was
most miserably uncomfortable. It was dreadfully silly; at last I could
not altogether conceal it. You understand. But I consoled myself with
the thought that I was not the first girl to whom this had happened,
when she was to be presented at Court. I was really quite ill at last,
and therefore have hardly any impression of the journey, or what we
talked about. For all that, I got into a dispute. Fuerst said that all
the monarchies were trying to gather the wealthy classes about
themselves against the lower classes. That seems to me to be too bad.
Is the monarchy meant to protect itself? I thought it was to protect
the lower classes, and I said so too. Papa began to tease me about the
Society and school, and Karen Lote's history lessons; you can hear him,
can't you? Fuerst asked who was to protect the wealthy classes in that
case? They must protect themselves, I should suppose. At all events, it
is wicked of them to betray the lower classes, is it not?

"Oh, how enchanting Oresund is! When we crossed (I forgot to say that
we came there, that is, to Helsingoer, by railway) you see what I am
to-day.... No, I will pass that altogether, or I shall never be ready.
Father wants me to go out with him this morning, you will soon see why.
I will begin with the Palace, which can be seen from the Sound; it is
magnificently situated, but is not so large as we had expected. So at
last we arrived at Helsingborg. There, now you _will_ be astonished--a
royal carriage was waiting for us. Both papa and Fuerst took it as a
matter of course, but I am certain that they were at least as
astonished as I was.

"The carriage was just like any other; it is the livery which is the
important point. But I was in the most deadly terror how it would all
go off. The weather had, however, become delightful. I was obliged to
leave them for a moment before we got into the carriage.

"You can imagine how upset I was by it all, when I tell you that I
perspired through my gloves. Of course I had another pair to put on
when I got there. Papa drove me to despair by saying, 'My dear child,
how wretched you look.' I really believe I had tears in my eyes, for
Fuerst, who was opposite to me, began to try to amuse me, but I hardly
heard what he said. But still through it all I noticed that the
formation was a mixture of sandstone and coal strata, and that there
was a lot of iron in the rocks. I thought of Rendalen and his maps and
collections. You cannot imagine how all this passed through my mind in
the midst of my fright. If any one would have taken me home again, at
the price of every pretty thing I possess, I would have accepted the
offer, I can assure you. We drove through a little wood, and came out
into a great open quadrangle--the Palace.

"When I saw the quadrangle and the grass there--how do things come into
one's head?--I remembered so distinctly the lesson at school when I
learned that _bowling-green_ meant in English just such a place as
this; and that Fru Rendalen came into the class at the moment and asked
why it was called a bowling-green? and that Tora whispered it to me.
How cleverly Tora could do such things! I have no further recollection
of where we drew up. I got out of the carriage, when a very grand
gentleman met us, and gave me his arm. We were shown to some rooms. A
lady came with me, thank goodness. I was not myself till that moment. I
looked at myself in the glass. What a fright I was! I saw that at once
in papa's face when we met in a sitting-room. Fancy, I never noticed in
what direction we went or where the room was. Guess where we were going
to. Into the garden, where we were to lunch with their Majesties. There
could not have been greater condescension to the townsfolk of a little
Norwegian town, could there? Do you remember how we dressed our dolls
for a Court ball? The same gentleman--Fuerst does not remember his name,
but I believe he was a gentleman-in-waiting--escorted me and said
something to me in Swedish. I could not understand him, my wits were
wool-gathering.

"No one could have been in a greater state of mind. When I saw the
garden and came into it--it all whirled round me, trees, people, table,
servants, chairs--the awful fright I was in almost made me drop. I used
all my strength, I can assure you. The gentleman whose arm I had, must
have felt my hand tremble, or have read my trouble in my face; he told
me not to be frightened, their Majesties were so charming. I understood
that.

"Oh dear, and how wonderfully good they were; especially the King. Oh,
that smile, the shape of the hand, those eyes! It was a perfect ocean
of goodness--but more than goodness. There is something, especially in
the eyes, which fascinates one. I will use the word heaven rather than
ocean to describe those eyes, for then you can better understand what
the Swedes call _tjusande_.[3] There is no word in Norse for it. Yes,
_tjusande!_ Only southern people have such eyes. How cold and
egotistical we are, I must say it, when we look at them. At all events,
I feel it so.

"Now you shall hear something wonderful: from the time--I may say from
the very second--in which his Majesty's eyes rested on me, I felt well
again. Well, did I say? I felt this look fill and warm my whole being.
I felt it--it is strange, is it not? but on my honour it is true--I
felt it in my knees; yes, in my knees. There is only one word in our
language which can fully express my state of mind; I am almost in the
same state now, merely with telling you about it, the others would not
understand me. I was in a state of _beatitude_. Perhaps it is profane,
or at least wrong, to use this word in such a sense, but it is _true_.

"What do you think the King said? 'Welcome to my house, Froeken,' in the
prettiest, sweetest Norse I ever heard.

"The Queen smiled. She asked me what town I came from. The King
answered for me.

"'What is the clergyman called?' asked the Queen.

"'Karl Vangen,' I said; but that was stupid; I ought to have mentioned
the Dean's name or that of one of the elder clergy. At the same time
the King welcomed my father, who stood there with Fuerst, and said to
him, 'I think the lieutenant has excellent taste.' That is exactly what
he said, word for word; I have often thought of it since, for it
evidently showed that Niels Fuerst had spoken about me in these high
places. I did not know that they would trouble themselves about
anything so insignificant.

"We then went to table, the same elegant gentleman took me. 'Well?'
said he in Swedish, and I hastened to answer that I was enchanted.
'Every one is,' he assured me. We did not sit down, but walked about as
we liked, and first one and then another came up and was presented to
me. Only think! one of them was a Count, another a Baron, then a
Countess, a Baroness, and a Master of the Horse: he in particular came
and walked about, and talked continually.

"It was not exactly what they said, but their whole style and manner
had something incredibly intellectual and winning. But there was
something as well in the place and surroundings which helped, for I
felt as though I were not on earth.

"The servants themselves made me feel uneasy and small, they gave me
the impression of being so careful, so attentive, of knowing so well
how everything should be.

"I did not always do things right. We Norwegians do not learn anything.
No, there was a nobility, a beauty and kindness, and it was all so
bright and yet so stately; none of the Princes were there, though. What
we had to eat (I hardly touched anything) I can say by heart, for I
wrote it down in my diary, and I will copy it for Tora; that and the
furniture of the castle, and a thousand other things which you do not
care about. You do not understand anything about nice dishes, but I
arrange it so as to tell you all the more intellectual things, and you
must not show it to any one. My word, if you do! Nora, you don't know,
but I must have one confidante, or happiness would be a burden. I have
never felt as I have done yesterday and to-day. I am quite upset. I
will write to Tora about my dress. Of course I have a new one, which I
think would have surprised you all, although there is not much to be
done in black. Still I think it suits me. I got a glimpse of myself in
several mirrors at the castle, for you must understand that we were
shown over it. On the side where we came in first, to the left, is the
great apartment where the royal entertainments are held in all their
grandeur. Ah! if one could only be present. This room is decorated in
white, with an arabesque on a blue ground, and great big pictures, one
by Markus Larsson, full of sunlight, but I don't know what it is, it is
so extraordinary; and divans and chairs in blue silk--an enormous
chandelier of different coloured glass, magnificent! Near the wall two
black figures, dressed in red and gold, holding lamps, real works of
art. A huge marble fireplace, the shape we call '_Pies_,'[4] but the
word is so ugly; and a richly gilded clock and porcelain vases; a
particularly noticeable flower-stand in Japanese porcelain, very
curious. Also a Chinese or Japanese writing-table made of black wood,
with gold ornaments. But that was in the cabinet.

"But no; I will scratch out about the cabinet. You shall read all about
it in Tora's letter. I will just tell you that you look out from the
great balcony over the Sound, and see all the ships and steamers, and
Helsingborg and Krongborg. There is not a view like it in the North.
How should there be? Do you think we did not go into the bedrooms? I
don't know if that were right, but we did. I really have to restrain
myself from telling you about them at once, and about their Majesties'
sitting-rooms. Imagine white silk hangings over both walls and ceiling,
with a light red border, in the Queen's room. And such a writing-table!
The King's rooms were so nobly simple. On the pillow in the King's
bedroom I saw two hairs--you know what sharp eyes I have. I lagged a
little behind, and took them without any one noticing it. I put them
into the case of my watch. But this reminds me of the great event. When
we went into the garden again, the light fell very strongly right on
the gate, and I saw something written on the railing. I went up to it;
it was in French, and undoubtedly by a lady.... Yes, you see I have
scratched that out again. For when one has made up one's mind not to
repeat a thing, it shall not be repeated. It was horrid. I rubbed it
out with my finger; but I had to be quick, and I got a splinter into my
finger, through my glove, and made it bleed. So I rubbed it out with my
blood. I have not said a word to any living being about it until now,
nor must you tell it to any one. To papa I said I had pricked my finger
while I was trying to gather a rose.

"If any one should have seen me--but they were looking at something in
the garden; or if any one had seen what was written before I did? Is it
not extraordinary?

"The royal party and their attendants were no longer in the garden, but
the gentleman who had met us now joined us. As he did not show any
intention of taking us to the others, papa asked him to convey our
respectful thanks to their Majesties, and we then left the garden. The
carriage came up again, and my elegant cavalier handed me a beautiful
bouquet from the royal garden. What do you think of that? It is before
me as I write. The flowers are of the Swedish and Norwegian colours. To
be sure, Fuerst says they are the commonest flowers, but I thought there
was more meaning in it than that. I especially admire a lily and a
rose. I put a few forget-me-nots into my letter, for I must tell you,
my dear Nora, that I am not coming home again. I hope this will be
nearly as great an astonishment to you as it was to me, when papa told
me this morning. I am to go to Paris to learn French thoroughly.

"'Is that a determination he has only lately come to, or why did he not
tell me before?' you will naturally inquire.

"You must know that we start to-morrow. What do you think of that? Papa
cannot spare the time to remain away longer.

"'But why did we not go direct?' you ask again. I asked the same thing,
although, Heaven knows, I would not have missed yesterday for the
world.

"Papa answered that he came to the determination yesterday. Lieutenant
Fuerst drew his attention to the fact that all well-bred Swedish ladies
speak French as well as they do Swedish, and that all Germans and
Russians know it; besides which, every well-educated woman ought to
speak French like her mother tongue.

"It is not disagreeable to me to travel. To be sure, it will be for at
least a year that I shall be separated from you all, but we shall have
all the more to tell each other when we meet again.

"There is one thing I must ask you about. Lieutenant Fuerst says
that---- I had got so far when father came in this morning, and I had
to hide my letter. He took me out all in a hurry. We are only just home
again this evening, and do you know what for? To pack up and start at
once. A fresh determination! Lieutenant Fuerst will give father the
pleasure of coming with him. I shall put my letter just as it is into
the letter-box at the station. I suspect that if I were to read it
through again you would not get it.--Your loving

                                         "Milla."


Nora and her mother had left the Baths when the letter got there. It
was forwarded to Christiania, where they were staying. When Nora
returned she found a telegram, dated from Hamburg, which ran: "Do not
read the letter which is coming; send it me,' Hotel Continental,
Paris.'" But the letter had been already read.




                               CHAPTER II

                              A MISFORTUNE


Soon after the beginning of the term Miss Hall began a series of
lectures for the ladies of the town; it had become the fashion to hear
a little of all the objectionable things which their daughters and
sisters had learned about in the past year. The lectures were held
twice a week in the great laboratory, which as a rule was full. Most of
those who had been in the senior class the previous year, and had now
left, attended these lectures. One day late in October, when they were
assembling in the lecture-hall, Tora came in, accompanied by her
friends. There was general astonishment and greeting. Where had she
been? Why was she so pale? And, good gracious, how thin! It was true,
then, that she had been ill. Was it in the west country that she had
been staying? When had she returned to the town? Would she live up here
now?

The conversation ceased as Fru Rendalen and Miss Hall came in, and
those who were not seated turned to find places. But it was soon seen
that there were not sufficient seats; the crowd had never been so
great, for Miss Hall was lecturing upon certain phenomena of the nerves
which had till now been overlooked or denied, and the lectures became
more interesting every time.

To gain space, the large double door leading to the entrance-hall was
opened, the outer door being closed. A number of chairs were placed in
the hall, and two rows as well in front of the laboratory table. Fru
Rendalen's commanding voice was heard giving directions, till quiet was
obtained. Tora and her friends found places at the furthest end of one
of these rows of chairs.

Miss Hall took up her subject where she had broken off at the last
lecture.

"The health and morality of mankind demanded that woman's nerves should
be strengthened. It was not enough that she should feel physically
comfortable, her will must be ripened by knowledge; she must have an
aim in life which will not readily allow her to remain the mere slave
of another human being." In a professional manner she ran shortly
through what she had said before, for the benefit of those who had not
been present.

"People with weak nerves, and especially those of an hysterical
temperament, can by certain mechanical operations be brought into a
'hypnotic,' 'somnambulistic,' or 'magnetic' condition. This condition
was impotence combined with consciousness; we did, while in this state,
what he wished who had brought us into it. We were his prey, and that
not only while we slept, but afterwards when we were awakened--we
absolutely obeyed the commands we had received while we were in this
condition." Miss Hall reminded her hearers of one or two examples she
had given.

"In this state certain mediums could visit other places, read the
thoughts of others, both near and far. Some few could even see into
futurity.

"This fact could no longer be denied, nor could it be explained. At one
time it was believed that this result was dependent on belief; now it
is known that belief has nothing to do with it. _Certain people could
bring themselves_ into this abnormal condition, some by great exertion,
others merely by wishing it. They all accomplish this--with whatever
object--by fixing their minds upon some single thing, either in their
thoughts or in the exterior world.

"Most of us know a little of the effect of doing this, but only those
with weak nerves and in certain conditions can bring themselves by it
into a state of excitement and abstraction. Many conversions have taken
place by this means, especially among women. In this way we come to-day
to what is the most dangerous for women. Some people have the power of
bringing others, and especially women, into this condition without the
ordinary mechanical means, without approaching them, without any
movement, merely by a look. They can force people to look at them, and,
with their eyes on theirs, command their will."

Miss Hall related a story which she had heard of a very celebrated
singer. One day she was in a railway carriage; the train had just
stopped, and she was looking out of the window furthest from the
platform, when she felt an uncomfortable sensation, felt constrained to
turn round; she met the gaze of a pair of eyes which seemed to stab
her, and which looked straight into hers. She hurried out at once and
changed compartments, but the man followed her; he was probably aware
of his power and wished to use it. The lady found her _Impresario_, and
begged him to free her "from those green eyes." It was done, but she
felt certain that otherwise she would have been lost. "Now the Prima
Donna happened to be conscious of her own weakness, but how many are
so? More especially if touch is added to the power of the eyes, they
are lost. A man who does not know what it is, takes it naturally for a
desire for more, and acts accordingly. But this need not be so. I dare
assert that many a woman who has fallen is as guiltless as an
unconscious child."

A chair is overturned--something heavy and soft falls to the ground;
other chairs are pushed aside, and exclamations are heard from several
of the audience as they hastily rise.

Every one now got up, those behind standing on the forms. Through all
the bustle they heard the words, "Stand back!" It was Fru Rendalen's
voice. Those who were standing on the benches could not contrive to see
anything, and questioned those before them in whispers. Only those
quite near saw what it was, and they made no answer, nor did they move
till Fru Rendalen and one or two others had lifted up an inanimate form
which Fru Rendalen carried out in her arms--it was Tora. "Stand back!"
was heard again.

Miss Hall followed her, then Nora, Tinka, and Anna Rogne, and then
several others. Miss Hall hurried forward as soon as they were in the
hall, and opened the door of Fru Rendalen's sitting-room; she went
quickly in, and arranged a cushion on the sofa, while Fru Rendalen laid
down her burden with Nora's assistance. Miss Hall turned to all those
who were standing round and asked them to leave the room; as soon as
Fru Rendalen could raise herself she sharply repeated the request. They
all went away. Outside in the hall they encountered a stream of people
coming from the laboratory--every one was curious; others came from the
class-rooms, which were opening one after the other. But Nora, who had
grown deadly white, took upon herself to stay. When her unhappy friend
began to show signs of life she was seized with a fearful suspicion.
She ran forward and fastened the doors leading to the two passages. It
was hardly done when she heard Tora call out, "Yes, yes, that happened
to me! Oh yes." And a fit of despairing crying followed. It sounded
through the passages. Supposing any one outside should hear it? Nora
flew into the inner passage, meeting the stream of people; she did not
clearly know how she could hinder them from coming near the doors. She
never knew how she got through the crowd of grown people and children;
how she gathered voice and courage to call out that they must not go
on, they must all come back again. She mounted the tribune and rapped
loudly with a ruler. They came streaming in from all quarters. She
rapped again, and every one was quiet. She said: "Tora Holm has had
nervous fever. The air in here was too close, and what was said
frightened her, and--and--and--oh yes, Miss Hall is coming directly."

She made this last assertion because she did not know what else to say.
She rushed away so as not to burst into tears while she was in the
room.

Miss Hall, however, could not come, and at last Fru Rendalen had to go
in and mount the tribune.

"I must beg your indulgence. Miss Hall is obliged to remain with the
invalid. I must partly take the blame on myself for what has happened.
Froeken Holm, being so unwell, ought never to have sat in this crowd. I
ought also to have noticed her sooner, but I was entirely engrossed in
the lecture. It often happens that we who are occupied in teaching
allow ourselves to be too much taken up with it." Her voice
trembled--she was as white as her own cap; she left without heeding
those who wished to speak to her.

In Fru Rendalen's bedroom Nora stood clinging to Tinka, trembling and
crying. Tinka was very dejected. Some one peeped in from the passage.
As no one forbade it, she entered softly; she looked at them with wide
open questioning eyes--it was Anna Rogne.

"What is it?" she whispered. Nora raised her face; they both looked at
her. Anna remembered some remarks which Tora had made in the course of
the summer; on these she now formed her opinion--"I suspect the worst."
She folded her hands; her tears began to flow. Nora laid her head down
again on Tinka's shoulder and cried bitterly. All the time they could
hear Tora in the sitting-room; they could not distinguish her words,
they were broken, wrung from her by bewilderment, danger, despair.
Presently there was silence; the silence was almost worse, there also
they were as still as death. At last they could bear it no longer, what
did it mean? They exchanged looks, and were on the point of breaking in
on them, when they heard heavy, rapid steps across the floor; the door
was opened violently, and Fru Rendalen rushed past them with her hands
above her head. What is it! in Heaven's name, what is it?

They went in. Tora was lying on the floor, Miss Hall stood over her; on
the table was a cup of water. Miss Hall looked up quickly. "Help me to
get her up again." They did so; they saw that Tora had not fainted, but
she either would not or could not help herself. When she again lay on
the sofa, looking like death--ghastly, thin, dishevelled--Miss Hall
turned with a meaning look towards the others. They gazed at her
terrified; Miss Hall answered their looks with two confirmatory nods.

They all three drew back a few steps. After a little while they slipped
out one after the other to Fru Rendalen. She was sitting motionless in
a large arm-chair. Nora came and laid her hand on her lap. There was
not a word spoken.

Again they heard Tora from within. They heard her explain, cry, bemoan
herself. Miss Hall came in to them. "What is it now?" asked Fru
Rendalen almost grudgingly, she was quite overdone.

"Did you know," said Miss Hall, "that he came after her again?" They
stared at her. "She had taken refuge out on an island with the family
of a pilot. He traced her and laid wait for her there as well, the
wretch! It was then that she went into the west country, where she was
taken ill."

"The poor child!" cried Fru Rendalen. Her sympathy was aroused again;
she got up quickly, and went back to Tora; she ought never to have left
her.

"My dear, dear child," she said. But the moment Tora saw her she turned
and repulsed her with her hands, crying "No, no, no! Don't come; don't
say anything--no, no, no! It is not my fault, it is not my fault. Yes,
great God, it is my fault!" And she broke into the wildest crying.

All the same, Fru Rendalen came up to her; so soon as she could she
said, "Don't take it in this way, my child; we shall never desert you
for it." This seemed to calm her, but when Fru Rendalen added that some
steps must be taken, she must speak to her son about it, Tora broke out
again, "No, no, no! Oh God, no!" She became almost frantic.

"But, dear Tora, you know yourself how things are. It cannot be helped,
this will become known everywhere."

"I know, I know; but say nothing to him. No, I must get out of the way
first. Do not say anything. There is no need." She raved on, and her
voice was so heart-breaking that they all hastened to her. They wanted
to quiet her by holding her, but she did not look at them. Each time
she freed her hands or her head, and cried and implored, "They must,
must, must be silent." In the midst of it all arrived Rendalen. He had
chanced to open the bath-room door, and so heard the cries and moans.
He thought that they came from the bedroom and crossed the passage to
it. There he stood; Tora sprang up with a shriek, and then suddenly
flung herself down, with her face in her hands. Fru Rendalen went
towards her son, took him by the hand, and went with him to his room.
Tora tried to rise, to go away. She would live no longer--no, not for
the whole world. She struggled with the others, but for Tinka she would
have fled. She was beside herself. She implored and struggled. Tinka
held her till her strength began to fail; she called for help. Anna
fetched Fru Rendalen, and as soon as she came Tora gave in. She allowed
herself to be led by her to the sofa, and, when she was calmer, into
the bedroom. There she was undressed and laid in a bed, which had been
placed by the side of Fru Rendalen's. Fru Rendalen was obliged to sit
by her side and hold her hand--even in her sleep she sobbed like a
child and bemoaned herself.




                              CHAPTER III

                   PEACE-MAKING WITHIN, PROPOSALS OF
                             PEACE WITHOUT


When Fru Rendalen took her son by the hand, when she proposed to speak
to him, it was by no means with pleasure that she did so, but, on the
contrary, with great anxiety.

The relations between mother and son had, as we know, for some time
lost their confidential character; for some time they had not been
good, and at the present moment they were actually bad. On his side it
almost amounted to a breach. No one could interfere, not even Karl
Vangen. Tomas declined to speak on the subject, it pained him if Karl
brought it up. This last phase had been produced quite by chance, by an
external cause.

According to arrangement, Tora Holm was to have assisted Fru Rendalen;
but when she remained ill in the west country, Nora offered to take her
place. Nora's gifts lay in a different direction from Tora's--her help
was therefore given in a different way; among other things, she was
deputed to keep the books. One day when, for want of something to do,
Nora chanced to be comparing past and present expenses, turning over
the earlier pages of the books, Tomas, elegant as usual, hurried
through the room on his way out. "Who is this Tomasine," Nora inquired,
"who has had so much money? It is not your mother, for she always puts
'self' in the entries, and nothing more."

"Tomasine? I never heard of any Tomasine." He came up to her, put down
his hat, and in his short-sighted way bent over the register, knitting
his light eyebrows, staring with his sharp grey eyes. She turned over
the pages and showed him the entries, month after month, which extended
back for several years. She could not make much of it, but _he_ began
to do so; for her the subject had no great interest, for him it
appeared all-important. While he studied the books, she observed him
and the effect which his near neighbourhood had on her; it was
agreeable. She looked at the freckles on his clean-shaven face. In
repose the sharp lines of the mouth, the quickness of the eyes, and the
power of the brow showed more distinctly; the strong jaw, the bristling
red hair, pleased her. She followed the short, slightly recurved,
nervous fingers as they turned over the leaves and toyed with the cover
of the book. A strong, freckled hand, covered thickly with light
bristles, a thick wrist--one felt the strength of the arm, she traced
it involuntarily to the shoulder; how strong he must be. She heard the
scraping of his necktie on his shirt-front when he drew his breath. She
noticed the slight whiff of scent which, now that his head was so near
her, mingled with the smell of his skin. Something of half terror, an
intoxication, a feeling of increased intelligence came over her--her
thoughts moved more quickly, were more highly strung. She wished it
might continue--it was absolutely pleasant.

"Where is mother?"

"I don't know."

"This is very curious." He took up his hat and went out. Hardly five
minutes later, Fru Rendalen came quickly in from the inner passage.
"You excite yourself so, Tomas."

"Excite myself?" As soon as she saw that Nora was there she turned
quickly towards him. "Hush," she said, and went towards her bedroom, he
following her. Nora heard him talking quickly and without a pause; she
could hear Fru Rendalen as well, parrying his words, and at last
tearfully justifying herself. At length he went away; long afterwards
Fru Rendalen came back, sad and sorrowful. "I have done a dreadfully
foolish thing," said Nora shamefacedly.

Fru Rendalen made no reply; she continued to walk slowly up and down.
It was more than she could bear alone, and Nora's evident sympathy
tempted her.

"God knows, I believed it was one of the best acts of my life, and now
I am told it is the worst." Tears bedewed her spectacles, and as usual
she turned her attention to them as she sat down. Nora rose and came
forward sympathetically. "But, dear Fru Rendalen." She knelt down
beside her. The old lady wanted this friendliness, wanted some one to
confide in, and so Nora learned that "Tomasine" was Tomas's sister. The
girl had begun well, but from the time that she had gone to America she
fell into bad ways, and was sent home again, out of her mind. Fru
Rendalen had paid for her till her death. She had been entirely silent
about it to her son--why need he know of it? But now he fell upon her
with the most frightful accusations. The dead girl had had the same
right in her father's fortune as he; the law on this subject was vile,
no honourable person could abide by it. In the most violent words he
had cast his sister's misfortune in Fru Rendalen's face. _She_ was
responsible for it.

Nora was dismayed. She had heard one or two things said since she had
been up here, but this----!

Rendalen's manner during the time which followed frightened her, if
possible, still more; she suffered almost as much as Fru Rendalen. He
treated his mother distantly and coldly when he was obliged to be with
her; as a rule he avoided her.

From the time he was a boy Tomas had at times felt her to be
coarse-grained and wanting in refinement, as though he had no
relationship with her. The feeling had always yielded to gratitude, and
to the similarity in their views and purposes of life; and, whatever
his feelings might be, he nourished a constant admiration for her
strength and power of government. His ill-temper had always come
suddenly, and passed away directly.

It was quite the contrary at a later time.

His mother did not understand all this, neither did Karl, but they
realised that he was unhappy. He seemed to them to be in a growing
state of self-torment, and in this they were not mistaken. He would
discover, with all the ingenuity of a _Kierkegaard_, that if _he_ had
never existed, his sister would have lived happily. She would have had
the property then, and the hereditary tendency would not have grown
into insanity; or he would picture his sister brought up there with
him, with Augusta, and with the other girls, in the garden, in the
school; all those strangers had admittance here, she only had not--his
sister, his father's daughter. That his mother could with an easy
conscience buy herself free from this imperative duty, and that with a
few paltry daler a month; that she had never felt that more was
demanded of her!--what a crime had been committed against the
unfortunate girl, and she had never once comprehended this!

In the midst of it all came the incident of Tora. His mother _insisted_
on speaking to him. The first time, as we know, she was interrupted;
but when Tora was asleep she went in and confided it all to him. He
perceived at once its bearing on the school, on her friends, and on
himself, and fell into such a fury against Niels Fuerst, whom he had not
loved before, as can be best described by his own exclamation: "If I
had him here I would beat him to a jelly with my own two hands."

Although Tomas had no outward resemblance to his father, he could look
so like him that it made Fru Rendalen shudder.

This very fear gave her courage. For a whole year she had seen how his
impatience, irritability, and quickness of temper increased. When she
herself aroused it she did no more than justify herself, or perhaps go
away; he had really cowed her by degrees.

But now another was in question. Tora's despair forced her on; it had,
too, an alarming resemblance to what she saw before her. When, after
another overpowering outburst, he was about to rush away, she placed
herself before him.

"Tomas, you frighten the life out of me with your violence. You give
way to it more and more; it will grow beyond you at last, my son."

He shuddered, and grew deadly white.

"Yes, excess is excess in whatever way it shows itself, and I think you
ought to be on your guard."

Her voice trembled; their eyes met and measured each other; an
unhappiness and bitterness had risen into his, which wounded her.

"What, Tomas, may I not so much as warn you--I, your own mother? No, do
not look at me like that. It is not _my_ fault. I have combated it as
well as I could--yes, before you were born, Tomas, and I intend to
combat it still. For the last year you have not struggled against your
temper, and it is especially on me that you vent it."

He stood near the window, looking out. He turned now with a melancholy
expression.

"What is it, Tomas? Tell me, in God's name, what it is."

But he turned away again, and laid his head on his arm.

"I do not understand you, Tomas, you are so supercilious to me. You say
there is something naturally blind about me, and I know it. Yes, you
often humiliate me--often when I am alone, and that I can bear; but
often before others as well, and that you should not do. At all events,
you ought to be able to bear having your faults pointed out to you by
me."

She said the last words almost humbly; they worked strongly upon him.
He did not speak, but he turned and began to walk quickly up and down
in visible agitation.

"If I could only understand what it is you are vexed with me for. It is
not only what you rebuked me for---- Yes, Tomas, you cannot bear to
hear that word; but I have had to endure more than words. It is not
that alone; there is something more under all this. What is it? Why do
you never talk, now, Tomas, either to me or Karl? You are unhappy; do
you think we have not noticed it? I would so joyfully do anything for
you. Even if I am inferior to you----"

"I cannot endure to hear that word," he cried.

"No, no, but you never will condescend to speak to me, so I am
compelled to think--no, I will not say that, but you see yourself what
you are; one must not so much as make use of a word before you, and
you---- But I will be silent, I see that you are suffering, my son; if
only you would remember that I suffer as well. Great heavens! must I
ask permission before I remind you that this has been going on for a
year? I have not the slightest idea what is the matter--not the
slightest, Tomas, beyond what results from my want of ability. If there
is anything that I can set right, only tell me--tell me, whatever it
is. Can you not trust me?"

"Cannot you trust me?" he burst out, and threw himself down on the
sofa, with his face in his hands.

And then it transpired that he thirsted for sympathy.

His was a warm, impulsive nature, which must have trust and affection
if he were not to waste his whole life. The independence to which he
had accustomed himself, and which had increased during his violent
studies, his continual journeys, and by his different plans, had
changed into a sense of deprivation--had been succeeded by the most
terrible hunger when he was here in the midst of a daily recurring
life, full of heartiness and devotion--devotion to one another, while
he was always outside it. All his being yearned for what he saw. "Not
the cursed littlenesses," as he expressed himself; "no, only to have
trust as the groundwork of everything--trust, and nothing but trust."

They must just bear with him and take him as he was, _because they
believed in him_. Otherwise, he should go to destruction.

Fru Rendalen sat there, she had taken his head on her lap; she listened
and listened, her heart swelled, and she laid her spectacles aside, for
they were no longer any use to her.

"He is right," she thought; "oh, how right he is!" One image rose up in
her mind after another; above all, the incident with the teachers. She
had believed them at once, and to humour them had taken the school away
from him, and from that time forward had in a manner controlled it.
Till this moment she had lived in the blessed delusion that he was
indifferent to this--nay, that it was a relief to him. And thus things
began to dawn upon her which she might otherwise never have discovered.
She did not understand this delicate, sensitive nature. If his
repressed powers did not recover their strength, the fault would be
hers.

"You mean about the teachers, Tomas?" she asked, and she could hardly
control her voice. He took her hands and held them while he enumerated
his grievances.

There were, oh, such a string of them, both great and small--some so
small that she had never been conscious of them. An answer, a word of
advice in passing, a remark to some one else, even a silent look in
response to something he had said. In her distress, the worthy Fru
Rendalen asked his pardon with voice and gesture and tender embraces,
declaring that hereafter if he said he wished to go to the moon, she
would believe him. She had never worked herself up before to such
decided exaggeration, so that Tomas was forced to smile. Her memory was
awakened. She remembered clearly how it had all happened, and how she
had first lost confidence in him. It had been after his famous lecture;
he had taken her much farther with him on to "slippery ice" than she
had really the courage to go, and she had only discovered this
afterwards. That was the foundation of it all. His power of persuasion,
his gift for talking people over, and something indescribable added to
this, carried one away; that was undoubtedly what the teachers had
felt. Now unfortunately it is the way with mankind, that as soon as we
discover that any one has carried us farther than it suits us to go, we
not only try to fight against it--that would be right enough--but we
look ever afterwards with mistrust at what that person says. Fru
Rendalen knew that at times she had done this, and had tried to correct
it; but she had had no idea how often she had done so, and still less
how often he had noticed it. She knew that she hurt herself when she
did so, but till now it had never occurred to her that she had hurt
him--he seemed so superior and so distant.

There was a real reconciliation. It was broken off, and taken up again
during the next few days, whenever it was possible.

The immediate fate of the unfortunate Tora was decided at the same
time, but this was but a small settlement compared to the great one
which had been accomplished. A confidence was now opened between them
which on his side poured out with overwhelming wealth. The long
privation of a year satisfied itself in two days; he was so
spontaneous, so tender, and so loyal in the smallest things, that she
more than admired him, she adored him. If when she was wrapt in her own
thoughts, he came unexpectedly upon her, she coloured; you could see by
her face when she heard his step--she guessed everything he wanted, and
_everything_ he wished for was remarkable. If she saw that he was in a
good humour, she sang--the worst thing she could have done, for no one
ever yet discovered what it was she believed herself to be singing.

Nora would have felt unhappy if she had not as well been drawn into
this great feast of reconciliation, which lasted from morning till
evening, and from morning till evening again.

In the midst of all their joy, Tora's affairs, as has been said, were
arranged. Tomas had soon come to a clear understanding of what should
be done. The newspapers announced that Fuerst had been ordered to
Stockholm, and he offered to take Tora there at once. Fuerst should be
forced to marry her--not, of course, that she should live with such a
scoundrel, but in order to give his name to her child and support to
herself, so that she might learn to do something, and be able to care
for her child. If Rendalen had to go to Fuerst's superior officers--nay,
to the King himself--he would answer for it that the wretch should do
her justice. None of those in the secret, least of all Fru Rendalen,
doubted for a moment. They were surrounded by an atmosphere of
confidence and hope.

The unfortunate Tora had from the first felt the deepest aversion to
Rendalen's plan; the ground on which she consented to yield was
consideration for the school and her friends, that as little shame as
possible might fall on them. They had forborne to mention this, but it
forced itself upon them.

Only in one particular was Rendalen's plan altered--Fru Rendalen would
go instead of her son; his presence might have produced the very
opposite of what they wished.

Two days after this plan had been conceived--three days after the
violent interruption to the lecture--Fru Rendalen and Tora set off.

On the afternoon of the last day Fru Rendalen had become suddenly very
despondent. It was known that there had been some worry about money,
but that was always happening; and, indeed, it had been set right, but,
notwithstanding, the gloom did not disappear. Rendalen went to her and
tried to find out what it was. She put him off with excuses once or
twice, but when he held her fast she was obliged to blurt out that she
could not tell him; it was another person's secret--"not Tora's," she
hastened to add. "Use your own eyes, and then you will not need to
tempt me." He did use them, both on man and beast, but found it quite
impossible to discover the cause of his mother's low spirits. She
carried the secret away with her. He went round and asked everybody,
but they were all equally obtuse.

It made some stir in the town that Fru Rendalen, at this time of the
year, and in the midst of the school work, should go to Stockholm; and
that if she needed a companion she should have chosen Tora Holm, who
was ill.

Tora Holm's mother announced with some pride that probably her daughter
would not return, for if Stockholm seemed to be the best place, she
would continue her studies there. Every one had heard that Tora's
talents were more than ordinary, so this seemed quite reasonable.

Fru Rendalen had been up to speak to Sheriff Tue and his wife about
Nora. According to her ideas, Nora was cut out for teaching and
directing. She became less self-assertive, too, the more responsibility
she had, and she had ceased to be capricious.

Fru Rendalen asked if Nora might not move over to "The Estate," and
during her absence overlook the house and school, and take charge of
the money and books. Afterwards she might help with them, and perhaps
perfect herself in school subjects. Both parents gave their unqualified
consent to this at once, they had precisely the same opinion of their
daughter as Fru Rendalen. Her father added, smiling, that she seemed to
have no notion of falling in love. "No," her mother observed gladly;
"she has no inclination for marriage."

At the house and in the school, all thought it strange that the
youngest teacher, a pupil a year ago, should be put over them; but it
was certainly true that Nora displayed her best qualities--she was
clear-headed, ready, and marvellously helpful.

She got on well with Rendalen, he seemed to find pleasure in conversing
with her. "Conversing with" is not the right expression--_he_ talked
and she listened, but then he never did otherwise; he always went away
when others joined in.

Although he was not quite thirty, he had by degrees acquired a number
of curious ways, but each one was the result of something in the
development of his character. Had not his fashion of running away from
any discussion had its origin in a series of sorrowful experiences?

He was making a noble struggle with the bursts of passion which certain
things, certain names, always aroused. The result was that whenever he
restrained himself, he choked as though he had swallowed something the
wrong way; and if it was very violent, he spat quickly two or three
times through his closed lips--not actual spitting, at the most a sort
of fine spray.

Tinka mimicked him incomparably. She made a face over little things as
though she had taken too much mustard, for greater ones as though she
had swallowed soft soap; she would turn her head and give a cough like
a cat, or if she pretended to spit, it was with an air of disdainful
superiority. Very soon all the pupils followed her example--there was
nothing they did better.

At the school, Tomas Rendalen was just what he had been when he first
came home--all brightness and life, wonderfully careful in making all
his explanations clear, and often quite fascinating in his manner.

It must be confessed that he proved a rod in pickle for the teachers,
but there was no longer any misunderstanding him, though they were
often on pins and needles when he began to interfere; but it was only
necessary to speak to him about it, and he became at once irresistibly
charming; this, however, did not prevent a recurrence.

His uneven treatment of the children, his way of treating any subject
according to the temper of the moment, remained unfortunately the same,
but it was done unconsciously; and this fact, the absolute justice of
his mind, and more than all the frankness with which he begged pardon
when he had once been convinced that he was to blame, set things for
the most part right again.

Miss Hall was obliged to confess that she had looked too hardly on this
his incorrigible failing, as well as on several others; for even his
admirers had to allow that he was not perfect. For instance, in the
face of several classes assembled for a lecture on physics, he would
begin to carve a face on the laboratory table, which some chance had
begun there, and shortly afterwards would rave like a Turk because a
little girl had cut a tiny little name on her desk! "Did she think that
was what she came to school for? did she suppose her desk was made to
be cut to pieces?"

Fru Rendalen sent word from Stockholm that Fuerst was away, but was to
return in a few days, they must therefore wait. She would employ the
time in establishing Tora in some respectable family, and in collecting
some requisites for the school. They had made the journey slowly, and
notwithstanding the time of year it had done them both good, as did
their stay in Stockholm. The letter was very hopeful, Tora improved
every day. Rendalen was enchanted; any one who did not know him would
have thought that he looked upon Tora's misfortunes as the greatest
good luck. "Now you see," he called out cheerfully whenever he met any
of those in the secret. What he meant by it was not very easy to
understand.

But his certainty of victory and that of the others received a serious
blow when the report spread about that Niels Fuerst was engaged! and to
whom? To "Your affectionate friend, your ever grateful Milla Engel."

The report came from Anton Doesen, Niels Fuerst's greatest friend; he did
not give it as more than a rumour, but he believed that it was certain.
The families on both sides were diplomatic; they knew nothing about it.

The members of the Society were a sight to see when they met during
this time! Above all, Tinka Hansen, when she solemnly opened the
register and pointed to Milla's name! She could take her oath that
every one looked upon Niels Fuerst as thoroughly immoral. No one had
been more severe than Milla; her mother's legacy made this only
natural. No, this engagement was impossible! One could not think so
badly of her. Such a thing would be disloyal, both to the living and to
the dead. Milla's different letters to Nora from Paris were now read
aloud again.

She and an American lady were living in a French family, who had had
great losses, but who had aristocratic relations and acquaintances; she
lived in a legitimist atmosphere, but it was not too severe. She had
both the opportunity and the inclination to admire everything "fine,"
independent of religion and politics--everything fashionable,
everything where talent and beauty were to be found. And she used her
opportunity; "with my enthusiastic temperament, you know," wrote Milla.

She had begun as a loyal member of the Society, the obedient pupil of
the school, and therefore gibed at the French spirit. But almost
without warning she turned round: paintings, novels, and theatrical
representations enchanted her; life, even when viewed from a distance,
stimulated her.

It was evident that this was no real change of opinion; one heard the
American's voice, though the writing was Milla's; but for this very
reason it had not received the attention which it deserved.

Milla wrote that what they believed when they were together at school
would not really do: her father had been right. In every letter she
related something or another which was to prove this--not in the
slightest degree in doubtful taste; on the contrary, with a delicacy
which was not without its talent. "One must have no illusions," she
wrote; "one will thus be least unhappy." Nora had replied, giving her
her opinion of it.

This all now received fresh importance. Was Milla's way of writing
something more than the reflection of the life around her? Was it
really a well-considered introduction to her engagement to Niels Fuerst?
Impossible! Nora was above thinking so ill of friends. She had given
Tora her solemn promise not to tell anything to Milla; she now
considered herself released from it, and wrote out of the fulness of
her heart. Tinka wrote as well; she was full of the offence against
Tora, and the report that it was to such a person that Tora's greatest
friend had engaged herself--she whose name stood in the register!

Five days passed before they again received a letter from Fru Rendalen,
and it was short and dry. Fuerst had not yet returned. A short time
afterwards they received a long and touching letter from Tora, and then
several days passed without anything further from either of them. Ten
days had gone by since Nora and Tinka had written to Milla--they would
have sworn that she would have answered at once. She ought to have done
so after such a piece of information and such a charge.

They became very nervous, especially when some one, who had taken no
part in the affair, now remarked that, as soon as she had heard that
Milla and Fuerst were travelling together, she had thought "that would
be a suitable match."

Of course, this was Anna Rogne: why had she not said anything? "Because
the others would have mistrusted it; and," she added, smiling, "it
would have been wrong." At last one afternoon, when Nora came in from
the singing lesson, she found a sealed envelope on the table in the
sitting-room. "Here it is," was written at the bottom in Rendalen's
large handwriting. Nora suspected bad news, as he had not brought it to
her at once. She had promised the others not to read it before they
came, but one cannot keep those sort of promises.

Fru Rendalen had had her great conversation with Fuerst. He had listened
to all she told him with a cool politeness, as if he had been prepared
for it, and when at last he had to answer, he began by saying that this
was difficult, as their views differed so much as to the person in
question. In his eyes Tora Holm was, in no small degree, a sensual
woman, who could hardly restrain herself in the neighbourhood of a man.
To the question if he were aware of the power which he possessed, he
answered "Yes." It only, however, affected a certain description of
woman, and Tora was precisely one of these. He was under no more
obligation to marry her than any other with whom he had had an
intrigue. He would provide for the child, and for her as well, with
pleasure--that is to say, he would make a reasonable annual allowance.

Fru Rendalen threatened to bring the whole thing before his superiors,
or even, if necessary, before the King.

"Pray do; I can reach as far as you can, Frue."

She said to him that this would be a hard fight; to which he answered
that he knew how it should be conducted--he was not going to have his
career spoilt by a lot of schemers. The lady in question was stamped in
good society as a _femme entretenue_--it was shocking to wish to force
her upon him as his wife.

He understood what it all meant: he was to offer himself up for the
school, but he was not inclined to be so amiable. He knew what kind of
lectures were given both in the girls' "Society" and elsewhere--what
sort of conversations and readings they had had; it was natural enough
that sensual natures should be aroused by such things. He therefore
considered that the school should bear the blame; it would have a good
deal of that sort of thing.

Fru Rendalen had a decided impression that something had happened to
annoy him, and that, before he came to her, he knew for what he would
be called in question. The conversation had so agitated her that she
became ill, which was the reason for her not writing sooner. She had
not wished to mention her illness until she could say, at the same
time, that she was starting the next day. This she could now do. She
had not the courage to undertake anything more in this strange place,
nor did she think it would be wise. As far as she could understand,
publicity and open war were just what he wished for.

He was a dreadful man; they must all be on their guard. She had no
doubt that this would bring their school into danger, and remain a
great grief to Tora and her innocent friends. Tora was quite overcome.
They both looked forward with dread to the parting to-morrow.

The letter closed with a lament that this warfare, which had arisen out
of the school work, should never have an end. "Our enemies have gained
a dangerous ally; we shall soon see if we have gained any as well."

Late that evening--Miss Hall, Tinka, and Anna Rogne had all read the
letter, and were in the sitting-room with Nora--there arrived a
telegram. They supposed that it was from Fru Rendalen to Tomas, and
Nora had got up to ask one of the servants to take it to him, when
Tinka called out that it was not for Rendalen, but for Nora herself.
"For me?" asked Nora, and came forward. It was true, it was for her,
from Milla. It ran: "_Frightful: report untrue_."

A fortnight had passed since Nora and Tinka had written. Milla had
therefore had the letters for ten days, and then sent--a telegram! What
did it mean? While the others soon forgot it in Fru Rendalen's news,
compared to which this last event was comparatively indifferent, Anna
Rogne remained sitting with the telegram in her hand. She pondered over
it.

The others began to ask themselves whether they also would now be mixed
up in the Tora scandal. "War" might already be declared. If Niels Fuerst
had written to any one in the town and given _his_ version, what would
happen? A time might come when they would hardly dare, any one of them,
to show themselves in the streets.

Anna Rogne interrupted them. "This telegram; ought it not to be taken
in to Rendalen?" Yes, of course, and it was done at once. They all
expected that Rendalen would come to them directly, but they waited in
vain; on the contrary, they heard him a little time afterwards at the
piano.

"Well, as Rendalen does not seem to pay any attention to this telegram
either, perhaps I may be allowed to suggest what may have happened?"
asked Anna, rather ceremoniously. The state of things she thought must
be that Fuerst and Milla really had been engaged, but that on the
receipt of Nora's letter she had at once broken it off, with such an
intimation as to make him understand the reason; that was why he had
been prepared to meet Fru Rendalen, that was why he wished for
publicity and war. He can never win the day without it, and he must
win; a marriage with the richest girl in any of the coast towns is the
condition for the success of his career. Just because Milla had been
engaged to him she had been ashamed to write. She had reflected--tried
as well, perhaps--until she had found a way out of the difficulty by
telegraphing.

Anna ended by saying, "I suspect that Lieutenant Fuerst is at this
moment in Paris."

It may as well be said at once that Anna's position in regard to Milla
was fateful for the latter. It influenced firstly those whom she was
constantly among, later Fru Rendalen. Neils Fuerst really was on the way
to Paris, but if Milla's friends had sent on Fru Rendalen's letter to
her she would hardly have received him; and if they had asked Tora to
write to Milla--as she at a later time, when it was necessary, wrote to
them--he would never have been able to approach her either personally
or by letter. Indeed, even as it was he did not do so. He had first to
obtain help from home; but he had taken that into consideration, he had
not wasted his time.




                               CHAPTER IV

                                  WAR


The day before Fru Rendalen's letter and Nora's telegram reached "The
Estate," Anton Doesen had received a letter from Fuerst. It had been well
considered before it was written, and evidently was intended to be read
aloud or sent the round of the town. In his narration about Tora he
laid great stress upon their meeting at Fru Groendal's. He had only seen
her once before, and only in passing; he had not the slightest idea
that he should meet her there. She had been entertaining and pleasant,
Fru Groendal had said, until he came, when she became unnatural at once;
she could not bear him to speak to Fru Groendal, she hid herself, and
let herself be sought for, and then took it into her head to go away.
Of course he followed her, just to see what it was all about. As soon
as he came near her on board the boat, she began to cry. She would not
let him help her on shore; but all the same, she walked past his house
every day, and peeped in to see if he were at home, and then went on to
the wood or up to the "Groves"--alone. He recalled certain readings and
lectures up at the school; it seemed to him that a girl who had come
from an atmosphere so exciting to the senses, would be sure to conduct
herself somewhat in that way. He thought that this was "magnetic
influence" enough, no more was needed.

He would not deny that at last he had allowed himself to be tempted
to follow her into the wood, where she amused herself by playing
hide-and-seek with him. Little girls always begin in that way. But he
asked if any man, with a regard for himself would marry a girl who went
past his windows every day to tempt him out into the woods. Fru
Rendalen thought otherwise. She had come after him to Stockholm to
arrange the marriage on the spot. It might have proved like her own.

For his part, he had far too high a conception of marriage to attempt
to profane it in such a way. He had offered to support the girl, at
all events as long as the child remained a burden, and he would
acknowledge it as his. Honour and duty compelled him to go thus far,
but further---- That would be to patch a bad business with a still
worse one.

To this every one to whom Doesen read the letter agreed. He read it in
the shop, in the streets, at the club. Some people borrowed the letter
from him, and although the paper had been carefully chosen, it was
passed about so much that it became an illegible rag. Two copies had
been made of it, one for Rendalen, at his request, and one--yes, Doesen
hesitated a moment about this one, but after repeated requests he could
not refuse--for Tora Holm's mother. He obtained some enjoyment from
this copy. Tora's mother was a violent, powerful woman, embittered in
the struggle of life. She looked with doubt and scorn upon most
circumstances. When angry she was regardless of consequences. One
morning, in the middle of school time, she came up to "The Estate" in a
heavy, shabby duffel cloak, a bonnet with bright-coloured feathers, and
her bare hands in an old muff, with which she gesticulated while she
cried and screamed. In the broadest Bergen accent she demanded her
daughter--they must give her back her daughter; they had ruined her and
stolen her. She was a good girl when she went there, but "up here, in
the cursed old Kurt house, she had been ruined. Now, God forgive them
for it, she was brought to shame, and made the talk of the town. She,
her mother, had been stuffed with lies." But they should pay for it;
they should be locked up. She would send the police after them. Her
passion was uncontrollable, but her grief was real.

All fled far and wide, so she burst into one of the classes, which at
once broke up, the teacher deserting her post. She contrived to break
up three classes in this fashion: she made a tremendous turmoil. Some
of the girls were so frightened that they rushed right up to the top
attic, and stood there shivering, straining their ears and wondering if
they dare go down. Some of the elder pupils, who remembered from
stories that on such occasions you must show determination, remained
behind, and tried to talk her into reason. But at this she became
beside herself. This was evidently an example of the way in which they
learned to be indecorous up here. It shocked her that "the children of
worthy men" should justify such a thing. They had to run away as well,
with their fingers in their ears.

But the little ones got the greatest amusement out of her. They
surrounded her, and followed her about in triumph. The whole procession
swept into the kitchen, where she began the same story. The occupants
felt sorry for her, but they did not venture to say a word. So the
whole train went off again along the hall, to Rendalen's door, which
was fastened, then to Karl Vangen's, which was also fastened, back to
Fru Rendalen's, which was open. In they went, she wanted to see if she
could not find Rendalen.

Rendalen was in the town, and would not return for an hour. But Karl
Vangen came in. He very gravely commanded silence, sent away the
children, and took the poor mother into his own room. There she sat for
at least an hour, and poured out her heart to him. It was a bewildered
tirade, about Tora, about her husband who drank, about their poverty.
At last she went away down the avenue, with a hundred kroner in her
pocket, weeping quietly.

The school had all the appearance of a hen-house when some one has
broken in upon its denizens. Has not every one seen such a sight? At
first the hens fly with terrified cries against windows, walls, steps,
and roosting-places, till they become tired and confused, and can fly
no more. Then they run about the floor with wilder cries than ever,
knocking against dishes, troughs, one another. And when the danger is
past, the commotion is not--they chatter, lament, scream all at once,
in continual commotion. This goes on and increases, for whenever one of
them is inclined to stop, some others are more persevering and will
not. They recall all the remembrance of their affright, and the whole
bevy starts off again worse than before.

Finally, they begin to plume themselves, to flap their wings, and set
themselves straight, till at last things return to their original
condition. But at the school things did not settle down during the
whole day--some effects remained even longer, and threatened to become
dangerous.

What spiteful pleasure was shown in the town, what victorious laughter
was heard! Nothing else was talked of in the offices, on the quays, in
the streets!

When a day or two later Fru Rendalen returned, the landing-place was
crowded with people, mostly young men, who had come to meet her. It
became known at the school on Saturday that she would arrive by the
steamer on Sunday afternoon. No one could find a better use for his
leisure time than to see how a great person returns from a defeat.

The scandal, which she had sought to cover by the journey, had now
become as great as the journey had been long. When Rendalen came down
with the carriage, he could not push his way through, but had to get
some one to take charge of it while he tried to get past himself. Nora,
Tinka, Anna, and several other friends, who had talked of going down
together, stopped when they saw the crowd; thus following the example
of St. Peter of old, naturally with the difference demanded by modern
days. Little Miss Hall alone defied these dangerous warlike
preparations. She slipped along till she reached Rendalen's side, just
as he was preparing to go on board. He was very nervous.

Fru Rendalen looked much worn, the glances which she hastily exchanged
with Tomas and Miss Hall proved that she understood why the crowd was
here, and that she did not feel safe among them. She held her son's arm
very fast.

But respect for her--perhaps, now that they were face to face with her,
a feeling of compassion also--prevented them from attempting anything.
Way was made for them. Of course they could see by words and manner
that this was no guard of honour, even some of their older
acquaintances were there, such as the Town Bailiff and his wife. They
hardly bowed; with the sternness of high morality they watched these
evil-doers go by.

Those who had been standing nearest to the quay now made their way
towards the carriage, followed by degrees by those whom the three had
already passed. The carriage was quite surrounded when they got into
it. In consequence of this they had to go slowly, step by step, once
more through the crowd, which became more tiresome. They were hardly
through before Rendalen whipped up. He was much incensed. At this
moment he saw Anton Doesen, with a number of others, hurrying across
towards them; they were flushed and had evidently just come from
dinner. They all bowed with immense deference; either Doesen's bow was
impolite, or it appeared so to Rendalen in his irritation. In an
instant he pulled up the horses, threw back the reins to Miss Hall, was
out of the carriage and up with Doesen, giving him a box on the ear
which made him reel. He was back at the carriage, up and off again so
quickly, that no one grasped what had happened before the carriage was
rumbling over the cobble stones.

In the hall up at the house stood the three deserters, Tinka, Anna, and
Nora. Miss Hall was the first up the steps, and with beaming eyes told
them all that had happened; but Fru Rendalen found no pleasure in it.
Rendalen, too, disappeared as soon as he had brought his mother up; it
was long before he returned, and he was then in low spirits.

The conversation turned exclusively on the dark point in Tora's story,
upon which she herself had laid but little stress, hardly ever
mentioning it--the meeting at Fru Groendal's. It had frustrated any
attempt made in the town to lay the blame on Niels Fuerst. Fru Groendal
had supported Fuerst's assertions in the most minute particulars.

Tora Holm had been furiously in love with him, she returned to the town
merely to get Fuerst to accompany her.

Fru Rendalen could assure them that the only thing which Tora had been
"furious" about was the confidential terms which Fru Groendal and Fuerst
were upon. This had put her out all the more perhaps, because she was
beginning to feel an interest in him. She understood this later. They
all agreed to let Tora herself relate the circumstances. Tinka wrote to
her the same evening.

Rendalen had joined them during this discussion, and now the events of
the journey were related and all about Tora. Fru Rendalen was giving
them her reading of Tora as she now knew her, and the others were
deeply engrossed in it, when Karl Vangen interrupted them; he came in
from church. The meeting between him and his adoptive mother was more
than usually warm, she went into his room with him. She did not return.

The one whom Tora's misfortune had struck the hardest was Karl Vangen,
but no one knew this except Fru Rendalen.

He had gone quietly on from day to day, the happiest man in the world.
Whenever he met Tora she was evidently pleased, though he never never
ventured to construe this into a sign that she loved him--far from it;
but _he_ loved her, and thought that if Fru Rendalen would ever help
him, the pliable Tora might be brought to share in some of his
interests. If she came to do that, perhaps she might perceive his great
affection for her; perhaps she might then feel that he would be able to
do something to make her happy too. Fru Rendalen had often enough heard
him talk to Tora and about Tora, but had suspected nothing till the
morning when she told him what had happened. She saw him change colour
and remain silent instead of expressing sorrow or offering help; but
even then she was not certain, beside which she was much absorbed in
her new relations with Tomas. Still she had a dim suspicion of the
truth. But when the money which she had reckoned on for the journey
could not be obtained, and Karl took her into his own room and offered
her his savings and a small sum which he had inherited--then, as he
looked into her eyes, she understood it all. He could not keep silence
any longer, he held out his arms---- "Yes, that is how it is, mother."


"My Dear Nora,

"I do not know what you can think of me for not writing, but your last
letter so upset me on account of our dear Tora that I really did not
know what to write. How at a loss, how helpless, one feels at such a
time, dear Nora! And, let me add at once, how ashamed. To think that
such a thing could happen to any one with whom we have associated! I
shall never forget what my father said the first time he saw her. I was
very angry at it then, we thought so highly of one another. Are you
quite certain, dear Nora, that everything was exactly as Tora has said?
You know she was never very exact, and, especially in such a case, it
seems to me that a person is almost obliged afterwards to put a
different colour on it. Do you not think the same? I will not repeat
what I have heard, it may be a mistake too; but you know yourself, dear
Nora, that she never was particular. Do you remember that once or twice
you had to check her when she was telling us stories. You see, she had
been in France; she knew a great deal more than we others. When I
recall what she has told me at different times, I feel that it amounted
to a great deal. May not some of this have affected her disposition? Of
course, I do not say this as a reproach, least of all could I do so now
when she is unhappy, but perhaps this may explain a few things. I am
terribly sorry for her, and you would do me a service if you could tell
me any way in which I could be of use to her without offending or
embarrassing her. I will not answer dear Tinka this time, give her my
best love, and say that the expression in her last letter, 'Tora's
greatest friend,' is not a true one, at least from my side. It might
have appeared so at one time, I do not deny it; but that was quite and
entirely Tora's fault. Not that she forced herself upon me, it would be
wrong to say so, but it was impossible, when in her society, not to go
too far. I was obliged to make more of it than I wished, and this to
the last hour of the last day.

"Do you know, I had not been three days alone before I began to have a
feeling of dislike for her. Perhaps that was bad of me.

"Her influence over me lasted beyond the time when we parted. I did not
understand that at once, but I have a proof lying before me--the letter
you kindly returned to me; that one in which hurriedly scribbled down
something about my impressions of Sofiero. I shall keep it, that shall
be my punishment. I have just read it through again. You unfortunately
have read it also (a thing I shall never forgive myself for): could you
conceive any letter of mine more unlike me?

"I don't know why, but I see Tora through the whole thing. I can't
explain it. I have never been able to write to her since. Here, where
everything is more formal, and where there is no room for sentimental
confidence, it offends the taste even to be reminded of such a thing.
It would almost be like going out before one was _coiffee_ and without
one's dress. Perhaps I am too severe, the blame for being so must fall
on the tone of conversation at home. I am so often reminded of that
unfortunate girl by some Germans here; they are very like her, though
she was the worst I have ever met.

"Yet how clever she was! I never have a new dress, or study a pattern,
or indeed see any new fashion which interests me, without remembering
her. Could she not become a milliner? If I could do anything to help
her in that direction, it would be a pleasure to me, otherwise what is
she to do? I really am dreadfully sorry for her.

"I have lots to tell you, I see something fresh nearly every day; but
this affair of Tora has put me in such a _triste_ state of mind that I
do not feel inclined to begin anything more cheerful. Poor Tora! You
must give her my love, but don't say anything about what I have written
to you in confidence, it would wound her without doing good to any of
us. Fate has raised a dividing wall between us, so there is no need.
Give my love to Tinka, Fru Rendalen, and all who ask after your
affectionate, and, in other respects, very happy,

                                   "Milla Engel."





                                  VII

                            THE FIGHT ITSELF




                               CHAPTER I

                             IN BOTH CAMPS


After Milla's letter, Nora disappeared from the sitting-rooms--nay, for
several days she was unable to go on with her work; she was quite
overcome. First Tora in her way, now Milla in hers. It was too much for
her. She had held the principal place in their mutual life, she had
believed all they said, and made herself one with them.

Latterly she had endured mockery, not least from her father, ever since
her presidentship had laid her open to ridicule; she had tried to bear
this, but after Milla's letter she gave in. As we know, she had every
now and then before this time felt her life shallow and superficial.
But after this! Over and over again she reviewed the thoughts and
actions of her companions since she had been here. She was confronted
everywhere by lofty aims, but lamentable weakness when it came to
deeds; not least in herself. They had all been easily raised to
enthusiasm, yet were unutterably volatile, their heads full of
nonsense, vanity and jealousy. In many, was an evil desire which
befooled them under a thousand disguises. They were disfigured by the
instinct, inherited through a thousand years, to submit themselves to
the wishes of the stronger.

She would no longer be the leader of the Society. She could hardly
resolve to remain a member of it. It did no good, and she had more than
enough to do for herself, for she saw in herself natural gifts, but no
stability.

"Genius with disorder," as her father called her mother. Just then the
relations between her parents were not good. Nora clung to the school,
absolutely hid herself there.

Christmas came; she was free and could have gone home, but she begged
to be allowed to stay. She was very lonely; Tinka was engrossed with
Frederik Tygesen, who was at home for Christmas; the engagement was now
almost openly acknowledged. Anna Rogne was studying philosophy with
Rendalen, and was so learned and so happy that she did not at all suit
her. Very often, when any one came in, Nora was sitting crying. She had
a quick way of brushing away her tears; her hand moved across her eyes
as though she were driving away a fly. Then she would smile cheerfully
at whoever came--no matter who it was; the reason for her distress was
evidently not in the house.

Nora down-hearted! Nora overcome! They all knew that that happened
occasionally, but now it had continued so long. Of course she was asked
about it, but she at once became so high and mighty that no one asked
her a second time.

At last, just after Christmas, came the long-expected letter from Tora.
Rendalen invited all her friends in the school to hear it. The
beginning of the letter at once explained what they wished to know; it
reminded them of something that they recalled at once, but had not up
to this time understood; how Tora had been affected the first time that
she and Fuerst met, that morning up at the gymnasium, when she was
excited and overdone; how he had walked slowly up, fixing his eyes upon
hers and nailed her to the spot, till he stood by her side. The
agitated style of the letter, the constant interpolations, re-writings,
protestations, gave a striking image of Tora. If she had not always
been careful, she was touchingly so now, perhaps just because she knew
that, not without grounds, they might be doubtful about her in this
particular. Anna Rogne read the letter aloud to them all; she knew
it by heart, and delivered it in a rather precise, but even tone of
voice; thus read, the letter touched them. Its many turns and additions
came out oddly. The protestations shone out like sunlight through
clouds--one laughed, and was moved at the same time.

During the reading, Rendalen sat looking at Nora. He had just heard
that she would not continue to be the head of the "Society," and he
felt that he must break through the restraint which he had put upon
himself.

While the others were discussing the letter among themselves, he sat
down near Nora, and talked long and eagerly with her--until some of the
others noticed that she often passed her hand across her eyes. The
conversation ceased; looks were turned towards them. Fru Rendalen
proposed that they should have some music; she asked her son to play
something. "With pleasure," he said, but remained sitting thoughtfully.

"What should you say to my first endeavouring to combat the depression
which often overcomes a woman when her eyes are opened to her
inheritance of frailty?"

Yes, they would all like to hear him.

He said he had been reminded that evening of how, more than a year ago,
he had spoken at a meeting of the Society in a very desponding manner
on heredity. This had really only arisen from a feeling of depression.
His opinion of heredity was simply this, that one inherited quality
combats another. One need not be so desponding. In the course of time
all families are so mixed together that any legacy of evil (which one
must strive to reduce to impotence) has almost always beside it a
legacy of good which may be strengthened by use. That is to say, never
be guided by chance, but let the teacher first, and ourselves
afterwards, be watchful betimes.

He was so imbued with the subject that he was able, on the spot, to
give a number of historical examples. He added others to them, gathered
from his own and others' experience. The question had occupied him from
his boyhood. In his own family there was a predisposition to insanity.
Every case which he could trace showed plainly that only when the
weakness which led to insanity had been allowed to increase, did this
infirmity break out. When this weakness was opposed by the intermixture
of fresh blood, by education and self-education, that person was saved
for his work in life. Heredity was not a destiny, but a condition.

It was sometimes said that knowledge and surroundings were no help. But
what did the letter tell us which had just been read? First, most
distinctly, that Tora had an inherited weakness; next, that if Miss
Hall had given her lecture four months sooner, Tora at any rate would
have been saved, "So we may well say, 'Help one another,' by knowledge
and fearless counsel. Woman has been condemned to isolation. Man has
sought fellowship and knowledge. Only by fellowship will women teach
each other to fight for their own cause.

"'The inward development,' is subject to crises, and then intercourse
is burdensome; with this each one must deal as she can. But there is no
doubt that we advance our inward development only by doing our duty."

That was all; but from it, and the conversation which succeeded it, was
formed, from that evening, the strongest bond of union among all the
women who, in the time that followed, supported the cause of the school
in the town. From this evening also dated the influence of the
"Society" over the school; all discords were subdued before they came
to the teachers' ears. Even before this the members of the "Society"
were accustomed to go into the different classes to help the more
backward pupils before lessons began. This had given them an influence
of which they made use. Again, from this evening dated--and in the long
run this was the best of all--Rendalen's lectures in the chapel up on
the mountain. Every Saturday evening he explained the laws of natural
history, illustrating them with pictures and experiments; and every
Sunday evening gave sketches of the history of civilisation, when
pictures were also exhibited. Niels Hansen defrayed the preliminary
expenses, and was always present. Rendalen had begun this partly to
gain partisans. He would not "Hang in the wind." But when once he had
begun, he became interested in the task which lay before him, and
persuaded Miss Hall to lecture every Sunday, between three and four, to
the women there. Miss Hall elected to speak alternately on the diseases
of children and those of women. She had an immense audience, and this
was greatly owing to the fact that the quick-witted young lady at once
declared that these diseases, both in women and children, had in no
small degree the same origin--men's immoral lives.

But to return to this evening. There are times when human wills, with
the projects they have formed, readily unite themselves as though there
had never been doubt or separation--a harvest full of promise for a
future seed-time. Such a time at "The Estate" was that evening of the
twenty-ninth of December. The day was remembered, and often mentioned
at a later time. They did not separate till past midnight, and the
departing guests sang as they went down the avenue.

As Fru Rendalen was undressing she heard, to her astonishment, Tomas
going out; she half opened the door.

"My dear boy, where are you going?"

"It is such splendid starlight."

Fru Rendalen could not be called romantic; she went to the window and
peered out from behind the curtain; yes, it was starlight, quite so.
There are so many things that a schoolmistress has to think of, that
there is no time left for the stars. Yet the tone in which he spoke of
them! Tomas had not for some time seemed so happy as this evening. He
had never before stayed with them the whole time, till past midnight!
He really was beginning to take root, or was it through combativeness?
He was terribly like the Kurts.

"Fru Rendalen?"

"Good gracious!"

"It is only I."

"Why, my dear Nora, are you not in bed? I am coming to the door. What!
you are still dressed?"

"It is such lovely starlight."

"Tomas has gone out."

"Yes, I heard him. Oh, Fru Rendalen!"

"What is it, my dear? Excuse me, I am going to get into bed. That's
it!"

"I am so happy."

"Are you? That's right; you were so unhappy a little while ago."

"All that Rendalen said----"

"Yes, he was capital this evening."

"Fru Rendalen, do you think I might thank him for it? Might I venture?"

"Why, of course! What do you mean, my dear?"

"I could not rest till I had written----"

"Written? When you live in the same house----"

"I thought I would get it sent to him this evening."

"To-night, you mean; you can wait just as well till to-morrow, my dear,
and then you can say it to him. You know Tomas is peculiar."

"But this evening he is in a good humour, eh?"

"You want to take a letter into his room?"

"Oh, no; not I myself. Fancy if Pastor Vangen were to come, or Rendalen
himself!"

"Would you like me to?"

"Dear Fru Rendalen!"

"Get me my spectacles, and let me see."

"Here they are."

Fru Rendalen read:


"Herr Rendalen,

"I cannot go to bed without thanking you. I did not want you to think I
did not wish to do so. I did not find an opportunity for it. Thank you.

                                   "Most humbly,

                                         "Nora Tue."


Fru Rendalen's bed creaked; she got up. "I will put it on his table by
the candle. Have you the envelope? There, that's all right. Have you
directed it?"

"Yes."

"Just give me my skirt and slippers--that's it. It was pretty of you,
Nora. Yes, he was very good this evening: that's it;" and she trotted
off.

As she again got into bed she said: "But, Nora, why did you not thank
him at once?"

Instead of answering, Nora put her head down to Fru Rendalen, kissed
her a good-night, and went lightly off. She turned back. "Shall I put
out your candle?"

"No; good-night, my dear."

The winter passed by, and they began to hope that the war might pass
off as well as it had done before.

But when minds are excited they require but little to aid them. The
political strife was now at its height; the so-called people's party
had started a newspaper; the _Spectator_ seemed to them to have
attained the measure of iniquity. Between this paper and the new one,
the _Independence_, a fierce antagonism quickly arose, which became
most trying to the nerves.

In the spring, on Rendalen's birthday, the "Society" hit upon the
unlucky idea of having a large flag-staff set up on the tower, from
which waved, on the great day, an enormous Norwegian flag without the
"Union." The girls had never thought about the old quarrel over the
flag, but Rendalen had showed the whole school pictures of the flags of
all nations, and explained to them that, from old times, the Union was
only used by States which were incorporated one in the other, such as
Scotland and Ireland with England, or the United States of America, and
this was what the world understood by a Union, notwithstanding the
differing colours of the two flags. "Thus a Union gave us, the smaller
country, the appearance of having been incorporated into Sweden."

This flag was looked upon as a demonstration; it was "bringing politics
into the school." Rendalen forbade its being again hoisted; he wished
to avoid new quarrels. But this was of no avail; angry spirits were
roused; all the old accusations were gone over again in the columns of
the _Spectator_ and at the club. The Town Bailiff suddenly came forward
with a gift of five thousand kroner to found a new school without
politics, with unbiassed instruction, without a method which was
antagonistic to morality. The donor, he said, wished the gift to be
anonymous. He had been most decided on that point.

The Town Bailiff and his wife each added one thousand kroner. It was he
who had before proposed that a new school should be started; now he
came prominently forward; he had been scandalised. The anonymous gift
was precisely the same sum as that given by Fru Engel. Was Consul Engel
the donor? Several amounts were subscribed on the spot, but they were
not large!

Tomas Rendalen at once put himself up for the club, as did several of
his friends, Karl Vangen and Niels Hansen among them. All these were
elected at a very full meeting, Niels Hansen, however, with only a
small majority; the club was partly built on his ground, and it was
thanks to this that he was elected at all. Rendalen's election, on the
contrary, was left open. It is true that the rules declared that every
admission should be decided at the first meeting, but happily there
were a number of lawyers present, and this rule was so construed that
it was decided that _first_ really meant _next_.

The next meeting was largely attended. The Town Bailiff opened it with
the astounding declaration that Rendalen must be kept out, for "peace"
sake.

A number of men had been sent to this meeting by their respective wives
to vote for Rendalen, and one of these obedient husbands made the mild
remark that "peace" had already been disturbed by the Town Bailiff's
proposal. The last-named gentleman became so exasperated at this
that he would not continue, and Consul Engel's solicitor, the best
speaker in the town, found it necessary to come to his assistance. His
name was Bugge, and he was extremely eloquent. Several solicitors
followed him, and all talked more or less about peace, morals, and
Christianity--subjects which they, at all events, knew by _hearsay_.

Karl Vangen asked what on earth these great questions had to do with
the matter in hand, whether Rendalen should, or should not, be a member
of a social club? But Karl Vangen had hardly stood up before the Town
Bailiff pulled a long list out of his pocket. He asked if he might put
some questions to Pastor Vangen?

"With pleasure."

"First question--Is it true that Herr Rendalen has said that history
cannot well be taught to people who believe that the world began as
Paradise and its inhabitants as perfect beings?"

Breathless silence. Karl Vangen began a little hesitatingly: "Yes, that
is true, but----"

"I beg your pardon, but I have the word," interrupted the Town Bailiff.

"No," observed one of the "husbands"; "Pastor Vangen undoubtedly has
the word. It was he who was interrogated."

Hereon there was a great uproar; the real men were, Heaven be praised,
in the majority; the "husbands" had by no means such strong throats.

"Second question--Is it true that Rendalen has said----"

"But dear me!" called out Niels Hansen; "is Rendalen to join the club
to be confirmed?"

A roar of laughter followed. The whole room, without distinction of
parties, gave way to immense merriment. The Town Bailiff paused. As
soon as peace was restored he began again. "Second question--Is it
true----" The laughter began again, worse than before. The Town Bailiff
stopped abruptly, and left the room; Karl Vangen now began. His friend
Rendalen was of the opinion that history lessons ought conscientiously
to describe all movements just as they were, and therefore the
development of Christianity as well; but to describe the life of
mankind as a work of God's dispensation belongs to Church history.

"Is he not a Christian, then?" asked Bugge.

"We have nothing to do with that here," called out Niels Hansen.

"Is he not a Christian?" repeated Bugge.

"No, he is not a Christian," answered Vangen, colouring like a little
boy.

"The blockhead," muttered Niels Hansen, and he left too.

"Then he has deceived us," shouted Bugge.

"He should have said that from the first," observed another.

Several shouted at once. There was disturbance, noise, delight. All the
"husbands" were frightened, and held their tongues.

A quiet, well-to-do man stood up: "Yes, I could almost have guessed
that Rendalen was not a Christian. Women to take the same position as
men, that is against Christianity."

Pastor Vangen then again came forward, and he now spoke warmly.
Rendalen's actions had been perfectly honourable. So long as
Christianity supports mankind's moral consciousness, every school
director should see that it was given to the children, as truly and
heartily as possible. And it was thus that Rendalen had acted. It was
only to be lamented that his instrument was so feeble, for that
instrument was himself. But he could assure the meeting that he had
full opportunity of doing all of which he was capable.

This made a good impression, and for a moment it seemed as though the
discussion would end there. But the man who had spoken before, again
rose; it was evident that it was a serious matter with him. "If Tomas
Rendalen had said this when he gave a lecture up at the gymnasium two
years ago--if he had said, 'I am not a Christian'--there would have
been no school."

At the moment Karl Vangen could not think of any reply to this; it
almost seemed to him to be true. The voting began immediately, and
Rendalen was refused admittance by an overwhelming majority.

"Not," as Bugge observed, "because Rendalen did not believe, for they
were tolerant there, but because he had not behaved honourably."

As soon as he could do so, Rendalen gathered his friends, and any
others who liked to join them, at a meeting at the gymnasium. It was a
very full one. This was a fight which every one understood, and in
which most of them took an interest. As well as this, the special
woman-question was far more opened up than it had been two years ago;
Rendalen was able to speak quite freely. He began by declaring that
religion had been made use of as a "last resort." He had been expecting
it for a long time. The audience was given an amusing description of
the moral and Christian responsibility of the club, enveloped in clouds
of tobacco smoke round the card-tables and punch-bowls, and of the
virtue of the men, which consisted in a strong demand for virtue--in
women, which was an advantage to themselves.

A work to obtain equality between men and women could not be called
"Enmity to Christianity." Therefore notorious interpolations of Judaism
into Christianity ought not to be sanctioned. If this were done, and
the views of woman's position two thousand years ago in Judea were
sanctioned--well, in that case, he could tell the Christians that they
did not thus destroy the claims of the present day, but themselves.
There was no help which he desired so much as that of serious
Christians. He considered, too, that the Christian who had no
reactionary aims must range himself here with the great French pastor,
Pressense.

As a teacher of history, he had himself endeavoured to point out
trustworthily the works of Christianity. As a teacher of natural
science, on the contrary, he could not disguise the fact that divers
new discoveries were in opposition to the Jewish traditions; an honest
teacher of natural science in most Christian schools must find himself
in the same case. But the principal dogmas--the belief in God and
salvation through Christ--remain unmoved.

The Christian beliefs of the school were unfettered, and directed by a
clergyman, whom they all highly respected. He was clearly in his rights
when he demanded that his private beliefs should be left out of the
question. Indeed, it was his duty to demand this where the question was
notoriously merely introduced for the sake of making confusion.

This time the current of opinion against the school was divided by a
brisk counter-current. It was a good sign that Miss Hall's public
lectures at the school were still well attended.

But what would Rendalen, or his eager opponents, have said, if they had
known that the whole movement, from the moment the flag was hoisted,
had been directed from outside? That the best contributions to the
_Spectator_ had never once been written in the town? That the Town
Bailiff was a tool in a light but skilful hand? That the five thousand
kroner which had so animated his faculties and morality, and those of
his wife, had not come from Consul Engel at all? What would the Town
Bailiff, what would lawyer Bugge and his colleagues have said, if they
had known that the famous anonymous donor, who had called forth their
eloquence, was a rascal who had carefully reckoned on the certainty of
these men behaving as they had done, if they believed Consul Engel to
be the donor? What would all these worthy men and women, who were
fighting for morality and Christianity--what would they have said if
they had known that at Stockholm there was a man who reckoned on their
zeal and strong prejudices, as well as on the cringing and shrewdness
of others, with the same sense of superiority with which we use the
wide powers of Nature for the accomplishment of our own ends. But the
force of opposition could not be accurately measured from a distance;
where women are concerned, it is never easy to calculate;
notwithstanding these great exertions, the amount subscribed was small,
very, very small.

A mine must therefore be laid, and some of this opposition blown up.
And this was done. The report of Niels Fuerst's engagement to Milla
Engel had died out; it was now renewed, and, with it, the exasperation
of the whole woman's party. Angry, scornful remarks were flung over the
whole town from Rendalen's circle; they stabbed and wounded both the
families, Fuerst's and Engel's. Consul Engel was especially offended by
Rendalen having said, "All the Consul's mistresses ought to attend on
the wedding-day as bridesmaids." Engel gave Rendalen to understand that
till then he had held himself aloof from the business. Now, if the
wedding took place, the new school should be remembered both as
regarded a house and funds.

The person who brought this information to Rendalen received out of
hand for answer: "Yes, it is wise of the Consul to put _if_ before it,
for there is not a church in the town in which Milla Engel will dare to
be married to Niels Fuerst." This was really going too far; other people
saw this beside the Consul. He now felt himself compelled to act.

The fact was that Milla had not engaged herself again to Niels
Fuerst--the report was untrue, a mere trick. Up to this time the Consul
had not mixed himself in the matter; in such affairs one must be
circumspect. He had contented himself by sending her cuttings from the
_Spectator_, small reports, stories, and so on. He had also asked
others to write; she no longer corresponded with any one at "The
Estate." Now, however, the Consul wrote to her himself. He was so
fortunate as to be able to send her a cutting from a Lutheran weekly
paper, in which a highly esteemed clergyman analysed the proposition
that women have the same right to demand chastity from men, as men have
from women: the decided logical result of his analysis being that the
proposition was unchristian.

"And now," wrote her father, "what further objection can there be? You
love Niels Fuerst? If there is any condition which you wish to make in
regard to your marriage, name it, my child. The consideration which you
and I possess demands that you should be married in accordance with our
position in your native town."

Milla complied. If her dear mother's favourite clergyman, old Dean
Green, who had carried her mother's gift to the school, would perform
the ceremony, he _himself_, her father, might fix the wedding-day at
once. So old Green, the most respected man in the town, was to give his
countenance to their side? The Consul felt that this was highly
improbable. He wrote to Niels Fuerst, that now he had but little hope.

Fuerst was not of the same opinion. Most old people incline towards
compromise. He gave some instructions to his brother-in-law, and, after
the latter had paid a visit to the Dean, Fuerst wrote to the Consul
that, after all, things might be more hopeful than he had imagined. The
Consul was off at once. It may well be that he was astonished when the
old man said decidedly that the attacks on the school ought now to end.
A peculiar smile passed over the Consul's face as he lamented that he
did not possess sufficient influence. The old man met smile with smile;
there was no need for influence, he believed. And thus the matter
rested.

It was on a Friday morning that printed invitations were sent out to
Consul Engel's friends, in this and the neighbouring towns, asking them
to honour him by their presence at his daughter's marriage with
Lieutenant Niels Fuerst.

The wedding was fixed for the following Monday week, at four o'clock in
the afternoon, at the Cross Church. It was being hurried on.

To a few of his oldest friends the Consul added in writing that the
spiritual guide of his family, his beloved wife's friend, Dean Green,
would do the young people the honour of uniting them.

On the same day, about dinner-time, the Consul walked along the quays
just as all the business men were coming to, or from, them. Every one
greeted him with beaming faces and with great cordiality, and those who
were sufficiently intimate pressed his hand laughingly.

Every one had been annoyed that Rendalen should wish to prescribe who
was or was not to marry--precisely like Max Kurt in the old days--he, a
miserable fellow, crippled with debts, with a great school which might
tumble about his ears any day. The news of the wedding, and that Dean
Green was to perform the ceremony, was carried by Saturday's steamers
up and down the coast; it sprang ashore on the islands, was heard at
the watering-places, and slipped away through the woods far inland. It
brought excitement everywhere. One party rejoiced; the other was
immensely scandalised. But there was not a woman in either party who
did not declare that she should go to the town for the day to see it
all. The children begged to go too. Mimic weddings took place in the
"Groves" and about on the rocks, where an old Dean Green, in a short
frock and with bare arms, intoned the service over the bridal pair in a
trembling voice.

Somewhat more laggardly the news came that the donor of the five
thousand kroner to the new school had withdrawn his gift; that Consul
Engel had condemned all the uproar about the school; if it were carried
further, he would be obliged to support the recipients of his wife's
legacy: her memory demanded no less of him.

Had a compromise been effected? Was Milla to return home as the Angel
of Peace?

Some people were incensed; some laughed; some few, including the Town
Bailiff, would not give in; but how could a new school be started
without Consul Engel? And when in cold blood the advantages were
considered, who did not at last wish for peace? The daughter of the
school's benefactress married to Niels Fuerst--that was in itself
victory, and that sufficed. One or two marriages of this sort,
especially amongst the most advanced pupils at the school, and the good
old constitution, the good old distribution of virtue and authority
between the sexes, would remain unshaken. Rendalen, the Society, and
Miss Hall might stick to their views if they liked. Tora was never
mentioned now.

Milla was to be married on a Monday, and to leave the same night; she
was to arrive the evening of the previous Friday; she would not be
three days in the town! That did not imply a vast amount of courage,
her quondam friends considered. Not one of them went down to the
landing-place to meet her. But there was no need for them, for,
notwithstanding a drenching rain, it was densely crowded. The wedding
for which she was returning, even if nothing special had happened
previously, would have been the most important that any one could
remember. The bridegroom, aided by the unusually large fortune which he
would command, would be able to enter upon a career at Court which
would lead to the highest positions in the country. Every one who knew
him described him as a "born politician;" not very flattering to
politicians, but that I cannot help.

The bride was a beauty capable of becoming a thorough woman of the
world. Besides, she was to remain so short a time at home, that every
one must secure a glimpse of her.

Flags were hoisted everywhere, but they drooped along the masts in
quite a shamefaced manner, mere patches of colour--the beautiful
green-clad mountains at the head of the bay were shrouded in fog.
Houses, gardens, sea, seemed to lie in a casket whose cover was the
grey woolly mist.

The house-roofs were no longer red-brown but black; the houses not
white, but ashen grey; not yellow, but a sooty colour; all the tints
were subdued by several shades, the houses themselves seemed to crowd
closer together, and appeared wonderfully small and crooked to the girl
fresh from Paris, who stood, in the rain, on the deck of the steamer
which was gliding in among the islands. Only the great building up at
"The Estate" and the formal stone walls by the side of the avenue
loomed out from their encircling trees; but the red bricks looked dark
and ominous, the window-frames a pitchy black, the dumpy frowning
tower seemed to stand on the watch; as they drew nearer a huge white
flag-staff could be seen on it without a flag. "The Estate" lay hemmed
in, wide and menacing. Milla's glances wandered down from it towards
the Cross Church with its slender spire, from which the joyful soul of
Max Kurt had ascended to heaven; not that Milla thought of this, but
under that spire she would, notwithstanding ... But, good Heavens, what
is that? all that moving mass of black on the landing-place up to the
very walls of the houses? Umbrellas? Absolutely nothing but umbrellas!
What could that mean? From all the information which had been sent to
her, and perhaps even more from what had not, she was quite convinced
that if things were not all that she could wish, yet still there was
peace here now, and no danger. Dean Green's authority protected her,
and she herself did not wish to do any one an injury. But at the sight
of all these people, a remembrance rushed to her mind of the way in
which poor Fru Rendalen had been received, when she had returned from
her journey with Tora. Milla turned deadly white; a fearful dread
seized her. Although she struggled against it with all her might, she
could not help trembling; her knees trembled so that her whole body
shook; she had to support herself, to sit down. In the short space of
five minutes she went through more--ah! more than when her mother died,
for then a comforter hovered over her; the gloom was lightened by the
hope of a future meeting. Now she felt separated, cut off, plunged into
an abyss!

A sound of pitiless laughter surrounded her; people were trying to
grasp her hands--where could she creep to?

Her father was on board, but at the moment was down below collecting
the luggage and paying the steward. He heard the vessel swing noisily
in towards the quay, and then cheers from hundreds of voices, repeated
again and again. He came on deck, and his daughter rushed towards him,
seized him, pressed herself against him, her lips quivering, and
trembling in every limb. She who was ordinarily so self-contained, was
in a state of nervous excitement.

"Why, Milla? They are calling out 'Hurrah for the bride!'"

"Hold me," she whispered. "Let me collect myself, I did not know, I
thought----" And she cried--ah, how she cried!

Happily there was some obstruction at the quay, and a little time
elapsed before they were alongside. The captain stormed; as Milla
listened, the strain relaxed; so that when she stepped on shore,
leaning on her father's arm, though still pale and trembling slightly,
she could smile from under her coquettish hat as she passed in her
charming travelling dress. Tears were becoming to her.

What ringing cheers for the bride, for Consul Engel! The crowd was
almost all composed of men, and there was no one whom she knew well;
but, yes, there are Fuerst's sister and Fru Groendal and Wingaard, and
several others. There are flowers and welcomes, friends pressing
forward, and cheer upon cheer, and more welcomes--nothing but homage
and delighted greetings. More flowers still. The carriage was almost
full! She took her seat in it--the same carriage in which thirteen or
fourteen months ago she had driven here with Tora. She had no time to
recall it. This was splendid, perfect!


At a little past two the next morning a _skyss kaerre_[5] drove slowly
up the avenue to the school. A closely veiled lady sat in it with a
child in her arms. She was expected, for Rendalen came down at once to
meet her, and take her up the steps, at the top of which stood Fru
Rendalen. It was a touching meeting.




                               CHAPTER II

                     A GALA DAY IN TOWN AND HARBOUR


Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon, two unlucky printer's
devils trudged off, each on his own beat, with the _Spectator_. They
threw it into the passages, left it on the steps, pushed it under the
gates. They must hurry on! The church was full long ago; by this time
the marketplace was packed from one end to the other.

When the worthy burghers returned home and found the _Spectator_, they
read the following:--"As we go to press our town presents a most festal
appearance. Naval Lieutenant Niels Fuerst and Froeken Emilie Engel,
members of two of the oldest and most respected families in the town,
are to-day to be united at four o'clock, in the Cross Church, by our
venerable Dean. From the country, where all the families who have the
means are now enjoying their summer holiday, there has been an immense
influx of people to witness the ceremony. As well as this, our streets
are filled by a considerable number of strangers. It is understood that
Consul Engel has received the good wishes of his Majesty, through the
High Chamberlain of the Norwegian Court. Consul Engel, on the occasion
of this happy event in his family, has presented to the Maternity
Hospital the interest of a bequest of ten thousand kroner. The poor of
the town will to-day be entertained by the Consul at the poorhouse.
Further, we have just received the announcement that, in response to a
special appeal, Consul Engel has given two thousand kroner for the
thorough restoration of the magnificent organ in the Cross Church. A
gala day in town and harbour!"

At midday a refreshing breeze had fanned the glowing streets; now only
a capricious puff stirred the flags, and each time they blew out they
formed a mass of colour over the town, and the whole length of the
harbour; several ships were covered with flags from deck to masthead. A
barque, the most gaily decorated of all, is hauled out to fire a
salute, to begin the moment that the pair are united, and to continue
until the bride's carriage draws up before Engel's house. Another
salute is to be fired during the dinner.

The most perfect weather, over mountain and hill and sea and town! How
cheerful the town looked in the sunshine! The small blocks of houses
with their provincial decorations, surrounded by the pavement of
cobble-stones, cleanly swept and warmed by the sunshine.

The shadows were very heavy; when any quiet pedestrian emerged from
them into the white glare of the street, he had the same feeling as in
old times the wick of a tallow candle must have had when it escaped
from the snuffers again. The cats dozed in the sunshine, but with one
eye open, for there were a hundred idlers about to-day. The gutters,
generally the route for many a toy-boat, were now dry; the newspaper
boys jumped backwards and forwards across them, as they went from one
empty house to another. Everything was clean and charming and quiet.
Only in the streets by the quays the smell of decayed wood, salt
herrings, train oil, and "such like," prevailed. There was work going
on there too; festival at the masthead, toil on deck and down below. In
the rest of the town most work was over by three o'clock.

A train of young people could be seen trudging down from "the mountain"
towards the marketplace, succeeded by groups of women, both old and
young. They knew a little about the two families which were to be
united, those good people on the mountain!

What a glorious day! The land breeze now and again sent "cat's-paws"
across the harbour, which lost themselves in the blue grey water out by
the islands. The open sea beyond lay wide and peaceful.

And how lovely were the wood-clothed mountains and hillsides, in the
full colours of both pines and leafy trees, with the grass below ready
for its second mowing. The greens were deeper than those of spring and
with less variety. On the road below the churchyard was a long train of
pedestrians; those country folk who lived nearest the town, toiled in
just at the last to get a glimpse of the show--the men in front, the
women following. A fussy little steamer shoots out from among the
islands, snorting and puffing--she is behind time; she is bringing
people from the nearest town, and has a horn quartet on board.

In the sunshine, the mountain seemed to those approaching it from the
sea, to rear itself from the water like an anthill, but the resemblance
was spoiled as one came nearer, although its small houses still looked
like linen and stockings put out to dry. Close by, it became a curious
breeding place for human sea-birds. All the children of the upper
classes in the town looked at it with the greatest envy, especially on
a day like this, for the flags excited their imagination.

Every now and then, heads were turned towards "The Estate." Every pane
of glass in the great red-brick building shone in the sunlight, but no
flag was hoisted. As late as half-past three, Consul Engel, smoking a
cigar, went up to the top attic to see if the flag were hoisted; Emilie
was just coming down the attic stairs; she was fully dressed, except
that she still wore her _peignoir_. She coloured when she met her
father.

"What are you doing up here, my child?"

"I was looking----" She slipped past him without saying for what. No
flag on the tower! The Consul remained there smoking. If there had been
a flag without the "Union" to-day it would have been most suitable.

From the time it was reported that Tora Holm was at "The Estate" with
her child, which report was heard early as Monday morning, an avalanche
hung on the mountain ready to overwhelm them. This was the cause of all
the Consul's generosity; if any one but asked for more, he gave it.

He had had two sleepless nights! Was it true that Rendalen had sent a
letter to the old Dean couched in most respectful terms, but in which
he said that if this were "peace," it was once more shown that peace
belonged to Satan, but that the fight was God's?

"What did they contemplate--a scandal?" the whole town was asking.

Tora's appearance with her child just now was in itself a sentence--she
must have an undaunted conscience; something would certainly happen.

There was no answer to this fact: Tora Holm had dared to come here;
Rendalen and Fru Rendalen believed in her--_all_ her friends believed
in her.

All the incidents of Niel's bachelor life were recalled--that is to
say, those which related to _that_ part of the country; as a general
thing, people would say what a devil of a fellow Niels Fuerst was, and
stroll away laughing. The laughter ceased now. In Tora's neighbourhood
such stories took a different complexion. Some of them seemed
absolutely repulsive.

And the father-in-law! His past also was brought up again. None of the
stories dealt with daring seductions, unexpected, astounding conquests;
no open scandal--Heaven forbid! but certain quiet intrigues were known
of, often one or two at a time.

Expensive presents and small annuities had been heard of as well. They
knew of children who passed for his, and who were his living image. It
all came up again now; even "indiscretions" of twenty years ago and
more, were recalled. Such little provincial towns have pitiless
memories.

It had been but a short time previously that every one rejoiced that
Fru Engel's gift had been opposed by a similar one, so that the
"indecency" up at the school might come to an end. Now, as the women
flocked into the town (which they began to do as early as Sunday), and
the juniors at once hurried up to "The Estate," or collected in groups
in the streets, a remembrance of Fru Engel's beautiful funeral filled
the minds of all. What the daughter was about to accomplish was, in
reality, disrespectful to her mother's memory.

Emilie herself was the only one who did not know that Tora was there.
Fuerst had arrived on Saturday morning, and had heard it at once, but he
and her father believed that Tora had come to force herself upon Milla;
they kept most careful watch that neither Tora herself, nor a letter or
message, or indeed any sign from her, could come without being
intercepted. The friends of the house had received their instructions,
and beside they consisted entirely of members of the two families. The
bridesmaids arrived in the town on Sunday--they were relatives, and,
with hardly an exception, from a distance.

Milla knew nothing except that the other party had been defeated and
ruined, there would be nothing now but peace. Her father had the firm
intention of helping the school; it would work well enough if some of
the ideas were abandoned. Milla felt especially grateful for this
promise of her father. Why should not they all be friends together?
"That is what we shall be," Fuerst had assured her. The school party had
made peace: old Dean Green was a proof of it. "Yes, old Dean Green was
a proof of it," repeated Milla to herself, whenever she felt any doubt.

On Sunday she went to church and heard him, it did her so much good;
and in the afternoon she went with her father to call on him. How kind
he was! He exhorted her to be patient; we cannot alter the world, but
we can set a good example; that was what her mother had done. Milla was
deeply touched. "Ah! if only every one were good!"

Her father had never been so loving to her as now. His increasing
kindness reminded her of the time when her mother was ill, and then the
great amount of his charity; he could not have done her honour in a
more delicate or beautiful way. Fuerst was always amusing, and his way
of being so was so very superior. He told stories of the Court, and
terribly malicious ones they were; Fuerst was so pleasant and clever,
Milla felt that she was really fortunate--that is to say, except for a
slight sense of want, a tiny sensation of mistrust--just so much as to
oblige her, at the last moment, to go up to the top attic, to see if
there were a flag on the tower. But there was nothing. Perhaps no one
was at home! That would be the best thing for both parties. They could
find each other another time.

Now to put on her wedding dress! If Tora could have seen it! Poor Tora!
But such things will happen when one is not careful. Emilie asked her
maid to take care that the folds hung properly over her tournure. At
the same moment Fru Wingaard came in with the bridal wreath.


Every one who came from the adjoining streets into the market-place,
observed something red against the open door of the church, the outer
one to the left. It was a red shirt, worn by a tall sailor. The church
attendants tried to get him away, but in vain; all round were ladies
who would willingly have occupied his place, but he answered that he
had as good a right to stand there as any one else, which he
undoubtedly had. He did not belong to the town, no one knew him, a
tattoo mark on his hand showed that he had been at sea--indeed, he said
so himself. He was in a timber ship now--she was a large vessel.

With this exception there were nothing but ladies, old and young, on
the steps, down below, and in every direction, all who had not found
room in the church. Every time the inner door opened, affording a
glimpse of the interior, one saw, on both sides, right down to the
door, nothing but ladies--nothing but bonnets, with flowers, feathers,
and veils. A solitary uncovered masculine head in one of the rows of
chairs showed up like a single late gooseberry or black currant on the
branch in autumn. If the departed Herr Max could have looked up from
the chancel where he lay, it would have been "a goodly sight" for his
woman-loving eyes, especially as the younger ones were all in the front
places--they had been most eager in securing them.

Almost all the parasols which were to be seen on the market-place were
either on the steps, or round about them, a many-coloured moving
shield-like roof under which endless stories and laughter went on.
Every one thought the donation to the Maternity Charity _too_
felicitous. That Engel, who had so much tact, could---- But to be sure
that was because Fru Wingaard was the patroness--she had wheedled it
out of him, the minx!

On either side of the steps, each one the centre of a group, stood
those two sisters of doubtful character who had kept the club and the
hotel until they had been obliged to relinquish them in favour of
Engel's housekeeper. They least of all had reason to spare Engel or his
guests for the day, the magnates of the coast towns.

Nearest to these stood another knot of women who had not had so much
time to find places. There were few parasols here, but bonnets and
aprons, and some of the younger ones even bareheaded. There was
whispering, tittering, and giggling!

No solemnity, no gravity, no authority, not the least what is usual in
a provincial town. Even where the darker groups of men were collected,
there was no seriousness or "decorum," as the Town Bailiff would have
said, and indeed as he did say when, at a quarter before four, he
joined the guests, in full uniform, and with his wife on his arm. The
guests indulged in witticisms and laughter, the result of which was not
impressive; all the people looked at them with amused glances as though
they were comrades. The town was unrecognisable. When two boys
contrived to clamber on to the chimney of one of the houses opposite
the church, all clapped their hands and snouted. This had just occurred
as the Town Bailiff arrived. Amid the guests immediately following him
came the organist, very drunk. He was a young Swabian, who three or
four years ago came to the town in the course of a musical tour, and
there remained. The then organist had recently died--the organ was a
marvellous one; beside which there was excellent sea-bathing. He was a
soft, fantastic, thoroughly musical man, who as a rule was every one's
favourite, and who had more to do than he could manage, but who on a
holiday "_Wenn Konstantinople erobet warden ischt_," as he expressed
himself, got drunk. This occurred but seldom, but when it was the case
he did anything which took his fancy.

This culminated when one day a home missionary was speaking from the
chancel steps on the subject of sin, and the organist, noticing that
every one was yawning, began to play the organ till it roared! It was
pretended that the missionary made such very long pauses that the
organist had been misled by the longest of them.

To-day he had conceived the happy idea of going gaily to Consul Engel,
and asking him for some money for the organ, and he received a cheque
on the spot. So "_Konstantinople_" had "_erobet warden_" again, and
champagne corks flew! Who liked might drink with him. He came up,
beaming with happiness and swinging his arms about. Every one laughed,
and he laughed with them. He arrived just after the Town Bailiff and
his wife. They looked as stiff as though the organist had yoked them
and was driving them into the church. Great commotion was now caused by
an attempt to drive a carriage through the crowd. Up to this time every
one had come on foot. There was no room for carriages here, they cried,
and turned sullen; the police had to interfere. In the carriage sat a
pretty lively lady of uncertain age, by the side of a somewhat stout
gentleman with a remarkably shaped head and a supercilious expression.
Facing the lady sat an older man with a red face, heavy moustache and
imperial, and wearing a number of orders; he talked incessantly, as
though they were all three in a closed room where no one could see
them. They did not belong to the town; no one knew them until the
carriage-door was opened, and the man with the orders led the lady
forward. Then the hotelkeeper's wife said that he was a Consul-General
from Christiania; the lady was not his wife, but that of the gentleman
who was walking beside them--Consul Garman, of the firm of Garman and
Worse. Soon after these arrived two other strangers, Consuls Bernick
and Riis. The first-named invariably attended funerals with a stick in
his hand; the other always wore his order of St. Olaf when he went to a
ball. Several important magnates followed; some with their wives, some
without--millionaires in the herring, timber, or ice trade. The
monotony of the black coats was broken by the full uniform of the
Sheriff--he was without his wife, and in company with a gouty old
General, a relation of Fuerst. Besides these, there were Government
officials and merchants mingled together, most of them with their
wives, who hung on their husbands' arms like well-filled costly
baskets; the husbands were quite eclipsed. Absolute silence gradually
spread upwards from the lower end of the market-place, like oil over
troubled waters. The bridegroom was alighting from his carriage,
accompanied by his brother-in-law, Consul Wingaard. From another
carriage descended two naval officers and two civilians, one of whom
was Anton Doesen; these four joined the others.

All the special man[oe]uvres which had brought about that Fuerst should
to-day approach the Cross Church through the crowd, admired or envied,
accompanied or shunned, had been carried out by himself, and up to the
present time he had earned the honoured reception of a victor. Still he
did not advance with a victor's step--a child could see that at the
first glance. He walked forward in the deadliest fear. Tora had never
shown herself, had sent neither message nor letter. Neither she nor any
of her friends had once been near Consul Engel's house. It was evident
that she had not come to talk Emilie over, or to frighten her. What had
she come for? What did Rendalen's threat mean? There was danger until
he was inside the church; then the sanctity of the building, and the
respect due to the old clergyman, must protect him. But here----! His
eyes wandered up to the wooded slope above "The Estate." It was an
involuntary action. It was not there, but here, that she might appear.
She or others. She was not the only one.

His half-closed eyes searched about, his bronzed face was without
movement--those strings which moved his lips must have broken! There
was no smile now. His fair whiskers hung down and seemed to lengthen
his face.

The gait of this dandy had an air of painful caution--each step
might lead to disaster. If it did not fall on him, it might await
her who would soon follow him. There were sparkling eyes all round and
many sharp ones, but no one whom he feared. He was taller than the
women; he could see for a good distance, and he looked from side to
side--nothing!

He had just put his foot on the first step when the tall sailor stepped
forward:

"Ane Marja sends you her compliments."

Those who stood nearer heard it; some who were further away saw the
movement.

"Did he say something? What's he say?"

Sibilations whistled across; to those who were furthest away it sounded
like es-s-s-s-s-s-s-s all round the church.

Fuerst stood still: his eyes contracted as though fine dust had been
thrown into his face; his gloved hand sought for his handkerchief, from
which scent was wafted; he blew his nose and walked on, his friends
following him. Within it seemed dark after the bright sunshine outside,
but in the darkness were eyes, women's eyes!

Here sat Tora's friends. He knew every one in the town by sight, and
picked them out one by one. They sat quite in front, excited, restless,
threatening. There must be something after all. The great church bell
began to ring at that moment, and the bride's carriage was seen at the
end of the market-place. What would happen now?

Nora, Tinka, and Anna Rogne were on Fuerst's left as he walked up to the
chancel. He glanced involuntarily to the opposite side; the first seat
was vacant. Every one in the chancel rose as the bridegroom appeared.

There was a stir outside, not merely because the bride's carriage had
arrived followed by those of the bridesmaids and Fru Wingaard, but
because the coachman in grey livery wanted to drive up to the church
door, which seemed impossible. Those in front pressed back to make
room, but those behind declined to be pushed against, and exerted their
strength, till several people were forced up against the carriage
windows. Shrieks, angry words, and orders ensued, and alarm inside the
carriages. Engel put his head out of the window, but no one listened to
him, and he got out of the carriage. The police were at hand, and
eagerly cleared a way for the wealthy magnate, while the bride
alighted, as did the bridesmaids; they arranged themselves and walked
forward, not where the others had passed; the crowd made way for them
in all directions.

Her red-gold hair crowned with myrtle, the bride resembled the most
exquisite work of an English Academician. The lines of her face were
regular and of an English type, the colouring soft, the skin very
white; the shoulders rather sloping, beautiful--the figure that of a
soft delicate young girl.

She walked forward with her head bent, not looking at any one, her hand
resting lightly on her father's arm; just below the level of his order
of St. Olaf could be seen her diamond ornament, though only by those
just before or above them. An old-fashioned brooch, a valuable one,
which was recognised as having been a favourite of her mother, secured
the flowers in front of her dress. A puff of wind raised her veil just
as they came up the steps; it streamed out into the face of the sailor,
but did not touch it; a delicate perfume was spread in all directions.
How relieved Engel felt as he stood inside the door! That had been the
worst journey he had ever made in his life. Still he had not hurried;
unobtrusive, quiet, benign, he had walked forward; he kept his eye
fixed on one point--was that the needle's eye which must be passed
through?

His handsome regular features looked as though they had never been
disturbed by any idea inconsistent with honourable habits, or the good
counsel of elders and superiors--nay, as though he had never had
knowledge of such things. His had always been a God-fearing house;
three generations had endowed charities. The very perfume which now
hung round them might well have come from Palestine.

And after all there had been no danger. "We are in church now." The
organ pealed under the powerful touch of the drunken Swabian; its full
accords blended with Engel's thoughts, and seemed to restore him to
himself.

No delight can compare with that of an evenly balanced nature, which,
having believed itself in danger, discovers that that danger has been a
delusion. This feeling of delight does not spring violently into being,
it does not throb, but spreads through the whole man with a soft
perfect sense of enjoyment. It resembles the delight of recovery of a
good digestion, the smiling view, the delightful odour of some coveted
object to which he may now draw near. He raised his face, bearing its
best expression, towards the pulpit, calmly receiving all the glances
which were directed towards him. He suspected that he was envied, and
that tickled him.

What a future lay before them! Just then the bride's hand trembled; he
withdrew his eyes quickly from the pulpit. Milla was deadly white, and
could not, or would not advance. What was it?

Nora, Tinka, Anna Rogne, and several others were sitting quite in
front, just where they must pass. Could there be anything terrifying in
that? Every face bore an expression of mingled excitement and
mischievous delight, all, all of them, in whatever direction he looked;
it infected him as well. What was it? Involuntarily his eyes sought the
chancel--if they were but there! There they would be in peace. But all
in the chancel were on their feet; they stood amazed, staring down into
the body of the church, not to his side, but to the opposite one. At
the same moment his daughter gave a sharp cry and staggered backwards,
dragging him with her.

Into the pew furthest from them on the right, through the vestry, and
therefore from across the chancel, came Pastor Vangen; after him, Tora
Holm, with something in her arms; then Miss Hall, then Rendalen. In
this order they were just seating themselves as the bridal procession
entered the door.

Tora had a double black veil over her face and over what she held in
her arms, and this had been securely fastened so that it was only when
Miss Hall had helped her that she was able to turn with her face
uncovered, and with her child in her arms, towards her who was now
advancing.

A storm of anger, reprobation, threats seemed to rise to the very roof,
the excitement mingling with the roll of the organ. Milla was almost
dragged forward. She came into the chancel little more than a white
silk dress among all the other dresses.

A rustle, a stir! Heads, hands, eyes, bouquets seemed to whirl before
her, so that she could not extricate herself, nor find her own seat,
her own bouquet, her own handkerchief. Every one crowded round with
offers of help, with eau de Cologne, and general disturbance. The last
to come was the big red-faced man with the large moustache and the
decorations; he tried to force her own bouquet on her, of which she
could not endure the scent. When at last she was free and could draw a
breath, she burst into tears. She drew her veil forward. Milla pitied
herself so: what a dreadful thing it was that they had done; she felt
furious, perfectly furious.

Consul Engel received her first glance. It came on him, following all
that he had already gone through, like the last dram which deprives a
man of consciousness. He began to wonder with a strange delirious
feeling why his trousers felt so thin. Was it really so?

The elegant Fuerst sat beside him, holding his hat first in one hand,
then in the other, and crossing and uncrossing his legs. It was on
account of _him_ that all this had happened, and the budding politician
was not yet sufficiently accomplished to be able to sit still while he
was flayed, cut up, and put in the pot.

Doesen, who was close behind him, pulled the ends of his fair moustache
with his white-gloved hands--now left, now right--harder, and harder,
and harder. He was marvellously industrious over it. The people in the
body of the church saw this white hand moving about under his nose, and
thought that he was playing some trick, or making signs to some one,
but, they could not find out to whom. The grand folk felt the
embarrassment of the situation to be most distressing, but, all the
same, they wanted to get a look at the woman with the child--she was so
devilish handsome, so foreign-looking. They strained their necks, they
craned forward; Consul Bernick himself made his neck as long and
distorted as that of a cockerel when it is learning to crow.

To the rest of these mishaps was added the Dean's non-appearance. The
vergers went in and out, in and out, with all the solemnity of intense
stupidity.

The organist's playing showed signs of impatience.

It seemed to him that it was rather long before Dean Green came and he
would be able to begin the hymn. He had exhausted the pompous style
long ago; he now turned to the sentimental, its direct opposite--from
the clear notes of the shepherd's pipe to the most impossible chirping
of a chicken. His fancy indubitably wandered among all the little ones
who were to spring from this marriage; he chased them with his fingers
saying hush, hush, to them in the treble.

At last Engel had recovered himself so far that he began to realise the
difference between the delicate and the coarse, between well-bred and
ill-bred individuals; to the latter he knew that nothing was so
delightful as scandal, but this was something altogether unheard of. It
needed a Kurt to have thought of this, to have created such a maddening
scene. His handkerchief was wet already, his white gloves were almost
grey. As he fanned himself and wiped away the perspiration, he glanced
anxiously at Milla. She hated him! He prayed to God. Yes, Consul Emil
Engel prayed fervently to God that their sins might not be visited upon
this poor innocent girl! They had deceived her, truly, but with the
best intentions in the world. God knew how true this was. But who could
have anticipated that so mad a thing should have been attempted as to
dishonour the sacred edifice.

Engel did not swear as a rule, he was too refined a man for that, but
almost simultaneously with his heartfelt communion with God, he desired
with his whole heart that the devil might take the lot of them.

He had recourse to his wet handkerchief again. At the same time the
thought was in Milla's mind, "Shall I go?"

Engel saw it in her eyes, in the way she moved on her chair. Fuerst saw
it also. Both felt it like a million electric shocks: but they could
not give up their last hope that Milla was too well-bred to increase
the scandal. Engel felt that, even if she remained, he should be, from
this time forward, a broken, discredited man; Fuerst felt that if only
Milla would go with him before the altar, a career would still be open
to him.

But still the Dean did not come! All thoughts centred on this; it
became intensely painful. All eyes were fixed on the vestry door. Was
he ill, or feigning to be so, so as not to come? Where was the deacon,
then? Make him come! Why did not Karl Vangen move? The women in the
chancel who had not got over the first fright (there were some who had
been obliged to grasp the seats of their chairs to prevent themselves
from trembling) were now made really ill by this fresh strain; several
began to cry. "Yes," thought Milla; "I am to be pitied, dreadfully to
be pitied! Oh, if mother had lived!" And she cried bitterly. Every one
had conspired against her, who had done nothing. Would old Green now
let her sit there so miserably on the stool of repentance before all
these horrid, horrid people!

She thus lost sight of the first and important question, and was so
tossed about by the feeling of desolation that, when the Dean did at
length appear, she felt it consolation, a reward from Heaven.

But if she had not, even for a moment, got sufficiently away from
herself to feel why this had been done, those had, who sat below the
chancel. Not only those who were in the secret, who were few in number,
not only their sympathisers who were numerous; no, every woman felt
that it would be shocking, if, after what had occurred, Milla could or
would go on. Even it she had been dragged up there--why did she not
rise, why did she not leave them? They expected her to do so from one
moment to another, but Milla remained seated. Could such a thing be
possible, after such a strong appeal to her conscience? Every good
woman, who is unfettered, involuntarily takes the part of the weak, of
the one who has been wronged. The minds of those in the church were
agitated like the waves of the sea. The stir became greater and
greater. Was it credible that she would go to the altar with the
wretch? Shame on those around her who could countenance such a thing.
Every one stared at the altar. Was not old Green coming? He must have
had scruples at the last moment about giving them the blessing of the
Church. Karl Vangen would never have done so. He was with her who was
betrayed and deceived. He was so simple-minded that he believed that
the Church's place was there. The grateful glances which his broad face
attracted during these few moments would have gilded the vaulted roofs
of several churches, or thousands of hymn-books and Bibles. At length
they saw by the stir in the chancel that old Green had come at last.
Really and truly!

Very slowly and feebly he came, very feeble indeed he looked. "A
thorough ecclesiastical compromise," it was whispered about. Just as he
reached the altar, the hymn began. All those in the chancel joined in
it. In their zeal, their relief, their gratitude to Providence, they
all sang; the bridegroom, Engel, the General and the Consul-General,
Bernick, Doesen, Riis, the celebrities, the Sheriff, all sang of the
first bride who was brought by God himself to the first bridegroom. Not
one of them believed it, but they sang so that it was a sin that the
organ overpowered them, for such singing of hymns ought to be heard.

Their wives' trebles chimed in; they were so startled that they could
not find the hymn, but they all knew it by heart. The one who was the
quickest to join in, and who sang the loudest in praise of marriage,
was Fru Garman.

Except these and the clerk, no one in the whole church joined in the
singing. The stir became so great and so general that a number could
not remain sitting, they stood up; those behind them wanted to see, and
stood up also. But Tora rose before anyone of them. What those around
her had felt, and were feeling with all its violence, was as nothing to
what she experienced, for when deeply moved she showed herself her
mother's daughter. The journey here had worked her up to a state of
excitement, which her constitution could hardly bear.

If for no other reason, still for her own sake, Milla must be prevented
from marrying the wretch. For this it was necessary that Tora should
show herself, she and her child; everything else might fail, but this
would force Milla to pause--she knew her!

This could only be done if Tora had the will and the courage for it.
And she had, for her friends had the will and courage to be with her.
It did not merely concern herself, it concerned the school, Milla, a
great cause; it concerned thousands!

No one, least of all herself, had had the slightest doubt but that to
stand up with her child in her arms before the bride, would be
sufficient. From the moment that Milla had burst into tears in the
chancel, but still remained in her place, until now, when old Green had
come, Tora's excitement had increased to such an extent that those
nearest to her were alarmed; it could be observed as well from the seat
opposite. They knew now that something must be done, upon which neither
they nor she had reckoned, before their object could be attained. Tora
was Tora, and would be true to herself.

Fuerst was already at the altar, accompanied by Consul Wingaard;
Engel had walked carefully across the carpet to lead his daughter
forward. She rose and allowed the bridesmaids to arrange her train and
veil--when Tora sprang forward from her seat.

Every one in the chancel was looking at the bride, who gave her hand to
her father and turned with him towards the altar. They did not see Tora
come up the steps. There was a sound behind them like the breaking of a
wave, and at the same moment something black passed quickly by. The
ladies shrieked, the gentlemen grew rigid with dismay. Those at the
altar turned round; Engel staggered backwards; Tora stood between him
and his daughter.

"Do you wish me to lay the child down before you, Milla? Will you have
it to kneel on?"

"No! No!" cried Milla in horror. She turned, and with her hands before
her she flew from the chancel, her veil streaming behind her.

Every one had risen. Tora had hastened at once to the vestry--she felt
that now her strength was exhausted--Miss Hall followed her there.

But when Milla had left the chancel, she did not know where to fly to;
some one ought to come to her, to be with her--her womanly instinct
told her that. She turned and looked round bewildered. The vestry door
was opened, a harsh cry was heard from it for just so long as was
needed for the opening and shutting of a door; but it was enough. Milla
began to cry too. An arm was put round her waist, she was led from the
church; it was Nora. From the moment that Milla had yielded, all
resentment was over, all anger vanished. Indeed, it was so with most of
them. Rendalen was quickly at her side, and then went on before them to
make way.

The organist, who had not seen what had gone before, but who, after the
first hymn, had expected to hear the words of the service, rose when
the movement became general. What was it? He saw the bride out in the
aisle, the others still in the chancel, the whole congregation standing
up. "_Aber das war kurios! Wird's nichts daraus? Ho--ho! Ich hab' meine
zwei tausend_."

And he began to play the organ. They tried to stop him, but he
answered, "What haf they don with the brite? The music shall do her
goot."

Hardly had the bellringers heard the organ before they thought, "Now
they are married," and began to ring the bells. Hardly had those on
board the saluting vessel heard the bells before the guns began to
thunder. They were to continue firing until the bride's carriage drew
up at the door of the house, and as they could not see this from the
ship, a signal was to be made to them. In the general confusion this
was forgotten, so on they went--bang, bang, bang! It seemed to them at
last that they had fired a great many rounds, but that was other
people's affair, so they thundered away as long as they had any powder;
for they also had been drinking considerably.

All this caused great amusement. The affair changed from the sublime to
the ridiculous. First among the crowd who left the church amid the
pealing of the organ, the clash of the bells, the thunder of the
cannon; their laughter was taken up in increasing measure by those in
the market-place, and from there it spread over the whole town. In the
memory of man there had not been so much laughter at one time as now
resounded from the river banks to the most remote houses on the
mountain, or out on the Point. The country people went laughing home
amid the roar of the cannon, and wherever they came there was laughter.

A gala day in town and harbour. Thunder of cannon and flutter of flags,
flags and cannon--and laughter!

At first the bridal party looked at each other with horror; by ones and
twos they made their way out of the church, but the laughter outside
was infectious; when they got home and read the _Spectator_, they
laughed too.

The Town Bailiff himself laughed!

Up the avenue walked Nora and Rendalen. The cannon thundered, and they
turned round and looked at the flags flying in the town and in the
harbour--and laughed. Karl Vangen hurried past them on his long legs;
Tora was at Niels Hansen's. She was terribly exhausted, but calm; he
was going to fetch the carriage--and off he went. No less than fifteen
girls passed them at once, going up to Fru Rendalen; another large
group was following them. They did not walk, they raced, and were
quickly past.

A little later Fru Rendalen came out on to the steps to meet her son
and Nora: they were just the opposite of every one else; they stopped
every moment. Now, just when she wanted them so much. How could they
forget her?

All at once she pulled off her spectacles and wiped them. Then put them
on slowly.

Rendalen said, as he walked along the avenue, that there had been a
great deal which was one-sided and obscure, too much of a fixed idea in
his first lecture, and that there was a great deal in his development
as well, which was but half accomplished. Still, "life is a school, and
first and foremost concerns schoolmasters." He did not say this in so
many words, he had not the least need for anything so stiff and cold.
To speak the plain truth, while they involuntarily flew the flags down
below for the success of his life's aim, he walked along here and paid
his court--to her with the "flickering" hair. It seemed to her that she
was quite unworthy, and she brushed a swarm of flies from her eyes. But
it was so absolutely impossible not to wish, and so----

They agreed about many, many, many things. The first was that if one
has confidence in a work, that confidence helps in its development; the
second was, that when there are two it goes on twice as quickly, or it
may be that the last was the first, and the first the last. They really
were not accountable.

But fifteen girls were up on the tower at once; they wanted to hoist
one flag to-day which would tell no lie, and also for a reason which
was without deception. They called down to ask leave; Rendalen was at
the foot of the steps, he laughed up to them. Nora had sprung away from
him--up the steps to Fru Rendalen. She pressed closely, oh, so closely,
to her--apparently to put her spectacles on better.

"No, no," called Rendalen up to the girls on the tower; "not
to-day--for Milla's sake, but we will do so very soon."



                               FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Pigerne Jens.]

[Footnote 2: Some parts of it have been used in the Introduction.]

[Footnote 3: Enchanting.]

[Footnote 4: Open hearth.]

[Footnote 5: Hired posting carriage.]





                            END OF VOL. II.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heritage of the Kurts, Volume II
(of 2), by Bjoerstjerne Bjoernson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERITAGE OF THE KURTS, VOL II ***

***** This file should be named 37802.txt or 37802.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/8/0/37802/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by Google Books

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
