The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Woman Who Vowed, by Ellison Harding

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Woman Who Vowed
       The Demetrian

Author: Ellison Harding

Release Date: October 22, 2011 [EBook #37821]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WOMAN WHO VOWED ***




Produced by Anna Hall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  _NEW SIX SHILLING NOVELS._


  THE BLUE LAGOON. By H. DE VERE STACPOOLE.
  EVE'S APPLE. By ALPHONSE COURLANDER.
  PARADISE COURT. By J. S. FLETCHER.
  THE TRAITOR'S WIFE. By W. H. WILLIAMSON.
  MAROZIA. By A. G. HALES.

  LONDON: T. FISHER UNWIN.




  THE WOMAN WHO VOWED
  (THE DEMETRIAN)

  BY
  ELLISON HARDING

  [Illustration]

  LONDON
  T. FISHER UNWIN
  ADELPHI TERRACE
  MCMVIII




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                   PAGE
  I. A Goddess and a Comic Song                7
  II. Harvesting and Harmony                  21
  III. The Cult of Demeter                    37
  IV. Anna of Ann                             53
  V. Irene                                    63
  VI. Neaera                                  77
  VII. A Tragic Denouement                    94
  VIII. How the Cult was Founded             101
  IX. How It Might be Undermined             119
  X. An Unexpected Solution                  127
  XI. The Plot Thickens                      135
  XII. Neaera's Idea of Diplomacy            144
  XIII. Neaera Makes New Arrangements        150
  XIV. "I Consented"                         162
  XV. The High Priest of Demeter             171
  XVI. Anna's Secret                         183
  XVII. Designs on Anna of Ann               190
  XVIII. A Dream                             200
  XIX. The Legislature Meets                 207
  XX. On Flavors and Finance                 219
  XXI. The Investigating Committee           226
  XXII. "Treasons, Stratagems, and Spoils"   238
  XXIII. A Libel                             249
  XXIV. Neaera Again                         259
  XXV. The Libel Investigated                266
  XXVI. The Election                         285
  XXVII. The Joint Session                   293
  XXVIII. Lydia to the Rescue                302
  Conclusion                                 315




THE DEMETRIAN




CHAPTER I

A GODDESS AND A COMIC SONG


I remember awakening with a start, conscious of a face bending over me
that was beautiful and strange.

I was quite unable to account for myself, and my surprise was heightened
by the singular dress of the woman I saw. It was Greek--not of modern
but of ancient Greece.

What had happened? Had I been acting in a Greek play and been stunned by
an accident to the scenery? No; the grass upon which I was lying was
damp, and a sharp twinge between the shoulders told me I had been there
already too long. What, then, was the meaning of this classic dress?

I raised myself on one arm; and the young woman who had been kneeling
beside me arose also. I was dazed, and shaded my eyes from the sun on
the horizon--whether setting or rising I could not tell. I fixed my eyes
upon the feet of my companion; they were curiously shod in soft
leather, for cleanliness rather than for protection; tightly laced from
the toe to the ankle and half way up the leg--half-moccasin and
half-cothurnus. I fixed my eyes upon them and slowly became quite sure
that I was alive and awake, but seemed still dazed and unwilling to look
up. Presently she spoke.

"Are you ill?" she asked.

"I don't think so," answered I, as I lifted my eyes to hers.

When our eyes met I jumped to my feet with an alertness so fresh and
fruitful that I seemed to myself to have risen anew from the Fountain of
Youth. A miracle had happened. I was dead and had come to life
again--and apparently this time in the Olympian world.

"Here!" I exclaimed; "or Athene! Cytherea, or Artemis!"

Then quickly the look of sympathetic concern that I had just seen in her
eyes vanished. A ripple of laughter passed over her face like the first
touch of a breeze on a becalmed sea; for a moment she seemed to restrain
it, but her merriment awakened mine, and on perceiving it she abandoned
all restraint and burst into a laugh that was musical, bewitching, and
contagious. We stood there a full minute, both of us laughing, though I
did not understand why. She soon explained.

"Where on earth do you come from, Xenos, and where--_where_ did you get
_those_ things?" She pointed to my pantaloons as she spoke.

Then I discovered how ridiculous I appeared.

"And why have they cut all the hair off your face and left that ugly
little stubble?"

I put my hand to my chin and felt there a beard of several days' growth.

"It must prick dreadfully," she said; and coming up to me she daintily
passed a soft, rosy finger over my cheek. I caught her hand and kissed
it. She jumped away from me like a fawn.

"Take care, young man," she said, reprovingly but not reproachfully;
"though I don't suppose you are very young, for I see some gray in your
hair."

I don't suppose I liked being reminded of my years, but I was altogether
too much absorbed in the richness of her beauty and health to be
concerned about myself. And the subtle combination of freedom and
reserve in her manner conveyed to me an indescribable charm. At one
moment it tempted me to trespass, but at the next I became aware that
such an attempt would meet with humiliating resistance; for she was tall
and strong. Her one rapid movement away from me proved her agility. She
was perfectly able to take care of herself. Her consciousness of this
had enabled her to meet my first advance with unruffled good humor, but
I felt sure that persistence on my part would elicit repulsion and
perhaps scorn.

We stood a moment smiling at each other; then she said:

"Come, you must take off those dreadful things; why, you are wet
through"--and she passed her hand over my back--"and you must tell me
what you are and where you come from. But you are chilled now and need
something warm, so come to the Hall and you can tell me as we go."

As she spoke she swung to her head a basket I had not before observed;
it was heavy, for she straightened herself to support it; and the
weight, until she balanced it, brought out the muscles of her neck. She
put her arms akimbo and showed the way.

"Well," she said, as we walked together side by side, "when are you
going to begin?"

"How and where shall I begin?" answered I. "You forget that I too have
questions to ask; I am bewildered. Who and what are you? In what country
am I? Where did you get that beautiful dress?" I stepped a little away
from her to observe the beauty of her form.

"We try to make all our garments beautiful," she answered, simply; "but
this is the common dress of all--or rather the dress commonly worn in
the country. We dress a little differently in town--but what do you find
peculiar in my attire? What else could I wear out in the fields?"

I looked at the drapery, which did not hang lower than the knee; at the
girdle that barely indicated the waist; at the chiton gathered by a
brooch on one shoulder, leaving bare the whole length of her richly
moulded arm.

"I would not have you wear anything else," said I, restraining my
admiration; "but our women dress differently."

"Tell me about them," said she.

"I will," answered I, "but tell _me_ first where I am and where we are
going?"

"You are near a place called Tyringham," answered she, "and you are
going with me to breakfast at the Hall."

As she spoke we were walking down a grassy slope and came in sight of a
meadow on the left, through which meandered a crystal stream; it flowed
from the right of the hill on which we stood, and just below where it
fell in cascades over successive ledges it was straddled by a mill
smothered in jasmine and purple clematis. The moment the mill came in
sight my companion uttered a loud call that came echoing back to us from
the surrounding hills. Her call was answered by several voices, and soon
there came to meet us a youth as handsome in his way as my own
companion. He, too, wore the Greek dress; he was about eighteen years of
age and so like the girl that I guessed at once he was her brother. He
put me out of countenance by staring at me with open-mouthed wonder and
then bursting into an uncontrolled roar of laughter. But his sister took
him by the arm and shook him.

"Stop laughing," she said. "Don't you see he doesn't like it?"

The boy stopped immediately--for I confess his laughter was not as
agreeable to me as hers--and there came upon him an expression of the
gentlest solicitude.

"I am sorry," he said, with tears of laughter still in his eyes; "I
thought you were playing a joke on us."

I tried to look pleasant.

"I cannot at all account for myself," I said, "or for you; I suppose a
long time has elapsed since I went to sleep; so long that I hardly
remember where it was, though I think it was in Boston--in my bachelor
quarters there."

They both looked puzzled and concerned.

"And what is your name?" asked the girl.

"Henry T. Joyce," answered I.

I could see that my very name amused them though they tried to conceal
it.

"And yours?" asked I of the girl.

"Lydia--Lydia second, or more correctly, Lydia of Lydia."

"That means," said the boy, "that her mother's name was Lydia; and so I
call myself Cleon of Lydia, because, my mother's name was Lydia. She,"
he added, pointing to the girl, "is my sister."

He was dressed, like her, in a simple tunic coming to the knees, and was
shod like her also; but the tunic was not pinned up on one shoulder: it
had sleeves like our jacket.

We were walking down the hill and came now in sight of a group of
buildings entirely of wood, of a beauty that made them a delight to
behold. One much larger than the others reminded me of what Westminster
Hall would be if separated from the more recent Houses of Parliament. It
was lighted by large Gothic windows that started from above a covered
veranda; the veranda offered countless opportunities for surprises in
the way of carved pillars, twisting staircases, and subsidiary
balconies, every corner being smothered in vines and bursting into
blossoms of varied hue. Clearly the upper part of the building was a
large hall, and the lower part split up into smaller rooms. Near this
Hall and connected with it by covered ways were numerous other
buildings, all different, but conforming to the lay of the land on
either side of a torrent, upon one level reach of which stood the mill
in the same quaint style.

"Our power house," said Cleon, pointing to it.

I thought of the hideous masonry that ruined the valley of the Inn
between San Moritz and Celerina in the old days, and I wondered. But my
eyes were too much bent on the beautiful lines of Lydia's form to linger
long on the mill or its adjacent buildings. I had fallen behind her in
order to be able to take better account of her. The weight of the basket
on her head brought out the strength of her shoulders and the rhythmic
movement of her body. Every time she turned to speak to us her hands
left the waist in an unconscious effort to maintain her balance, thus
throwing into relief the rounded outline of her arm and the delicacy of
her wrist. "Alma venus genitrix," thought I, "hominum divumque
voluptas."

Cleon kept talking all the way, interrupted occasionally by Lydia. He
explained all the buildings to me and their respective uses. As we
approached the Hall we met several other young men and women who joined
us, for all were going in the same direction. Each expressed the same
surprise and amusement on beholding me; they joined Lydia, who with an
air of importance repeated her story to every one. I felt more
comfortable between Lydia and Cleon and had therefore joined the brother
and sister, so as to have the protection of one of them on either side.

When we reached the Hall, Cleon suggested that I must feel uncomfortable
in my damp clothes and took me to the men's quarters. He provided me
with all that was necessary for a complete toilet. A large swimming tank
occupied the basement of the building, and into it I was glad to plunge.
After I had shaved--for a razor was provided--I assumed the simple
garment of my neighbors and for the first time felt ashamed of the
whiteness of my skin. By the side of the swarthy limbs about me my arms
and legs looked naked and pitiful. I was extremely hungry, however, and
my appetite overcame my reluctance at facing the crowd that I felt was
awaiting me at the Hall. As we approached it we heard echoes of song
and laughter.

"They have finished breakfast," said Cleon, pushing me through the open
doorway.

Our entrance was unobserved, for they were all engaged in singing; the
words I heard in chorus were "The Lightning Calculator!" They all
stamped at each alternate syllable and I noticed that Lydia was the
centre of observation. She was flushed, half with vexation and half with
merriment, and was being held by a crowd of girls who prevented her from
interfering with the soloist, who, standing on a chair with a guitar,
was improvising.

I could not hear the words distinctly from where I stood but caught
something about a certain Chairo, at the mention of whose name there was
a laugh, and the stanza closed, as had the last, with "The Lightning
Calculator," whereupon all laughed again and stamped as they repeated in
chorus "The Light-ning Cal-cu-la-tor."

"That's my sister," said Cleon to me in a whisper. "She's the Lightning
Calculator."

In the next stanza, which was quite unintelligible to me, I noticed an
allusion to Demeter, at which the women looked shocked and the men
delighted. I was wondering at the significance of this when Lydia
discovered me, and, delighted to divert attention from herself by
directing it toward me, she said to the tormentors who were holding her:
"There he is!"--and she nodded in my direction.

Immediately all eyes were turned toward me and I became painfully
conscious of my bare white legs. The young man with the guitar stepped
down from his chair and came to me.

"Welcome to Tyringham," said he. "We don't know how you got here or
where you come from, but we are ready to answer questions and willing to
ask none."

I stammered something in answer and was led to a table where two places
had been left for us. Cleon and I sat down and food was brought. Lydia
asked me a few conventional questions to put me at my ease; but hardly
succeeded, for seemingly some hundreds were engaged in staring at me. At
last some one pushed the soloist by the arm. "One more verse, Ariston,"
said he, and Ariston jumped on the chair again, and, twanging his
guitar, resumed:

    "Of swarthy skins she tires soon
    To her new things must cater,
    So now she's found a pantaloon--
      The Lightning Calculator."

My legs were well under the table so I could join in the laugh, secretly
satisfied to be associated with her even in the jingling nonsense of a
comic song.

"Boobies!" exclaimed Lydia, "and Babies!" she added. "Boobies and
Babies!" She ran to the door and they all followed her, boisterously
laughing, and leaving me alone with Cleon.

"I didn't understand much of it," said I. "Who is Chairo?"

"Chairo is a great man; one of our great men; the youngest of them; he
may become anything; but he is not popular because he is so
dictatorial."

"And he is in love with Lydia?"

"Frightfully in love."

"And Lydia?"

"Ah! no one knows; she's very sly, Lydia"; and Cleon chuckled to
himself.

"And why did everybody look at one another when Ariston sang about
Demeter?"

"Well, the women don't like to have it talked about."

I was puzzled.

"Do tell me about it," I said, "for I know nothing about Demeter except
what I have read in my classics."

"Well, Demeter, you see"--but he blushed and stammered--"I really never
had it altogether explained to me; the women never talk of it, and yet
the Cult, as they call it, 'the Cult of Demeter,' is the most important
thing to them in the world."

I went on eating my breakfast and trying to guess what Cleon was driving
at, but altogether failed.

"What does this Cult of Demeter have to do with your sister?" I asked at
last.

"Why," answered Cleon, looking round cautiously and lowering his voice,
"Lydia is a Demetrian."

"What does that mean--'Demetrian'?"

"It means that she has been selected by Demeter."

"Do try to remember," I said a little impatiently, "that I know nothing
about your Demeter and can make neither head nor tail of what you are
saying."

The irritation I felt made me aware that I was jealous of Chairo,
jealous of Demeter, and infatuated with Lydia. Cleon's half explanations
seemed to be putting Lydia out of my reach, and I was exasperated at not
being able to understand just how far.

"Well," answered Cleon, "I don't know whether I ought to tell you, but
it's this way: Lydia is awfully clever at figures. She can square any
ten of them; add any number of columns; multiply any number by any
number all in a flash. And so she's been selected by Demeter; that is to
say, I suppose, they are going to marry her to some great
mathematician."

"What!" exclaimed I, indignantly. "They are going to sacrifice her to a
mathematician?"

"Sacrifice!" retorted Cleon with open eyes. "Why, it isn't a sacrifice!
It is the greatest honor a woman can have!"

"And what does Lydia say to it?"

"She hasn't made up her mind."

"Oh, then, she has to be consulted," said I, relieved. "She cannot be
compelled."

"Oh, no," answered Cleon, "she is selected--that is to say, the honor is
offered to her; she may not accept it if she does not like; but a girl
seldom refuses. She is no more likely to refuse the mission of Demeter
than Chairo would be to refuse the Presidency. It is very hard work
being President--very wearing; in fact, I should think it would be an
awful bore; but nobody ever refuses it, because of the honor. I suppose
it is the same thing with the mission of Demeter."

I was more and more puzzled, but despaired of getting satisfaction from
Cleon.




CHAPTER II

HARVESTING AND HARMONY


We had finished breakfast now, and my hunger satisfied, I was free to
look about me a little. The hall was lofty, and the roof supported by
Gothic arches, sculptured by hands that had enjoyed the work; for
although the design of the building was simple and dignified it was
covered with ornaments of bewildering complexity. We were waited on by
women who could not be distinguished from those upon whom they waited;
of every age and of every type, most of them were glowing with health
and cheerfulness. They laughed a great deal with one another, and
offered me advice as to what they put before me; warned me when a dish
was hot, and recommended the cream as particularly fresh and sweet. They
made me feel as though I had been there for years and knew every one of
them intimately. Just as we were finishing, a fine old man with a white
beard and a patriarchal countenance joined us:

"You come from a couple of centuries ago," he said.

"Is it two centuries, or a thousand years?" asked I.

"I have been looking at your clothes; you don't mind, do you? they
indicate the end of the nineteenth or beginning of the twentieth
century."

"You have guessed right," said I; "and what year are you?"

"We count from the last Constitution which was voted ninety-three years
ago, in 2011 of your reckoning. So we call the present year 93."

"So you have given up the old Constitution," I said with a touch of
sentiment in my voice.

"Yes, it had to be changed when we advanced to where we are now in
methods of manufacture and distribution of profits."

"Can you give your methods a name?"

"You used to call it Collectivism; we call it Solidarity."

"You mean to say you actually practise Collectivism!"

The patriarch smiled.

"Your writers used to say it was impossible," he said; "just as the
English engineers once said the building of the Suez Canal was
impossible, and our own engineers the building of the Panama Canal was
impossible. As a matter of fact, Collectivism is as much easier than
your old plan as mowing with a reaper is easier than mowing with a
scythe. You will see this for yourself--and you will see" here his brow
darkened--"that the real problem--the as yet unsolved problem--is a very
different one. But Cleon must join the haymakers; what would you like to
do?"

I was much interested in the old man and was anxious to hear what he had
to say about the "as yet unsolved problem," which I already guessed. But
I was still more anxious to be with Lydia, so I asked:

"Does Cleon work with his sister?"

"Yes," said Cleon, "on the slope, a few minutes from here."

"Perhaps I had better make myself useful," said I hypocritically.

I thought I detected a little smile behind the big white beard as the
old man said to Cleon, "Well, hurry off now; you are late."

I followed Cleon up the hill. He explained to me on the way that the
meadows were all cut by machinery, but that the slopes had still to be
cut by hand. We soon came upon a group in which I recognized Lydia and
Ariston. They were on a steep hill. Lydia was swinging her scythe with
the strength and skill of a man. She was the nearest to me of a row of
ten, all swinging together. Ariston was singing an air that followed the
movement; he sang low; and all joined occasionally in a modulated
chorus. Cleon took up a scythe and joined them. I was glad to observe
that there was no scythe for me, for I had never handled one. I stood
watching the work. When the song was over they worked in silence, but
the rhythm of their swinging replaced the music. It reminded me of the
exhilarating harmony of an eight-oared crew. At last one of the girls
cried out, "I want to rest"; and all stopped.

"I was hoping some one would cry 'halt!'" said Ariston.

"So was I," whispered Lydia to him.

"So were we all," called out the rest.

They sat down on the grass; after a moment's breathing space Ariston
lifted his hand; all looked at him, and he started a fugue which was
taken up, one after another, by the entire party; to my surprise and
delight I recognized Bach's Number Seven in C flat, and I began to
understand the role that music might play in the life of a people, and
what a pitiable business our twentieth-century notion of it was.
Confined to a few laborious executants and still fewer composers, the
rich partook of it at stated hours in overheated rooms, and the masses
ignored it, except in its most vulgar form, almost altogether; while
here, under a tree in the large light of the sun during an interval of
rest, all not only enjoyed it, but joined in it at its best. I singled
out Lydia's rich contralto and noted how she dwelt on the notes that
marked changes of key, with a delight in counter-point that belonged to
her mathematical temperament. I watched her every movement. She had
thrown off the loose gloves she wore while mowing and was lying on her
face, playing with a flower. The posture would have been regarded by us
of the twentieth century as unmaidenly; but in the atmosphere created by
the simplicity of these people I felt as though I were in one of Corot's
pictures. Maidenliness had ceased to be a matter of convention and had
become a matter of fact. There was a fund of reserve behind the
frankness of Lydia's manner that conveyed a conviction of rectitude
entirely beyond the necessity of a rigorous manner, or of a particular
method of deportment.

I seemed to be transported back to the peasantry of some parts of France
or of the Tyrol; but here was an added refinement that demolished the
distance which had always kept me despairingly aloof from these; here
was the charm of frankness, of gayety, and of simplicity, coupled with a
cleanliness of person, delicacy of thought and manner, culture, art,
music--all that makes life beautiful and sweet.

The young men and women who sat singing under the trees, smitten here
and there with patches of sunlight, were all of them comely and
wholesome of body and mind; but Lydia was to me preeminent; and yet,
could it be said that she was beautiful? Her eyes were long and narrow
and when I crossed glances with her they escaped me; so that I forgot
the matter of beauty in my eagerness to penetrate their meaning; her
face was too square to satisfy the ideal; her nose was distinctly
tip-tilted, like the petal of a flower; her mouth was large and well
shaped--altogether desirable; and her hair was flaxen and straight, but
in its coils it seemed to have a separate life of its own so brightly
did it gleam and glow.

Lydia was the first to jump up and suggest that work be resumed; and as
she stood among the prostrate forms of her companions she embodied to my
mind Diana, with a scythe in her hand instead of a bow. All arose
together and set to work again, but in silence this time; and under the
shade where I sat, nothing broke the quiet save the hum of insect life
in the blazing sun and the periodic swirl of the reapers. They did not
rest again until the patch of hillside at which they worked was mown,
when with a sigh of satisfaction they rested a moment on their scythes;
but for a moment only, for presently Lydia ran for shelter from the sun
to the shade of the tree under which I sat. She reclined quite close to
me, looked me frankly in the face and smiled. I was surprised to find
eyes that had escaped me till now suddenly become fixed composedly on
mine, and noticed for the first time that these women put on and off
their coquetry according to the context of their thought, for presently
she said:

"I am afraid you are lazy!"

"I believe I am," answered I.

"You mean to say you wouldn't like to join us in our work?"

There was not the slightest reproach in her voice, only surprise.

"I much prefer looking at you," I replied with a little attempt at
gallantry. But there was no response in her eyes that remained fixed on
me. She was trying to explain me to herself. I felt uncomfortable at
being a mere object of abstract curiosity. She was reclining on her
side, resting on one hand: in the other hand she was absently twisting
a flower she had plucked. Notwithstanding my discomfort I rejoiced in at
last plunging my look deep into hers. What was happening in the blue
depths of those eyes? I felt as though I were trying to penetrate the
secrets of a house the windows of which reflected more light than they
passed through. I saw the reflection only. Behind was a judge weighing
me in the balance, but as to whose judgment I could form no idea. And
although I was conscious that in her I had a critic, I was so bewitched
by her charm that I said to her in an undertone--for the others were
talking to one another:

"You are very beautiful!"

She waved her flower before my eyes as though to put a material
obstacle, however frail, between us and smiled; but she looked down
presently and laughingly answered:

"That doesn't make you any the less lazy."

I did not wish to be set down permanently in her mind as good for
nothing, so I explained:

"I am not incurably so; indeed, at my own work I was industrious; but I
never held a scythe in my life."

She looked at me again in open-eyed wonder.

"What was 'your own work'?" asked she.

"I practised law."

"What, nothing but law? Did you never get tired of doing nothing but
law?"

"We believed in specializing."

"Ah, I remember! The nineteenth century was the great century of
specialization. Later on it was found that specialization was necessary
to original work, but that it brutalized labor; we have very few
specialists now: only those who have genius for particular things, as,
for example, doctors, engineers, electricians--but we have no
_lawyers_." She laughed at me with bantering but good-natured contempt
in her laugh as she emphasized the word "lawyers." "And you mean to say
you did nothing but lawyerise?" And she suddenly with finger and thumb
lifted my free hand that was resting on the grass--for I was reclining
on my other elbow, too--and I became aware that my hand was soft and
white.

"It wasn't always soft and white," I explained. "I did a great deal of
rowing at college."

She kept hold of my hand with finger and thumb and laughed gently:

"I don't believe it ever did a useful bit of work in its life."

I was piqued; and yet her low laugh was so catching, her long eyes so
subtle, her lips so bewitching, that I gladly let my hand hang in her
contemptuous fingers so long as I could be near her and in commune with
her.

"That depends on what you call useful work," said I.

"I call useful any work that contributes to our health, wealth, and
well-being." The coquetry went out of her manner again and she became
thoughtful. "The people of that time needed lawyers to fight their
battles for them, but we have got rid of at any rate one principal
occasion of discord--the occasion that made lawyers necessary. We have
men specially versed in the law still, but they don't confine themselves
to law; they cut hay too. Ariston is a great lawyer."

She had dropped my hand by this time; as she mentioned Ariston we both
looked toward him; one of the girls exclaimed:

"I am hot; let's sing something cool."

"The Fountain," called out another.

Ariston lifted his hand again, and after beating a measure struck a
clear high note; he held the note during a measure and then his voice
came tumbling down the scale in bursts of semitones relieved by tonic
spaces, with a variety that reminded me of the Shepherd's song in
"Tristan and Isolde." The moment he left the first high note it was
taken up by another voice during the full measure, and as soon as the
second voice dropped down the scale, a third one pitched the high note
again, and so on voice after voice, the high note imaging the highest
point of the _jet d'eau_, and every voice dropping tumultuously down
into a placid pool of infinite variety below. Lydia did not attempt the
high note, but beginning low kept at the low level in peaceful contrast
to the sparkling tenors and sopranos, the whole musical structure
resting on the bass which moved ponderously and contrapuntally against
the contraltos.

How shall I tell the thoughts that crowded upon me as, lying on my back,
I listened to this amazing harmony! The beginning reminded me of one of
Palestrina's masses and transported me to a Christmas midnight at the
church of St. Gervais; but as soon as the intention of the strain became
clear to me, I felt that it belonged to the open air, to the eternal
spaces, to the new-mown hay, to my radiant companions. The merriment of
it, its complexity, its wholesomeness, the delight it gave--all brought
to a focus and intensified the interest that was growing within me for
Lydia.

But the whole party rose now to begin work on another hillside and Lydia
turned to me with:

"Why do you stay with us? Why not go to the Hall? You will find the
Pater there; we call him the Pater because he is the father of the
settlement. He will want to talk to you, and you _need_ to talk to him."
She put an arch little emphasis on the word "need." Evidently she did
not want me to be loitering among them. I pretended to adopt her
suggestion with alacrity although in my heart I wished nothing but to
remain with her.

"Yes," I said, "I shall never get out of my bewilderment unless I talk
to some one who can understand my point of view."

"And you will probably find Chairo there," she added, with a provoking
smile. "He was to arrive to-day."

Ariston pricked his ear:

"Ah!" he said. "You will enjoy meeting Chairo; he is the leader of our
Radical party; he is in favor of all sorts of Radical measures--such as
the destruction of the Cult--" the women looked at one another--"the
respect of private property----"

"What! Do you call the respect of private property Radical?" asked I.
"It was the shibboleth of the Conservatives in my time; they called it
the 'sacredness of private property.'"

"Just as the Demetrians speak of the 'sacredness' of the Cult to-day,"
said Ariston.

"Whenever Hypocrisy wants to preserve an abuse she calls it Sacred,"
said a strong voice at my elbow. I turned and saw that a new companion
had been added to us, and I guessed at once that it was Chairo.

He was a splendid man; nothing was wanting to him--stature, nor beauty,
nor strength. He was remarkable, too, by the fact that his face was
clean shaved, whereas all the other men I had met wore beards; but his
face bore a likeness so striking to that of Augustus that to have hidden
it by a beard would have been a desecration. And he was strong enough in
mind as well as in muscle to bear being exceptional. It would have been
impossible for him to be other than exceptional.

Lydia blushed as she recognized him, and the blush suggested what I most
feared to know. Chairo went to her and without a shadow of affectation
took her hand, knelt on one knee, and kissed it. There could have been
no clearer confession of his love. I could not help contrasting the
frankness of this act and the superb humility of it with the reticence,
hypocrisy, and pride that characterized our twentieth-century
love-making.

Lydia with her disengaged hand made a sign of the cross over his head;
not the rapid, timid, fugitive conventional sign that Catholics made in
our day, but with her whole arm, a large sign, swinging from above her
head to his as it bowed over her hand, with a large sweep afterward
across; and as she did so I saw her eyes widen and her glance stretch
forward across the heavenly distance.

For the first time I felt the narrowness of my life and my own
insignificance. And I--_I_--had dared to think I could make love to this
woman! For a moment it occurred to me that Lydia had encouraged me; but
so mean an apprehension of her could not live in her presence. As she
stood there making the sign of the cross over the bowed head of her
beloved, I knew that Love was something more in this civilization than
the satisfaction of a caprice or the banter of good-humored gallantry;
that it was possible to make of Love a religion, without for that reason
sacrificing the charm of life, and the particular charm that makes the
companionship of a woman something different from the companionship of a
man.

And yet I was puzzled; was Lydia not a Demetrian? Cleon had told me she
had not yet made up her mind; but was there not in this greeting with
Chairo a practical admission of a betrothal? And what was the meaning of
the sign of the cross? Was Christianity still alive, then? And if so,
how reconcile Christ and Demeter? And there swung through my mind the
terrible invocation of the poet: "Thou hast conquered, O pale Galilean!
The world has grown gray from thy breath."

When the cult of Demeter had first been hinted to me I had assumed that
the reign of the Galilean was over, and that the old gods had resumed
their sway. The possibility of this had admitted a note of latent
triumph in the hymn to Proserpine.

    Will thou yet take all, Galilean? Yet these things thou shalt not take:
    The laurel, the palm and the paean; the breast of the nymph in the brake.

Could it be that we could keep these things and yet remain loyal to the
religion of sacrifice? Could we worship as well at the voluptuous altar
of Cytherea and at the mystic shrine of the Holy Grail?

My mind was in a tumult of inquiry as Chairo arose from his knee and
engaged in conversation with the group; and though they did not point or
look at me I knew that it was of me they were talking. Presently, Chairo
came to me and held out his hand:

"You are a traveller from the Past, I hear! Dropped down among us in
some unaccountable way." He looked me squarely in the eye as he held my
hand a moment, with a frank scrutiny that I had already noticed in
Lydia. Then he added:

"You were returning to the Hall; if you don't mind, I shall accompany
you; it is too late for me to begin work before lunch; besides, there is
no scythe for me." And waving his hand to Lydia and the others, he
walked away with me toward the Hall.




CHAPTER III

THE CULT OF DEMETER


For some distance we walked in silence. At last I said: "You will not be
surprised to hear that I am bewildered; everything is in some respects
so much the same and in others so different."

"I am curious to know what bewilders you most."

"Well, it is bewildering enough to be told that you are actually living
under the regime of Collectivism--a thing which we always considered
impossible; but I confess what piques my curiosity most is this cult of
Demeter----"

A scowl came over Chairo's face.

"How much do you know about it?" said he.

"Nothing, except that Lydia is a Demetrian and that she is to be married
to some mathematician----"

"Married!" interrupted Chairo. "It cannot be called a marriage! It is a
desecration!" He paused a moment as if to collect himself and then began
again in a calmer voice:

"It is difficult for me to speak of it without impatience; but
declamation which is well enough on the rostrum is not tolerable in
conversation, so I shall not give way to it. The cult of Demeter is an
abomination--one of the natural fruits of State Socialism, which, to my
mind, means the paralysis of individual effort and death to individual
liberty. I lead the opposition in our legislature, and you will,
therefore, take all I say with the allowance due to one who has
struggled, his whole life through, against what I believe to be an
intolerable abuse. The cult of Demeter is nothing more nor less than the
attempt to breed men as men breed animals. It totally disregards the
fact that a man has a soul, and that the demands of a soul are
altogether paramount over those of the body. To attempt to breed men
along purely physical or mental lines without regard to psychical
aspirations is contrary not only to common sense, but to the highest
religion. Did not Christ Himself say, 'What shall it profit a man if he
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul'?"

"You quote Christ," interrupted I. "Is it possible that the Christian
religion can live side by side with the cult of Demeter?"

"Yes," said Chairo, "and this is perhaps just where the mischief lies.
Christianity has remained among us as the religion of sacrifice; and the
priests of Demeter bolster up their hideous doctrine and their
exorbitant power by appeal to this religion of sacrifice."

"But where," asked I, "do they derive this power of theirs?"

"Where else," answered Chairo, "but through the hold they have upon the
imagination of the women--that terrible need for ritual which has given
the priest his power ever since the world began. Gambetta was right, 'Le
clericalisme; voila l'ennemi.'"

"Do you mean to say," asked I, "that superstition has survived among
you?"

"No, you cannot call it superstition; the time has long since passed
when the priesthood could impose on the minds of men through
superstition; but just because they now appeal to a higher and nobler
function of mind are they the more dangerous."

"Tell me," I said--I paused a moment, for I was very anxious to ask a
question and yet a little afraid to do so.

But Chairo looked at me again with a look so frank that I ventured:

"Tell me," I said, "is Lydia going to accept the mission?"

"No one can tell," said Chairo. "She is profoundly religious, profoundly
possessed with this notion of sacrifice; she has been brought up to
believe the mission of Demeter the highest honor which the state can
give, and it comes to her now clothed with all the mysticism of a
strange ritual and a religious obligation. Think of it: just because she
has the talent of rapid calculation, a knack which you in your time used
to exhibit as a freak in a country fair, she is to be sacrificed--ah, if
it were only a sacrifice I shouldn't complain--but she is to be
contaminated. She is to be contaminated, because, forsooth, it is
believed that by coupling this knack of calculation with one possessing
a profounder genius for mathematics, she will bring into the world a
being further endowed with mathematical ability. What if she did; is
there not something in the world worth more than mathematics?"

"And what mathematician will be selected?" asked I.

"That is the wicked part of it," answered Chairo; "that matter is
absolutely in the hands of the priests. My God!" he said, "I shall not
endure it."

His eyes flashed, and his voice, though low, rang as he spoke these
words. But we were now approaching the Hall and we saw the Pater, as
they called him, sitting upon the veranda. "I have spoken vigorously,"
he said in a lower voice, as we approached the Hall--"perhaps too
vigorously; but I do not mean to disguise my intention. I would not
speak in this way upon a public platform, because they would endeavor to
stop me, and the issue would be raised before public opinion is ripe for
it. But I warn you the Pater is on the side of the priests, and so, to
avoid discussion, which we seldom allow to interfere with the harmony of
our domestic life, I recommend you not to speak of these things to the
Pater when I am present."

The Pater arose and advanced to meet us, holding out his hands to
Chairo.

"Welcome to Tyringham," he said. And then looking toward me he added:
"You could not get hold of a better man to explain to you the changes
that have occurred since your time, but I warn you he will not give you
an optimistic view of them."

I smiled, but said nothing.

After a few words about the weather and the crops Chairo left us, and I
at once began upon the burning theme.

I repeated to him the substance of what Chairo had said, leaving out the
heat, the indignation, and the threat. I sat down on the balcony with
the Pater, and he, after listening to me, began:

"Chairo is a man of extraordinary gifts, and has, of course, the quality
which generally attends these gifts--inordinate ambition. Such men are
naturally prone to favor individualism as opposed to collective action,
and to desire the rewards that come from individual success. It was such
men as Chairo who prevented so long the realization of Solidarity, and
who will always constitute a formidable opposition. Nor, indeed, would
it be well for the state that they should cease to exist; for the
Collectivist community would soon lapse into mere routine and
officialism, were it not kept perpetually at its best by the opposition
of just such as these.

"Unfortunately in this particular case his opposition is rendered not
only acute but dangerous, by the fact that he has come into collision
with one of the most precious institutions of the state, through his
inordinate passion for Lydia. Indeed, I had Chairo in mind when I said
to you, as we parted, that the economic problem presented by the
distribution of wealth was by far the least of the problems that
presented themselves. The desire for the accumulation of wealth is an
artificial desire; it grew with the institution of private property, and
when the institution of private property was abolished the desire for it
very soon, in great part, disappeared. But the desire of a man for a
woman is an elemental passion which has its root deep down in the
necessities of human nature. This passion will always be with us and
will always tend, when coupled with such abilities as Chairo's, to
disrupt the state."

"But," I interrupted, "is not this cult of Demeter a dangerous thing?"

"To the mind of Chairo," answered he, "inflamed as it is by his love for
Lydia, undoubtedly it is. But all those who belong to Chairo's party and
hate Collectivism because it doesn't furnish them the reward which they
feel due to their ability, are using this issue in an attempt to break
up the entire system. But consider for a moment what is this cult of
Demeter which you think so dangerous. In the first place there is in it
no coercion, absolutely none: the priests tender to such women as they
think proper the mission of Demeter, and this mission can be accepted or
declined; no disgrace attends the declining of it; the woman to whom it
is offered is absolutely free. In the second place, the cult is to the
utmost degree reasonable. Let us, for a moment, glance at the notions
that have prevailed on this subject in times past.

"From the earliest civilization the notion has prevailed that the most
highly religious act a woman could perform was to make the sacrifice
involved in celibacy. We see it in one of its most beautiful
developments at Rome. There, to the Vestal Virgins was entrusted the
maintenance of the sacrificial flame; to them were accorded the highest
honors of the Roman state, the most favored places at all state
functions; they alone, except the consuls, were preceded in the street
by lictors, and if, in walking through the streets of Rome, they met a
criminal going to execution, he was immediately set free. The sacrifice
required by this institution was chastity. So, in the Christian Church,
those of both sexes who desired to give themselves particularly to the
worship of Christ secluded themselves in convents and took the vow of
chastity. Yet what a barren piece of sentimentality it was! We respect
it still, because there was in it the element of sacrifice; but a woman
capable of such self-sacrifice as this commits a crime against the body
politic by refusing to become the mother of children; it is just from
such women as these that we want to raise new generations, capable of
carrying the torch of civilization onward in its march. The real
sacrifice to be demanded of these is not chastity; it is the surrender
of personal inclination to the benefit of the commonwealth. The real
sacrifice consists in refusing to leave the maternal function at the
mercy of a momentary caprice, and, on the contrary, in consecrating it
to a noble purpose and to the general good. But you can hardly
understand all this till you have heard the story of Latona, who founded
the cult--the first and greatest saint in our calendar."

The Pater did not persuade me; it was horrible to me that it should be
in the power of any man or men, by appealing to a woman's willingness to
sacrifice herself or by the exercise of priestly craft, to condemn her
to marriage without love, which, to my mind, is its only justification.

"And you think," said I, protesting, "that it is right to sacrifice the
love of a woman for life?"

"No," interrupted the Pater, "not for life! There you labor under a
mistake. Let me tell you what happens: if a woman accepts the mission
she becomes attached to the temple of Demeter, and while attending upon
the ritual is slowly prepared for the act of sacrifice; this is a period
of seclusion and prayer. Not that we believe in the existence of a
goddess Demeter, but that Demeter represents to us that divinity in our
own hearts which puts passion under constraint, and makes of it, not a
capricious tyrant, but a servant to human happiness--our own happiness
best understood, believe me--as well as the happiness of the community.
And so the Vestal--for so we entitle her--invokes and keeps herself in
communion with this special divinity within us each, and without us all,
until her heart is lifted into a consciousness of her mission as the
highest possible to her sex. Compare that, my friend, with the maternity
which is often the undesired consequence of a caprice or ceremony. But
as I have already hinted, the sacrifice is neither imposed at all, nor
is it suggested for a lifetime.

"Indeed, the Demetrian ceremony, once consummated, often results in
permanent marriage; upon this point the woman has the first word;
though, of course, the ultimate conclusion must rest upon the consent of
both. For example, the woman decides the question whether the
bridegroom shall become known to her. Some women, in whom the instinct
of the mother predominates over that of the wife, elect never to know
the father of their child; and as soon as pregnancy is assured, cease
all relations with him. Others, indeed the great majority, become
mystically attached to the man who, in the obscurity of the Demetrian
temple, has accomplished for them the mission of their motherhood; they
ask to see him; and if upon fuller acquaintance both consent, a
provisional marriage is celebrated between them."

"Provisional marriage!" exclaimed I, aghast again.

"All our first marriages are provisional," answered the Pater with
magnificent disregard for my indignation. "What can be more
preposterous--more fatal to happiness--than to commit a man and woman
for life to bonds accepted at an age when the mind is immature, and
under an impulse which is notoriously blinding. It became a commonplace
paradox in your time that the fact of being in love was a convincing
argument against marriage; for a human being in love is one who has been
by so much deprived of reason--by so much deprived of the exercise of
the very judgment most necessary to select a life companion. Look back
at the consequences of your institution of marriage: in your time it
was already in process of dissolution; the facility of divorce had
already destroyed the indissolubility of marriage, and made of it a mere
time contract. And divorce, that the clergy of your day regarded as a
trespass of Immorality on the sanctity of the marriage tie, was, as a
matter of fact, the protest of Morality against the immoral consequences
of the indissolubility of the marriage tie. No, there are two essential
elements in sexual morality: one is temperance; the other is sacrifice.
All are expected to practise the one; the few only are capable of
practising the other. The art is to frame institutions which recognize
this and to accommodate the institution to the temperament of the
race----"

"Yes," interrupted I, "but this is just where you fail; how are you
accommodating your Demetrian institutions to such temperaments as those
of Lydia and Chairo? Do you not see that by imposing them in such cases
as theirs you are risking the wreck of your entire system?"

"You are perhaps right," answered the Pater. "I am not initiated into
the secrets of the priesthood; but it may be easily guessed that upon
the application of the system there may well be divergence of opinion.
We have already seen the system result in infamous outrage in the
South, and give rise to the necessity of government intervention--a very
dangerous thing in such questions."

"But how do you practise this system of provisional marriage?"

"Simply enough: the first marriage is always provisional; if a child is
born, the marriage must last until the child is weaned; at that time the
parties are expected either to renew the vow of fidelity in the temple
of Demeter, or to renounce it. They can at that time renounce it without
disgrace, though it is seldom renounced without heart-burning; one wants
to renounce and the other to renew. But both know in advance that the
day of the weaning--which is a function of the cult--is the day upon
which final vows are to be pronounced; both prepare for it, and its
inevitable coming insures on the part of the one who most desires the
renewal a conduct of a nature to insure it. But renunciation on the part
of either involves no disgrace. A second renunciation after a second
marriage is otherwise. There is no institutional obstacle to it; each or
both can at any time renounce; but public opinion has happily created a
sentiment against a second renunciation, which makes them rare. This is
just where the system broke down in the South; the public opinion
against repeated renunciations did not exist; caprice became the order
of the day; the priests of Demeter became corrupt; and sexual disorder
involved, as it always must, every conceivable other disorder in the
state."

"And what was done?" I asked.

The Pater looked grave: "The Government interfered and substituted state
control for individual control. It is this that furnishes to Chairo and
his party their strongest weapon. State control is abominable;
institutions like ours are possible only in a community possessed of
such a moral sense as prevails in these New England States."

"But how could the Government undertake control of marriage?"

"By an extension of our State Colony system; this you will understand
only when you have seen the working of the State Colony system for
yourself."

One thing more I was eager to know. "What had the gesture of Lydia, as
Chairo kissed her hand, meant; was it an acceptance?" I asked the Pater,
and he answered:

"Just as it is no disgrace to a man that a woman should not return his
love, so is it no disgrace to a woman that she should withhold her
answer. In your time a woman who did not respond affirmatively or
negatively to a proposal of marriage was accused of playing fast and
loose. But we do not regard it as a bad thing for a man to be kept
waiting, or for a woman to keep him waiting; indeed, I am reminded of a
word of one of your own authors who said that there was no better
education for a man's character than the effort to win the love of a
worthy woman. And so, when a man has altogether made up his mind that he
loves a woman, he does not feel it necessary to keep his love secret
till he knows whether the woman will accept it; on the contrary, he
makes open confession of it as Chairo did. And the woman, if she is not
prepared to decide, responds to such an act as Chairo's, with a sign of
the cross to indicate that she is for the time being set apart until
such time as she has prayerfully considered. And in Lydia's case, this
has a double signification; her choice is doubly religious, in that she
not only has to consult her heart as to her love for Chairo, but also
her conscience as to her duty to the cult."

I was glad that the reapers began returning and that our conversation
was brought to a close by their return, for I was fairly tired. Great as
was my curiosity to know more of these singular institutions I felt the
need of thinking a little about them before my mind was crowded with
further information. And so I gladly returned to the men's quarters,
which were becoming crowded with those who had more right there than I
to a plunge in the crystal pool. We were soon ready for lunch, and I was
accompanied thither by Chairo, Cleon, and Ariston.




CHAPTER IV

ANNA OF ANN


My place at lunch was by the side of the Mater. I soon guessed that she
was the wife of the patriarchal old man with whom I had been conversing.
She had a delicious air of comfortable _embonpoint_, a clear skin, pink
cheeks, and massive white hair. She was already seated when Ariston took
me to her table, and, moving the empty chair a little to help me to my
seat, she said, smiling:

"You are to sit here; I am dreadfully anxious to talk to you; where on
earth have you come from now?"

I sat down by her, and answered:

"I wish you could explain it to me."

She looked me in the face and said: "You look just like the rest of us,
except, that only our _priests_ shave"; I looked in the direction of
Chairo inquiringly. "Oh, yes, Chairo shaves, and a few others who want
to be peculiar; but all of us simple folk----"

She chuckled a little, and then, bending near me, whispered in my ear:
"I have been looking at your trousers!"

I made a deprecating gesture and smiled; she joined me, but in a laugh
so brimming over with merriment and so contagious that very soon all the
table had joined but without knowing why. When the Mater had finished
laughing and the others with her, Ariston said:

"Well, Mater, now that you've finished laughing, perhaps you will tell
us what it's all about?"

"Indeed, I won't," answered she; and there was almost a wink in her
innocent old eye as she turned to me and said: "It is a secret--isn't
it?--a secret between us two," and she patted my hand as if I had been
her son.

I promised her with exaggerated solemnity never to reveal it, and she
patted my hand again and added:

"I see you'll become one of us--one of the Tyringham Colony; we always
come together at every harvest time--as indeed do all the other
colonies--only we think our colony is just a little bit nicer than every
other."

"And so does every other," said Ariston, "think itself better than the
rest."

"And so all are happy," answered the Mater convincingly. "But have you
met your neighbor, Anna of Ann?"

I turned to my right, and saw that Lydia was not the only beautiful
woman at Tyringham. Anna of Ann was of a different type. Her features
were delicate; the eye was not remarkable; indeed, her glance was veiled
and almost disappointing; her nose was ordinary; her skin clear but
colorless; it was assuredly in her mouth, and perhaps in her low
forehead and clustering hair, that her beauty resided; and as she spoke
there were little movements of the lips that were bewitching:

"No, I have not been haymaking with Ariston's group and so we have not
spoken," she said. "But I saw you this morning after breakfast,
and"--she added archly--"I stared at you with all the others; we were
dreadfully rude! But then, there _was_ some excuse for us, wasn't
there?"

"Every excuse," I answered reassuringly. "But tell me, what do you do
when you are not haymaking?"

"What do you mean; work or play?"

"What do you work at, and what do you play at?"

"My work generally consists in attending at the public store; I sell in
the hosiery department at New York."

"And what do you play at?"

"Sculpture."

"She's a great sculptor," volunteered Cleon, nodding at her from the
other side of the table.

"No, I am not," deprecated Anna; "I am not recognized."

I looked at the Mater inquiringly.

"By 'recognized,'" said the Mater, "she means the state hasn't
recognized her; that is to say, she has to do her work at the store or
wherever else she is assigned during the regular three hours a day. When
the state recognizes her--as it is sure to do one of these days--she
will be allowed to devote all her time to sculpture."

"I don't believe the state will ever recognize her," said Ariston; "she
is a great deal too good. That Sixth is a fool!"

"Sixth is head of the fine arts department," explained the Mater. "His
full name is Sprague Sixth; six generations ago we had a great artist
called Sprague, who was for twenty years our secretary of the fine arts,
and one of his sons has borne his name ever since, until it has become a
tradition in Massachusetts that we must have a Sprague at the head of
our fine arts. This man Sprague Sixth, whom we call Sixth for short,
doesn't believe anybody can be good at art unless he has studied in the
state school. Now Anna did not show any talent until her school days
were over and she had been assigned to work in the store."

"And now there is no chance for her," said Ariston ironically.

"What do you mean," exclaimed Cleon, taking Ariston seriously, "she can
be a great artist, without being recognized?"

"I am not sure I want to be recognized," said Anna. "If I were
recognized I should have to spend half my day in doing dull things for
the state to please Sixth; whereas, now one half of the day is spent in
doing mechanical work at the store; the other half I have fresh for my
own work. I am going to ask to be assigned to a factory; for factory
work is still more mechanical than that of the store, and I can then be
more free to think of my own work."

All this was very strange and illuminating. A sculptor asking to do
factory work!

"But won't factory work be very hard and brutalizing?" I asked.

Anna looked at me, puzzled, and Ariston came to her rescue.

"I don't think," he said, "Anna appreciates your point of view. In your
day all factory work was done purely to make money; the factories were
uncomfortable places, and workmen had to work eight and ten hours a day.
Now that most of us have to do some factory work during the year,
inventiveness has set to work to make the factory comfortable, and as we
all of us have to work for the state and we no longer have to pay the
cost of competition, three or four hours a day are all that are
necessary to furnish the whole community with the necessaries and
comforts of life."

"And so I can give the rest of the day to sculpture," said Anna.

"Without any anxiety as to whether her sculpture will pay or not," added
Ariston.

"She just has to please herself," said the Mater comfortably.

"I am dreaming!" said I.

"No, you're not," said the Mater; and she pinched me till I started.

Everybody found this very funny--and so I took it as good-naturedly as I
could. But I made up my mind to have a little revenge, so I asked the
Mater quite loud as soon as they had finished laughing:

"Tell me, is Lydia the only Demetrian here?"

All looked shocked except Cleon, who laughed louder than ever, but Anna
looked at him severely and said:

"Cleon, I'm surprised."

I noticed, too, a smile curl Ariston's lip. The Mater put a warning
finger to her mouth and shook her head reproachfully.

"You see," I said, with no small satisfaction at the confusion I had
caused, "I am new to all these things; I have to distinguish fact from
fancy; the sacred from the profane."

"Of course," said Ariston, "although we have our domestic life in the
cities, apart, every family having its own separate home, even there we
jostle against one another a great deal more than you used in your time;
and here at the colony we are like one large family; we have, therefore,
to respect one another's opinions, and I might add--prejudices." He
bowed here at the Mater as though in deference to her cult of Demeter.
"We wouldn't be happy otherwise; and we have learned that after all, the
highest religion is the highest happiness. And so each of us respects
the religion of the other; in our heart of hearts we doubtless tax one
another with superstition, but we never admit it. Every cult,
therefore, is tolerated and receives the outward respect of all."

I could not help wondering whether this was true. Chairo clearly
regarded the cult of Demeter as dangerous and bad; how long then would
he tolerate it? Ariston divined my thought, for he added:

"Of course, I assume that the cult involves no danger to the state; or
to individual liberty."

But the brows of the women darkened and I felt we were on dangerous
ground, so I asked:

"And what are you going to do this afternoon?"

"We are going on with our haymaking."

"But I thought you worked only three or four hours a day?"

"Yes, that is all we owe the state; but we often ask to work all day for
a season in order to have the whole day to ourselves later. And as
harvesting must be done within a given space of time, it suits our
economy as well as our inclination to work all day at this season and
have October to ourselves. Most of us go hunting all of October, and in
November we meet again at the Eleusinian festival."

"Hunting?" I asked; "but where do you hunt?"

"Almost wherever we want, though, of course, this has to be arranged.
Since your time the state has replanted forests on all the high ground
least suited to agriculture, and game is carefully preserved there
during the whole year except October; which is our open season. Some
hunting is done, too, in November and December to suit the convenience
of those who have to work in October; but it is mostly done in October."

Lunch was by this time over and we adjourned to the veranda for coffee
and a cigar. There we were joined by Chairo and others, and gradually I
began to get some notion of the working of their Collectivist State. But
as their explanations left me in considerable bewilderment, and it was
only when I saw the system in actual operation that I understood it, I
shall not attempt to give an account of our conversations, but rather
describe the events that followed, not only for the interest of the
events themselves, but for the light they threw on the problems which
still remain unsolved for our race.

Lydia's good-natured reproach at my idleness kindled in me a desire to
remove the occasion of it, so I set myself to learn to mow, and in a
very few days my muscles accustomed themselves to the work. I soon
picked up a part in their favorite refrains and was able to join in
their music as well as their occupations. My ardor for Lydia cooled when
I felt its hopelessness; and I confess to an admiration for Chairo which
justified her love for him. Neither of them attempted to disguise their
desire to be alone with each other, and yet they never moved far from
the rest of us. Obviously, Lydia had not decided between Chairo and
Demeter.

The Pater told me that she need not decide for another year, though it
was likely that she would do so at the Eleusinian festival in November.
This festival, corresponding to our Thanksgiving Day, was held in honor
of Demeter and Persephone, the genii of fruitfulness, whether of the
earth or of men; and it was generally on some such occasion that vows
were taken or missions renounced.




CHAPTER V

IRENE


I spent the whole harvest season at Tyringham, and when it was over I
went with Chairo to New York in order to get some ocular understanding
of their factory system. It was there that I understood one of the
reasons that made Lydia hesitate, for I met there another woman--a
Demetrian also--whose history had been intimately interwoven with
Chairo's.

Lydia had decided, much to Chairo's disappointment, that she would spend
October in the Demetrian cloister attached to the temple. She said she
felt the need of seclusion. It was one of the functions of the
cloistered to attend the daily rite at the altar, and I often went at
the sacred hour to attend the service, doubtless drawn by the desire to
see Lydia engaged in her ministration. One afternoon, as I sat in the
shadow of a pillar, I was struck by the singular majesty of one of the
ministrants. She headed the procession of women who carried the
censers, and it was she who offered the incense at the altar.

I was living with Chairo and Ariston in bachelor quarters and described
the priestess to the latter on my return home. Ariston's face flushed as
he answered: "That must be Irene of Tania; she is a Demetrian and is the
mother of a boy by Chairo."

Noticing that my question had moved Ariston I was unwilling to push my
inquiries; but after a few moments of silence Ariston, who after his
laconic answer had lowered his eyes to the book he was reading, looked
up and seeing the question in my eyes that I had refrained from putting
into words, added:

"Her story is a sad one. She was selected by Demeter not on account of
any special gifts, but because of her splendid combination of qualities;
she was a type; she represented a standard it was useful to reproduce.
Chairo for similar reasons was selected as her bridegroom; she chose to
know him and became deeply enamored. How should she not? He remained
devoted to her until her boy was weaned and then did not renew his vows.
She bore his decision with dignity; indeed, so well did she disguise her
disappointment that for a long time no one knew whether it was Chairo
or herself who had decided to separate. But when Chairo began to show
his love for Lydia, Irene sickened; there was no apparent reason for it
and no acute disease; her appetite failed and she lost strength and
color."

Ariston paused, as though he were going over it all in his mind,
unwilling to give it utterance. Finally, he arose and walked to the
window, and after looking out a little, turned to me and said:

"The fact is, I was consumedly in love with her myself; her illness gave
me an excuse for being a great deal with her, and at last in a moment of
folly--for I might have guessed--I told her of my love. I shall never
forget her face when I did so: the sadness on it deepened; she held out
her hand to me and said: 'I am fond of you, Ariston--and am grateful!
But I love Chairo and shall never love anyone but him.'" Ariston's voice
became hoarse as he repeated Irene's words. But he paused, cleared his
throat, and went on.

"Since then she has made a great effort over herself. She was told that
she was allowing sorrow to unfit her for her duty to her child, and that
she was suffering from no malady beyond that most pernicious of all
maladies--the malady of the will. She collected herself, regained
control, and has now recovered her health--and all her beauty. Was
there ever beauty greater than her's?"

"She is very beautiful--more than beautiful--she filled me with a kind
of wonder. But tell me, won't she object to your having told me her
secret?"

"It is not a secret; these things are not regarded as secrets; we hold
it unworthy to blab of such things, but we never make an effort to
conceal them. Often since then Irene has spoken of Chairo in such a
manner as to leave no doubt as to her feelings for him; and yet she has
probably never in terms admitted it to anyone but me. In confiding to
you my love for her, she would not complain at my also confiding to you
her love for him."

Ariston's simplicity filled my heart with tenderness for him.

I went to him, put my hands on his shoulders, and said:

"I am sorry for you."

For a moment he seemed taken aback by this expression of sympathy; but
when our eyes met his were dimmed. In a moment, however, he had
recovered control, and said:

"It doesn't make any difference in one way. I see her still; and one of
these days she will be sorry for me and become my wife; she will then
end by loving me. I mean to work to this end; the hope of attaining all
this gives me courage."

It seemed all the worse to me that Ariston, with his gayety and humor,
should be in his heart so sad. And yet, if it was to be, better that it
should come to one who had a fund of joyousness within himself, on which
he could draw.

The next day Lydia sent word to Ariston that she would like to see him,
and Ariston suggested that I should go with him to the cloister. "I
shall, of course," he said, "wish to see Lydia alone for a little, but
you will have an opportunity of seeing the cloister and what they do
there."

The cloister of Demeter and all the institutions which clustered around
it were situated in the neighborhood of what was in my time Madison
Square. All the buildings between Twentieth Street and Thirty-fourth
Street, north and south, and between Sixth Avenue and Fourth Avenue,
east and west, had been cleared away; and upon the cleared space had
been constructed a building dedicated to the cult. The temple of
Demeter, closely resembling the Pantheon, was surrounded by a grove of
ilex trees. At a short distance from the temple and connected with it by
a columned arcade, was the cloister, built also of white marble, around
a court carpeted with lawn; this cloister was the dwelling place of the
priestesses of Demeter and of all those women who were either in retreat
or in novitiate. A short distance from the cloister was a large
building, similar to the other large buildings of which New York now
mainly consisted. Twenty stories in height, covering acres of ground and
built around a large open court, these buildings were no longer open to
the objection alleged against them in my time, owing to the fact that
they were now removed from one another by large spaces planted with
trees. This particular building was devoted to the education of youth,
and particularly all children who, for any reason, became what was
termed "children of the state." The building was so large that it
permitted of a running track within the court of four laps to the mile.
New York had been transformed by the construction of these enormous
buildings, each one of which constituted practically a city of itself.
Some of them, such as the one in which I was living with Ariston, were
devoted exclusively to bachelors and childless widowers; others were
entirely for unmarried women and childless widows; others, on the
contrary, were set aside for the use of families and consisted of
apartments of different sizes.

Although the inmates of these buildings constantly met after the
fulfillment of their daily task, every family had as separate a home as
in my day. Almost every building had a dramatic corps of its own, a
musical choir of its own, a football club, a tennis club, and other
athletic, amusement, and educational clubs of its own, and all these
clubs contributed to the amusement one of the other, each colony
contributing its share to the enjoyment of the whole community.

Lydia was in the hospital ward of the state children's building, where
at last we found her, for though in retreat she was by no means idle.
She was not discountenanced when she saw us; nor would she even allow me
to leave them, but told Ariston what she had to say simply and in a few
words. It was this: She had come to the cloister, she said, very largely
for the purpose of seeing Irene there; she took it for granted that
Irene's duties at the temple would bring them together. Lydia feared,
however, that Irene was avoiding her, and wanted Ariston to arrange a
meeting between them.

Ariston promised to do this, and then we all three walked through the
buildings, Lydia taking great pride in her share of the work there.

Ariston did not find it easy to arrange this meeting. Irene freely
confessed that she did not want to speak to Lydia at this moment; she
was unwilling to give her reasons, but we both easily guessed them.
Irene, however, did not refuse to see Lydia and promised to go to her on
the following day.

The following day was the first of the Eleusinian festival. In the daily
rite, incense was offered to the goddess as a token of sacrifice, but at
the Eleusinian festival there was added a note of thanksgiving to the
rite, which substituted perfumes and flowers in lieu of incense. It was
the privilege of Irene to select from among the ministrants the one who
was to hand her the gifts brought by the rest, and it was from the hand
of the chosen one that Irene took the gifts and laid them upon the
altar.

On this opening day Irene selected Lydia for this privilege, for she
meant this joint ministration at the altar to serve as prelude and
preparation for their meeting. The temple was crowded.

Lydia trembled a little as she followed Irene to the altar; a priest
stood on either side as the priestesses, postulants, and novices of the
Demetrian procession went up the steps to it. Arrived at the foot of the
altar they formed a group about it, dividing one-half on one side, the
other half on the other; between the altar and the body of the temple
stood only Irene and Lydia.

Lydia took the perfumes and handed them to Irene, who sprinkled them
first upon the altar, then upon the priests, and then toward the
congregation; then she took the flowers, some of them in vases, others
in wreaths, and handed them to Irene, who arranged them upon the altar;
when the last gift had been taken there Irene kneeled and Lydia kneeled
by her side. There was a deep silence in the temple. At this point in
the ritual there was a pause, during which it was the privilege of the
postulants and novices to have a prayer offered in case of special
anxiety. Irene, though unsolicited, at this moment offered the following
prayer:

     "Mother of Fruitfulness, to her who now asks for thy special grace,
     grant that she may neither accept thy mission hastily nor reject it
     without consideration; for thy glory, O Mother, is the glory of all
     thy people."

There was a word in this prayer which did not fail to strike the
attention of every worshipper in the temple that day. The words of the
ritual were "Grant that she may neither accept the mission
_unworthily_." Irene had substituted "hastily" for the word
"unworthily." She had paused at this word and given it special emphasis.
It was usual for the Demetrian procession to remain kneeling after the
service was over and the congregation dismissed; and it happened that
the procession and the priests left the temple, leaving Irene and Lydia
alone there. For Irene did not rise with the other Demetrians, and
Lydia, feeling that she had been chosen as ministrant for a purpose,
remained beside Irene. The two knelt alone in the temple, Irene praying
and Lydia waiting on her. At last Irene arose and Lydia also, and they
both walked out into the covered way.

Neither spoke until they were in the seclusion of the cloistered court.
Then Irene said: "You wanted to speak to me, Lydia."

"And you have been avoiding me," said Lydia.

"Yes," answered Irene. "You have a matter to decide regarding which you
have already guessed I am not altogether unconcerned."

Lydia lowered her voice as she said: "You still love Chairo?"

Irene answered in a voice still lower, but firm, "I do."

For a few minutes they paced the cloister. Lydia was trying to decide
how to confess her own secret, but she did not find the words. At last
Irene said:

"When the mission of Demeter was first tendered to me I was eighteen,
and, although I had often preferred certain of my playmates to others, I
had not known love. The honor of the mission made a great impression,
and as it slowly came upon me that I was chosen to make of myself a
sacrifice, the beauty of it filled my heart with happiness. It hardly
occurred to me possible to refuse the mission; I was absorbed by one
single desire--to make myself worthy of it. I thought very little about
the sacrifice itself. I had the legend of Eros and Psyche in my mind;
one day I should hear heavenly music and be approached as it were by an
unknown god. And passing from the pagan to the Christian myth, I saw the
Immaculate Conception of Murillo--that of the young maiden at the Prado
in Madrid--and I felt lifted into the ecstasy of a mystic motherhood. So
until I accepted the mission at the Eleusinian festival I lived in a
rapture--the days passing in the studies and ministrations of our
novitiate, the nights in dreamless sleep. But once the vows taken and
the bridal night fixed, there came upon me a revulsion as it were from
the outside and took control of my entire being so as to make me
understand what the ancients meant when they described certain persons
as 'possessed by an evil spirit.' The thought of the approaching crisis
was a pure horror to me. I lost my appetite and sleep; or, if I slept,
it was to dream a nightmare. Neither our priest nor priestess could
console me, the legend of Eros and Psyche became abominable, the
Immaculate Conception absurd, and, believe me, Lydia, nothing but pride
kept me to my word. It was a bad pride, the pride that could not look
forward to the humiliation of refusing a sacrifice I had once accepted.
That pride held me in a vice and accomplished what religion itself would
never have accomplished."

Irene paused--and Lydia passed her arm around Irene's waist as they
continued to pace the solitary cloister, whispering "Go on" in Irene's
ear.

"You know the rest," continued Irene. "The unknown god came to me in my
terror and converted my terror into love; and as I look back at it now I
am struck by two things: One, how unaccountable and unfounded the terror
was; the other, how little my pride would have sufficed to overcome it
had the terror been enforced by love."

Lydia looked at Irene askance.

"I mean," said Irene, "love for some one else!"

A sigh broke from Lydia. This was what she had been waiting for.

"And you think," said Lydia, "that a woman should not accept the mission
if she already loves?"

"I don't _think_ it; I _know_ it!"

Lydia felt a burden taken from her--the burden of doubt as well as the
burden of sacrifice. But suddenly she remembered that Irene in advising
the refusal of the mission was making a sacrifice of her own love, and
she said very low in Irene's ear:

"But, Irene, it's Chairo----"

"I know," answered Irene, "and this is all the greater reason for
refusing. Had you loved a lesser man you might have doubted the trueness
of your love, but having loved Chairo once you can never cease to love
him. I speak who know"; and Irene turned on Lydia a look of immortal
sorrow.

But the tumult of emotion in Lydia's heart could no longer be
restrained. Her own great love for Chairo, her inability to sacrifice
it, contrasted with the dignity of Irene's renunciation, started a
torrent of tears. She fell on Irene's neck and sobbed there. Irene's
strong heart beat against her's as they stood in close embrace under the
cloister, and calmed Lydia. She slowly disengaged herself, and looking
into Irene's face, said:

"And so you tell me to refuse the mission?"

"You cannot do otherwise."

Then Lydia kissed Irene and withdrew.

Lydia went to her chamber and sat in the window seat, looking across the
lawn to the temple of Demeter.

What did it all mean? She had felt the beauty of the mission; had glowed
at the thought of sacrifice; had taken pride in it. But such was the
strength of her love for Chairo that so long as he was in her mind the
mission seemed a sacrilege and her heart had responded to Irene's advice
with a bound of gratitude and delight. And yet now as she looked at the
white columns of the temple at which she would never again be worthy to
minister, an unutterable sadness came over her, as though she were
parting from the dearest and most precious thing in her existence.

She was unwilling to mingle that night with the other novices, and
retired without seeing them. The night was filled with conflicting
dreams and she woke up next morning with the guilty conviction that she
had committed a crime.




CHAPTER VI

NEAERA


Meanwhile I was becoming acquainted with Lydia's family and their
friends. They occupied a building extending from Fifth Avenue to Lenox
Avenue and from 125th Street to 130th Street. It had a large cloistered
court within which was a beautiful garden, consisting of a grove
inclosing a lawn bordered by flowers. It was usual for the inmates of
the building to meet for tea in the grove on the border of the lawn.
They divided themselves into groups, each with his own arrangement of
chairs, hammocks, and tables, which reminded me of some of our _fetes
champetres_. Within the grove were openings for such games as tennis--of
which they had an infinite variety--and also for stages on which they
rehearsed concerts and plays. The hours between five and seven were by
common consent surrendered to social amusements. At seven there was an
adjournment to the swimming bath and gymnasium with which every
building was provided. Eight was the usual hour for dinner, this meal
being usually reserved to the family; and the evening was spent very
much as with us, either at some theater or at home. The dinner party was
a thing almost unknown. In the first place, the principal meal, and the
only one which required much preparation, was in the middle of the day.
The evening meal at eight was never more than our high tea, the object
of this system being to lighten domestic service. In the second place,
the unmarried, who did not live with their families, generally dined
together in the common hall; and if members of a family wished to dine
at the common table they could at any time do so. Members of different
families frequently dined at one another's domestic table but upon terms
of intimacy; the conventional dinner party had become ridiculous, no one
having the means or feeling the necessity to make a display. The more
thrifty and the best managers, who were skillful at dressing food and
chose to apply their leisure to securing exquisite wines, often
entertained; but out of the hospitality that enjoys sharing good things
with others, rather than the pride which seeks to impress a neighbor by
ostentation of wealth.

I learned later that, although the conditions I have described still
prevailed, the state was passing out of the pure Collectivism with which
it started; that numerous factories had been started by private
enterprise, partly to supply things not supplied by the state, partly
because of dissatisfaction at state manufacture. Although private
enterprise could only count on voluntary labor during one-half of every
day it had already assumed vast proportions, had given rise to
considerable private wealth and was modifying the social conditions that
resulted from primitive Collectivism.

I also perceived that although many of the problems of life, such as
pauperism and prostitution, had been solved by the introduction of
Collectivism, nevertheless it had not brought that total disappearance
of ill feeling which prophets of Collectivism had promised us in my
time. On the contrary, I soon discovered that the inmates of every
building were split up into cliques as devoted to gossip as in our day,
the only difference being that they were determined by individual
preference and political divisions and not by poverty or wealth; perhaps
it might be said, that the absence of the wealth standard raised the
level of the social struggle, deciding it by personal excellence and
attractiveness, rather than along conventional lines. Every man and
woman knew that popularity--and even political influence--could be
secured only by these, and this knowledge checked many an angry word and
prompted many an act of kindness. Chaff, too, and even sallies of wit
with a dash of malice in them were borne with more good humor than in
our day; because we all of us love to laugh, and generally the more if
it is at the expense of a neighbor, provided only there be no intention
to wound; so that those who bore banter well were as popular as those
who best could set it going.

And yet there were some very foolish and malicious people among them. I
remember a foolish one particularly, Aunt Tiny they called her. She was
an aunt of Lydia and Cleon. Lydia First, as Lydia's mother was called,
had married twice. Her first husband had not known how to keep her love
and they had separated after her first child was weaned. Then she had
married a second time; her second husband was an excellent man but
inferior to her; he had not been able to impress his personality nor his
name upon the family, and so the children of the second marriage as well
as the child of the first had taken the name of the mother. The second
husband had died some years before the beginning of this story; but a
sister of his--Aunt Tiny--had remained attached to the family. She was
very small and plump; her hair was of a sickly yellow color and so thin
on the top of her head that the scalp was plainly visible; she wore a
perpetual smile of self-satisfaction which expressed the essential
feature of her character; it was impossible for her to entertain the
thought that she was plain or unattractive; her happiness depended, on
the contrary, upon the conviction that no one could resist her charms
did she only decide to exercise them. Age did not dull this keen
self-admiration; on the contrary, as the mirror told her that
lengthening teeth contributed little to an already meaningless mouth, or
wrinkles little to browless eyes, she felt the need of faith in herself
grow the more, and her efforts by seductive glances to elicit from
others the expression of regard so indispensable to her happiness
redoubled.

I first saw her in Lydia's drawing-room. I had found it empty on
entering, but presently there came into it a little body with a hand
stretched up, in her eagerness to be cordial, at the level of her head,
and behind it a smirking face bubbling over with the effort of maidenly
reserve to keep within bounds an overflowing heart.

"Welcome to New York!" she said. "I'm _so_ glad to see you!"

She lisped a little, and as she emphasized the word "_tho_" she shook
her head in a little confiding way, and the smirk deepened into a
nervous grin.

I had been so long in New York that I felt her welcome a little
superfluous, but it was part of the doctrine, which kept her happiness
alive, that New York had not completed a welcome to a stranger until it
had been expressed by her.

I was a little confused by her effusiveness, for I did not wish to
offend an aunt of Lydia's, and yet I felt it impossible to respond in
proper proportion to her advances.

"You must be Aunt Tiny," I said. "I have often heard of you."

I refrained from telling her what I had heard; how she had constituted
one of the favorite types for Ariston's mimicry; how, indeed, Ariston
had gone through the very performance I had just witnessed, in which the
uplifted hand, the smirk, and the lisping "_tho_" had lost nothing in
Ariston's art.

"Dear Lydia!" she exclaimed; and in the pronunciation of the "d" in
"dear" she put exaggerated significance and added a shake of her head.
She wore little corkscrew curls; every time she shook her head the curls
quivered with suppressed agitation.

"Do sit down," she added--with unnecessary emphasis in the "do."

There was nothing to be done but to resign myself; she drew up a chair
quite close to mine and settled down in it as an army might settle down
for a Trojan siege.

"Do tell me--I am dying to know--how did it happen and what do you think
of us? You don't look very different from us; you remind me of Chairo,
and he is thought _very_ handsome"--her head and curls shook again and
she giggled consciously--"_very, very_ handsome!" She giggled still more
and her eyes assumed a coy meaningfulness that increased my discomfort.

I have never been able to understand why this poor little
woman--perfectly innocent of any real ability to harm--should have been
able to cause me so much annoyance; but there was something in her
glance that made me wish to throw things at her.

"And Lydia--isn't Lydia beautiful?" There was something caressing in her
tone as she puckered up her lips and dwelt on the word "beautiful" that
exasperated me again.

"What _do_ you suppose she is going to do? _Is_ she going to accept the
mission or marry Chairo? She is a great flirt, you know; quite a
terrible flirt! But _I_ shouldn't talk of flirting!"--and she giggled
again the same suggestive giggle. "_We_ mustn't be hard on flirts, must
we?"

This appeal to me, as though I were already _particeps criminis_, would
have led me to protest, but she did not allow me the opportunity, for
she continued:

"But she has not been fair to Chairo; a girl ought to know when to make
up her mind"--she became very serious now--"_I_ always knew where to
stop; no man ever had the right to reproach _me_."

I at last could agree with her and I smiled approval. She seemed
delighted.

"I am sure we are going to be great friends, and you will never
misunderstand me, will you?"

I protested that I never would, and was relieved by the entrance of
Lydia First, who suggested our going to tea in the grove.

On our way there as we passed the main entrance a detachment of
militia--some dozen or so--entered, divided into two columns, and stood
at arms while between them passed a woman somewhat more heavily draped
than usual. I asked the meaning of this, and was told that she was a
Demetrian.

"But why the military escort?" asked I.

"Demetrians are always attended by an escort unless they particularly
desire to be spared the honor; many would avoid it but the cult
dispenses with it only as a special favor and for a limited time."

"I cannot see the use of it," lisped Aunt Tiny.

But Lydia First looked sadly at her, and turning to me, said:

"All of us do not understand the importance of upholding the dignity of
the cult. It is the very key-stone of social order and we cannot pay too
much honor to those by whose sacrifice it is preserved."

We were joined at the grove by quite a party; Ariston came later; and
among others I remarked a young girl with bright black eyes who was
described to me as a journalist. It took me some time to become
accustomed to their habit of describing a person's occupation as that
adopted for recreation. The work they did for the state was not regarded
as a matter of particular concern; it was the work they selected for
their leisure hours which marked their character and bent. Neaera had
been first attached to the official journal of the state; but she had
joined Chairo's political party and her work on the journal betrayed her
partisanship, so the state assigned her work in a factory, and she
devoted her leisure therefore to the paper edited by Chairo.

As leader of the opposition Chairo was, by an established tradition,
relieved of all work for the state. Every political party representing a
designated proportion of the voters of the state could elect a certain
number of representatives upon the plan of minority representation, and
the leaders of the opposition were by virtue of such election released
from working for the state. No law had enacted this, but it had become
the rule by the operation of the principle of _noblesse oblige_. The
representatives who neither belonged to the ministry nor were recognized
as leaders of the opposition did not enjoy this privilege, except during
the sessions of the legislature. But it was recognized that the minority
parties in opposition had as much work to do as the party in power, and
public opinion approved the plan which gave to the recognized leaders of
these parties the greatest opportunity possible for exercising
vigilance. The number of these leaders being small, there was no fear
that the plan would give rise to idleness on a scale to be feared, and
the temptation of the government to annoy leaders of the opposition by
the allotment to them of onerous tasks, or that of ascribing such
motives to the government, was thereby eliminated.

So Chairo had his whole time free for the organization of his so-called
Radical party, and he published, with the assistance of his supporters,
a paper entitled _Liberty_, to which Neaera devoted all her spare time.
She was uncommonly pretty, but like all these women, was capable of
sudden changes of face and manner which, until I became accustomed to
it, constantly surprised me; though, indeed, I remember having noticed
it in some of the women of my own day whom we described then as
"advanced." Neaera was already seated at a small tea table with a young
man called Balbus, also a member of the _Liberty_ staff, when we arrived
and was engaged in earnest conversation with him. She looked at me
scrutinizingly when I was presented to her, neither rising nor offering
me her hand, and acknowledged the presentation only by a little
conventional smile. There was something that seemed to me ill-bred in
her keeping her seat when Lydia First and the rest of us arrived; but I
soon discovered that Neaera was a person of no small importance, and
expected attention from others which she did not herself concede. Our
party seated itself about an adjoining table and presently Neaera called
to me:

"Xenos, are you going to lecture at our hall?"

I had been invited by the Pater to lecture on the social, political, and
economic conditions of the twentieth century. He had assumed that such a
lecture would tend to strengthen the conservative and collectivist
government; and Chairo had asked me to lecture at his hall in the hope,
on the contrary, that it could be made to serve his own cause. I had
been told that these lectures were usually followed by an open
discussion, and I knew that it was from this discussion that both
parties hoped to draw arguments to sustain their views respectively.
Fearing, therefore, to become involved in their political animosities I
had not yet decided whether I would lecture or not, so I answered:

"I am not sure; I feel a little the need of understanding your own
conditions better than I do, before undertaking to contrast them with
those of our day."

"We'll undertake to explain our conditions," she said, with an oblique
smile at Balbus, "if you'll let us."

"I could wish for no pleasanter instruction," I answered.

"But I see you have Aunt Tiny," retorted she maliciously.

"Oh, I haven't taken him in hand yet," said Aunt Tiny, taking the
suggestion _au grand serieux_, "but," she added encouragingly, "I will!
I will!"

Balbus threw his head back and laughed outrageously.

"What are you laughing at, you goose!" said Neaera.

"Let him laugh and enjoy himself," answered Aunt Tiny quickly, by way of
discarding the thought that there could be in his laughter anything
disobliging for herself.

And Balbus, taking the cue, said:

"We don't want Aunt Tiny to take you in hand for she is terribly
persuasive"--the poor little thing giggled delightedly--"and we want you
on our side."

"I don't mean to be on either side," I answered. "I am your guest, and,
as such, must confine myself to stating facts; you will have to draw
your own conclusions."

"That's right," said Neaera. "All we want are facts; the conclusion will
be clear enough. For example, in your time, every man could choose his
own occupation."

"Undoubtedly," answered I.

"And was not subjected to the humiliation of working in a factory
because he would not be convenient to the party in control!" flashed out
Neaera.

I nodded my head gravely in approval.

"Imagine any of the writers of your day compelled to work in a
factory--Emerson, Browning, Longfellow!--and Tennyson--imagine Tennyson
working in a factory!"

"Abominable!" responded Balbus. "Abominable and absurd!"

"Wasn't Burns a plough-boy?" said Ariston, "And Shakespeare a
play-actor?"

"A second-rate play-actor, too," echoed Lydia First, "and ended by
lending money at usurious interest!"

"He chose to be that," retorted Balbus. "What we are fighting for is the
right to choose our calling."

"But haven't you chosen yours?" asked I. "Isn't journalism of your
choosing?"

"But I have to work at the state factory at the bidding of the state,"
answered Balbus, "for half of every day."

I could not help comparing his lot with my own in Boston. I had never
enjoyed the practice of law; indeed, I had adopted the profession
because my father had a practice to hand down to me. And as I sat day
after day listening to the often fancied grievances of my clients, their
petty ambitions, narrow animosities, and, particularly in divorce cases,
to the nasty disputes of their domestic life, I often felt as though my
profession converted me into a sort of moral sewer into which every
client poured his contribution. Had I really been free when I chose to
devote my whole life to so pitiful a business!

"Some part of the day," I answered, thinking aloud, "must, I suppose, be
devoted to the securing of food and clothing. In the savage state--in
which some people contend liberty is most complete--the whole day is
practically devoted to it. In our state it was much the same, except
that a few were exempt because they made the many work for them. But
only a very few enjoyed the privilege of idleness--or shall we call it
'liberty'?"

"No," answered Neaera, "it is quite unnecessary to confuse things;
liberty is one thing and idleness is another. We want the liberty to
choose our work--not the license to refuse it."

"Liberty, then," said Ariston, "is _our_ license; and license is other
people's liberty!"

"Ingenious," retorted Neaera, "but not correct. Can't you see the
difference between choosing work and refusing it?"

"Certainly," answered Ariston. "The work I should _choose_ would be
lying on my back and 'thinking delicate thoughts,' like Hecate. The work
I should refuse would be factory work, like _you_."

Neaera did not like to find herself without an answer; so she covered
her defeat by taking a flower out of her bosom and throwing it at
Ariston, who, picking it up, kissed it and fastened it to a fold of his
chiton. Just then a strain, that reminded me of our negro melodies,
being wafted to us through the trees, Balbus exclaimed, "Now, Neaera, a
dance!"

She sprang up at once and began moving rhythmically to the music. It was
a strange and beautiful dance, that had in it some of the quaint
movement of a negro breakdown, and yet the gayety and grace of a Lydian
measure.

Balbus clapped his hands to accentuate the broken time, and we all
joined him; Neaera, stimulated by a murmur of applause, gave a
significance to her movements; danced up to Ariston, then flinging her
hands out at him in mock aversion, danced away again; next reversing her
step danced back to him, and, snatching the flower out of his chiton,
tripped triumphantly off, throwing her head up in elation; and to
increase Ariston's spite she made as though she would give it to Balbus;
but upon his holding out his hand for it, danced away from him, and
after raising hopes in others of our group by tentative movements in one
direction and another, finally fixed her bright eyes on me, danced
hither and thither as though uncertain, and then finally brought it to
me, and daintily pressing it to her lips, put it with both hands and a
pretty air of resolution into mine.




CHAPTER VII

A TRAGIC DENOUEMENT


Lydia could not disembarrass herself of the feeling of guilt with which
she awoke after her interview with Irene. She went to the temple for
help and knelt before the story of Demeter's sorrows, which was told in
sweeping frescoes on its walls. Chance so happened that she found
herself before that part of the story which described the goddess
forgetting her own sorrow in her devotion to the sick child of the
woodman in his hut. The artist, in the reaction from the Greek method of
treating this story which marked the narrative of Ovid as contrasted
with that of Homer, had dwelt upon the humble conditions of the poor hut
in which the light of Demeter's golden hair shone like a beneficent
aureole; and the nascent maternal instinct in Lydia vibrated to the
beauty of Demeter's task. Was she to renounce this highest standard of
maternity? What though she did love Chairo, was it not this very love
which the goddess bade her renounce? And was not the greater the love
the nobler the sacrifice?

She returned to the cloister weary with the struggle and strove to
forget it by devoting herself to the duties of the hospital. As she
cared for a sick child there, the fresco in the temple before which she
had that morning kneeled came back to her, and in the memory of that
hour and in the love that went out to the child she was nursing she
found consolation.

But perhaps she was most influenced by a certain capacity for passive
resistance in her, which unconsciously set her upon opposing the
inclination to yield, whether to her love for Chairo or to the pleading
of the priest. She could refuse to yield to both more easily than decide
to yield to either. And so, many days passed in the valley of indecision
before she was lifted out of it by an unexpected event.

A novice came to her one morning and bade her go to Irene, who had asked
for her. She had not seen Irene since the day they had spoken in the
cloister and she had wondered; but something in her had secretly been
satisfied. Irene would have challenged her to decide, and this was just
what she was not prepared to do.

As she followed the novice to Irene's rooms the novice had told her that
Irene was very ill and had moaned all night, begging for Lydia. Inquiry
elicited that Irene was threatened and perhaps was actually suffering
from congestion of the brain, and that she had been confined to her
rooms ever since she had ministered with Lydia in the temple. When Lydia
approached Irene's rooms a nurse stopped her by saying that Irene had
just fallen into a sleep--the first for a fortnight--and must not be
awakened. So Lydia remained in the sitting room, peeping occasionally
through the curtain that separated it from the room in which Irene
slept. For many hours Irene remained motionless, but at last as Lydia
stood holding aside the curtain, Irene opened her eyes; her face was
flushed; she sprang up in her bed, leaning on one hand, and glared at
Lydia with eyes that lacked discourse of reason. Then, suddenly, she
seemed to recognize her and a shriek rent the room and sent Lydia
staggering back against the nurse who stood behind her. Putting both her
hands over her eyes and ears Lydia dropped the curtain between herself
and the raving Irene; but no hand could keep her from hearing the words
that came through the curtain and pierced her brain:

"Go away! Go away!" shrieked Irene. "You have taken him from me! Stolen
him!"

Irene's shriek sounded to Lydia like the crack of doom. Then came the
words, "Stolen him," in the voice of the accusing angel--and as if it
were in answer to her own shrinking gesture of protest behind the
curtain, she heard Irene shriekingly repeat: "Stolen, yes, stolen!"

The nurse put Lydia into a chair and went to Irene; she found her risen
from the bed, and, shrouded in her curtain of blue-black hair, with
lunatic eyes, she was advancing slowly to the room where Lydia sat. When
Irene saw the nurse she said, in low grave accents, "Not you--not you!"
and then with menacing significance added, almost in a whisper, "The
other!"

The nurse tried to stop her and urge her back to her bed, but Irene
swept her away with a single movement of her arm, and moved to the
curtain which separated her from Lydia. But Lydia had by this time
recovered control of herself; she knew that a maniac was approaching and
she arose to await her. Irene pushed aside the curtain and confronted
Lydia standing in the middle of the room, motionless and rigid as though
changed to stone.

"Don't stand there, brazen-faced!" shrieked Irene. "Kneel--I say,
kneel!"

But Lydia stood her ground unflinchingly.

Then Irene burst into a furious laugh: "Great mother," she began
mockingly, and Lydia had to stand and listen while the maniac, with
lurid eyes and frantic gesture, recited the most sacred of the prayers
to Demeter--the prayer in which daily the vestal repeats her vows; but
as the prayer came to a close the light went out of Irene's eyes, the
fury out of her gesture; she slowly bent down upon her knees, and the
last words of the prayer were, in a voice sinking to a whisper,
addressed to Lydia as though she had been the goddess herself.

When Irene's voice died away it seemed as though the paroxysm was over;
she remained kneeling, with her head bowed upon her breast.

Then Lydia thought to lift her up, and bent down to her. Irene looked up
suddenly and shrieked as she recognized Lydia; she frantically waved her
hands before her face as though to rid her eyes of the spectacle, and
Lydia resumed her erect posture again.

By this time the nurse had returned to the room and tried to lead Irene
away. At first she succeeded, but suddenly Irene swept her away, and
confronted Lydia again:

"It hurts here," she said, clutching at her heart. "You'll know," she
added, and laughed harshly. "You'll know!" she repeated, and throwing up
her hands she clutched the air; then in an agony of paroxysm she
whispered again in a faltering voice, "You'll know"--and suddenly sank a
huddled heap upon the floor.

Lydia and the nurse ran to her and lifted her back upon the bed, and
from that moment Lydia did not leave her side. For many days life
hovered on the edge of Irene's lips, sometimes appearing to take flight
altogether, and again returning to reanimate the clay. And Lydia with
anguish in her heart bent over her night and day.

At last a crisis came and Irene fell into a profound and restful sleep;
the fever left her, and the pulse slowly recovered regularity and
strength; she seemed to recognize no one, and it was expected that for
some weeks she would probably remain unaware of those around her. Lydia
was advised to absent herself, lest to Irene, on recovering her reason,
the shock of seeing Lydia prove dangerous; and so, one evening as the
sun set, her strength shattered, she returned to her own rooms.

It happened that the following day was the ninth of the Eleusinian
festival, on which, if at all, those to whom the mission had been
tendered might accept or renounce it. Strange to say, with her waning
strength ebbed also the power of passive resistance which had kept Lydia
from decision; she surrendered not to the exercise of a controlling will
but to the suggesting influence of Irene's anguish; and on the next day
in the temple, to the rage of some and to the deep concern of all, in
the procession she wore the yellow veil which announced her as a bride
of Demeter.




CHAPTER VIII

HOW THE CULT WAS FOUNDED


Before the dramatic climax of the Eleusinian festival, the first
incident of which closed the last chapter, and the thrilling sequel of
which I shall have later to narrate, I had become, in spite of myself,
dragged deeper into the political arena than I wished.

In the first place I had not remained an unmoved spectator of Neaera's
dance. It was very new to me and altogether bewitching. She had a
faultless figure--or, if it had a fault, what it took away from the type
of ideal beauty it perhaps added to her feminine attractiveness. And so,
on returning with Ariston to our bachelor quarters she was the theme of
our conversation. Ariston had passed through a phase of _tendresse_ for
Neaera. Most of his generation who were of Neaera's class had
experienced her novitiate. Even Chairo had not returned unscathed. We
found him at the bath, and after a plunge into the bracing sea water we
lounged in our wraps on the couches prepared for that delightful moment.

Chairo declined to take Neaera seriously: "'Il y des gens,'" he said,
"'qui sont le luxe de la race.' She is a sprite created to awake
sentiments which must be satisfied by others; or, perhaps, remain
unsatisfied, and thus stimulate the brush of the painter and the pen of
the poet. She is an artist herself; utterly without conscience or heart;
but contributing greatly to the charm of life, and if not taken in too
heavy doses, altogether delightful."

Ariston was more severe! "She is a calculating little minx with her own
ends to serve; sometimes those ends are good and she secures a large
following by virtue of them; sometimes they are altogether bad, and then
she uses the following secured by her good ends to attain the bad. But
the worst of it is, she uses what she has of charm remorselessly and has
more than once been summoned before the priests of Demeter."

"That is no discredit," retorted Chairo. "The whole band of priests
ought to be consigned to the shades. They are an unmitigated curse----"

It was no easy matter to understand the working of the priestly system
but I gathered this from the discussion: According to Ariston, the cult
of Demeter was organized mainly through the influence of the women to
accomplish a reform in the marriage system and an intelligent,
scientific, and religious regulation of all sexual relations. The evils
to be remedied were threefold: To reconcile continence with love; to
retain the sanctity of marriage without imposing a life penalty for a
single innocent mistake; and to secure, without compulsion, the
improvement of the race.

In regard to the first of these three, it was recognized that no one
function in the human body contributed so much to the health or malady
of the race as this; and that free love, which had constituted one of
the planks of the Socialist party, would be fatal to the survival of the
community, in consequence of the physical and moral abuses to which
incontinence would give rise. The survival of the races which practised
continence over those which did not practise it was too clearly recorded
in history for its lesson to be neglected. Thus, the promiscuous savage
disappears before the savage who exercises the continence, however
slight, involved in metronymic institutions; these last disappear before
the races which exercise the higher degree of continence required by the
patriarchal or polygamous system; and these last succumb in the conflict
with those which practise the highest degree of continence, known in
our day under the name of monogamy. The lesson of history, then, is that
continence is essential to the progress of the race. The problem
consists in defining continence.

This could not be done by written laws; the attempt to regulate sexual
relations by law had broken down in my own day. Divorce was the attempt
of morality to rescue marriage from promiscuousness. The greatest
immorality prevailed where divorce was forbidden; in other words, the
institution of marriage became a screen for immorality; women took the
vow of marriage only the easier to break it, and even those who took it
with the sincere intention of being faithful to it, once the bond proved
intolerable, finding no moral escape from it adopted the only immoral
alternative. Divorce, therefore, was the only escape; and the easier
divorce became the more did the sanctity of marriage diminish; so that
at last it became impossible to decide which system resulted in more
demoralization--the one which maintaining a theoretically indissoluble
marriage resulted in secret promiscuousness, or the one which through
divorce by making marriage easily dissoluble opened the door wide to the
satisfaction of every caprice.

The only force that has ever seemed able to cope with this problem is
religion. Religion for centuries filled convents and monasteries with
men and women who under a mistaken morality offered love as a sacrifice
to God; religion has been the determining factor in the survival of
community life; that is to say, those communities which were animated by
religion--such as Shakers, and the conventual orders--have relatively
prospered, whereas those which were not animated by religion have
rapidly disappeared. Religion effectually preserves the chastity of
women, even outside of convents--as in Ireland--and has been the main
prop of such continence as survived during our time in the institution
of marriage. Religion, then, seemed to be the only human sentiment that
could determine continence, and to some religious institution,
therefore, it was thought this question must be referred.

What actually happened was this: The constitutional convention, which
put an end to the old order of things and brought in the new, was
controlled by the Socialist faction which believed in free love; a
provision, therefore, was inserted in the constitution forbidding all
laws on the subject of marriage. The same constitution, however,
provided that all adults over the age of twenty-five years who had
passed the necessary examinations--female as well as male--should have a
vote; and this last gave women a voice in political matters, which they
soon exercised with unexpected solidarity. They became a power in the
state, and threatened a modification of the constitution on the subject
of marriage, which would not only restore it to its original
inflexibility, but would impose penalties on both sexes for violation of
the marriage vow, such as the world had not up to that time seen or
dreamed of. The whole community was aghast at the conflict between the
sexes to which this question gave rise, and all the more so, that women
had become a fighting power that could no longer be disregarded. The
drill introduced into the schools for both sexes had demonstrated that
in marksmanship the average woman was quite equal to the average man,
and in ability to endure pain she proved altogether superior to him.
Already the licentiousness that prevailed in Louisiana and the adjacent
States between Louisiana and the Atlantic seaboard had given rise to a
civil war; and the women of the North had fought on the side of sexual
morality in a manner that opened the eyes of men to the existence of a
new and formidable power in the state. The issue upon which Louisiana
had undertaken to secede was upon the power of the federal Government
to enact penal laws against idleness. Obviously, idleness is, under a
Collectivist government, a most dangerous offence. Collectivism cannot
survive except upon the theory that all the members of the community
furnish their quota of work. It was supposed that this question could be
left to state legislation; and during a few generations every state did
secure enough work from its citizens to furnish the stipulated amount of
produce to the common store. But as dissoluteness prevailed in the
South, the Southern States fell more and more behind in their
contribution, and their failure was obviously due to the demoralization
which attended promiscuity in sexual relations. In the Northern States a
certain sense of personal dignity had created a public opinion on the
subject, that prevented free love from producing its worst results;
habits of industry, too, already existed there, and the creation of
state farm colonies--such as existed in our day in Holland--where the
unwilling were made to work prevented idleness from prevailing. In the
Southern States, the climate lent itself to all the abuses that attend
the surrender of self-control; the women never possessed the initiative
necessary for defense; the more the men abandoned themselves to
pleasure the less they were able either to govern or to tolerate
government; and, as a necessary consequence, there was a relaxation of
effort in every direction whether political, industrial, or domestic.

Much agitation prevailed in the rest of the Union over the condition of
the South; the women, particularly, fearing that the contagion would
spread, banded together to form purity leagues, with a view to meet the
evil by a system of social ostracism; but before the sexual issue came
to a head, the failure of the Southern States to furnish their quota to
the common store raised an economic issue easier to handle. The federal
Government passed a measure providing that in case any State failed to
furnish its quota, the President was to replace the elected governor by
one appointed by himself, and the whole penal administration was to pass
into federal hands, with power to the federal Government to create
pauper colonies and administer them. This aroused the ferocity of the
whole Southern people, and it was at this crisis that the women of the
North showed their prowess and initiative. They formed regiments which
rivaled those of the men in number, and even compared with them in
efficiency. The seceding States proved utterly unable to resist the
forces of the North, and were soon reduced to unconditional surrender.

In the period of reconstruction which followed this civil war, there
came to the front in Concord a woman of singular ability, who united the
mystic power of the founders of all religions with a personal beauty
that made of her the model of the great sculptor of that day--Phocas.
She early developed a faculty for divining thought, which secured for
her the wonder and awe of the entire neighborhood; and when upon
reaching maturity Phocas took her as his model for a statue of Demeter,
she entered into the spirit of his work and the spirit of his work
entered into her. The statue was his masterpiece, and was moved from
city to city until, coupled as it soon was with the personality of
Latona--for so the new priestess styled herself--it became the center of
a veritable cult. It drew the minds of men to the old Greek worship of
Fertility and Death in the personalities of Demeter and Persephone, so
that Fertility became dignified by Death, and Death disarmed by
Fertility--both merging, as it were, into a notion of immortality dear
to the hopes of men. The golden ear of corn that figured in the radiant
tresses of Demeter was shadowed by the death in the dark earth that
awaits it, and thus became to them an emblem of the annual resurrection
of the spring with its promise of a new after-life for man also.

To Latona the quality of the Greek myth most worthy of commemoration was
the spirit of sacrifice, which made of Demeter the Mater Dolorosa of the
ancient world. The mother seeking her ravished daughter through all the
kingdoms of the world, wresting her at last from the dark god--but for a
season only--and during the season of sorrow and solitude finding
compensation in caring for the sick child of a woodman in a forest
hut--here was a myth for which Latona could stand and through which she
could draw men to learn the lesson of progress and happiness through
sacrifice. The long hours she spent with Phocas in the study of these
things and the strength of his genius inspired her with a love for the
man as well as for his art; but as the thought that she was born to a
mission slowly dawned upon her she withdrew from his companionship, as,
indeed, from the companionship of her neighbors; performed the tasks she
owed the state with punctiliousness, and gathered about her a few women
who responded to her exalted ideas. Her love for Phocas, about which all
her earthly life centered, became to her the consummate sacrifice that
she could make to this new religion that was slowly taking shape in her.
She drew her votaries chiefly from the conventual order that had
gathered about the great cathedral on Morningside Heights; for the
Christian religion had experienced a great change since the revolution.
The Christian Church, released from the necessity of worldly
consideration of wealth, was now sustained by those only who sincerely
believed in her principles; and as soon as the city had been rebuilt to
suit the new conditions, those who had contributed their leisure to the
beautifying of the streets, turned their attention to the neglected
foundations on the Heights. They found in the new Christian spirit
something of the enthusiasm of the thirteenth century, and ridding the
creed of all save the principle of love which Christ had made the
foundation of His church, set themselves to embodying this principle
with its mystic consequences of sacrifice into gothic arch and
deep-stained glass, upon a scale and design heretofore never
accomplished. Abandoning the transitional style at first contemplated,
they adopted the general scheme of Chartres; but in lieu of the almost
discordant steeples of Chartres they substituted a design taken rather
from what is left of St. Jean, at Soissons, varying in height and
detail, but identical in style, stimulating wonder without shocking it.
The entrance porches of the western facade were inspired by Rheims and
Bourges, for there were five of them; the nave and choir towered to the
heights of Beauvais; and in the center rose the spire of Salisbury. The
lateral steeples flanking the north and south approaches were completed
with the same bewildering variety as on the west front, and the apse,
where rested the sanctuary, terminated the story with a cluster of
chapels that equaled, if not excelled, the _chevet_ of Le Mans; and so
every part of this tribute to Christ lifted itself up in adoration to
heaven like a flame. It rose from a green sward, and adjoining it, on
the north side, was a cloister that in the hush of its seclusion brought
back hallowed recollections of a bygone age.

It was from this cloister that Latona drew her following; for Latona,
with her thoughts turned to Eleusis and not to Galilee, conceived of a
worship which--though sorrow had a part in it--partook also of joy and
thanksgiving; sacrifice assuredly, but for the happiness of this world,
rather than for its mortification; an after life also, but an after life
for which preparation in this world might through the great
unselfishness of a few assure the happiness of the many. So that while
sacrifice for the sake of sacrifice had become the underlying principle
of the Christian religion, sacrifice for the making of joy became the
central idea of the new cult. And Latona, as indeed every mystic, the
more she dwelt upon these things, the more she grew to believe in her
mission; she began by dreaming dreams and ended by seeing visions; she
found that fasting and asceticism contributed to lengthen and strengthen
the moments when, losing consciousness of this world, she seemed to find
herself in direct communion with the divine. Her body soon showed the
traces of her spiritual life; she lost her beauty, but in the place of
it came a happiness so radiant that as she walked in the streets to her
allotted task it caused men and women to stand and wonder.

Meanwhile, her fame grew apace. But her personality was at first far
more impressive than her cult. The one was clear and striking, the other
vague and even obscure. At last on a day that afterward became the great
festival of the Demetrian calendar, Latona fell into an ecstasy that
lasted from the rising of the sun to the setting. She spent it on her
knees, in adoration; rigid and motionless, with her hands held out as
though upon a cross; none of those about her dared intrude; when
darkness came she swooned, and those watching lifted her to her couch.
For a week she lay as it were unconscious. Then she gathered her
votaries about her, and for the first time clearly enunciated her gospel
to the world. This done, a strange sickness came upon her, she was, as
it were, consumed by the fire of her inspiration; she wasted away, and
with her dying breath asked that what was left of her be placed in an
alembic, the gases into which her body passed be burned and the flame,
so lit, be never extinguished.

And it was done. The corpse of Latona gave birth to a new vestal fire
tended by new vestals, vowed no longer to barrenness, but to fertility
and sacrifice.

Her words were preserved by many of her votaries, but their stories
varied, as must indeed all such records vary in a world where minds
differ as much as inclinations. But the central idea remained and gave
rise to a cult which, unsupported by the state or by law, acquired
control over the minds of men, much as did the papacy in the eleventh
century. Some, as Ariston, believed it to be founded on reason, but
dreaded its power and increase; others, as Chairo, regarded it as an
unmitigated despotism. The issue was to be fought out--as, indeed, such
issues generally are--through the conflict between personal passions
and political beliefs, each using and abusing the other and out of both
emerging, after the appeasement to which every struggle eventually
tends, into a clearer idea and a popular verdict.

Meanwhile, the followers of Latona had built the temple of Demeter on
the old classic lines, and the solemn grove about the temple had not
detracted from the cathedral close, perhaps because each cult appealed
to different temperaments; perhaps, also, because many found that the
two cults appealed to the different sides of character and to the
different demands of each.

The cult, though unsupported by any law or statute, had acquired
extraordinary power in the state. It undertook to summon before its
council all persons charged with offenses against Demeter--Demeter
standing amongst other things for the purity of domestic life. If the
party summoned refused to appear before the council, the matter was
referred to the attorney general, who, under the influence of the cult,
prosecuted the charge in the criminal courts with the utmost severity;
and whether the person accused was convicted or not, a refusal to appear
before the council resulted in a social ostracism so complete that few
ventured to incur it. If, on the other hand, the party charged appeared
before the council, the case was likely to be treated with leniency, and
conviction seldom resulted in more than the imposing of some penitential
task. Should it, however, appear that the charge was more serious than
could be dealt with by the cult, it was referred to the attorney
general.

The cult was careful to abstain from any act or teaching which could
tend to encourage idolatry or superstition; thus, the statue of Latona,
which had first inspired the Demetrian idea, was not placed in the
temple where it might be thought properly to belong, but in the
cloister. The temptation to worship it, therefore, was removed. Indeed,
it was for the purpose of making the worship of a graven image the more
impossible that Latona had asked that her body be consumed and the flame
from it perpetuated on the altar. A flame could remain an emblem; it
could hardly itself, in our day, ever become an object of worship.

In this way was kept alive the idea that the divine, wherever else it
might also exist, exists certainly within each and every one of us, and
that by the cultivation of love and usefulness it can be made to prosper
and increase in us. For men, the active scope of usefulness lay chiefly
in the field of labor; for women, chiefly in the field of
fertility--neither field excluding the other--but rather both including
all. And so women contributed labor, in so far as labor did not impair
their essential function of motherhood, and men contributed continence
as the highest male duty in the field of fertility.

The duties of the male, therefore, were grouped into two classes, active
and passive; the former were for the most part exercised in willingness
to labor for the commonwealth without too grasping a regard for reward;
the latter consisted mainly in continence, carefully itself
distinguished from abstention--for it was a cardinal maxim of the
Demetrian faith--as old, indeed, as the days of Aristotle--that human
happiness could but be attained by conditions that permitted the due
exercise of _all_ human functions, each according to its laws. Science
therefore came to the rescue of human happiness by determining the laws
of human functions; and art completed its work by creating an
environment which to the highest degree possible enabled every man and
woman to exercise all their functions with wisdom, moderation, and
delight, to the best happiness of all and the ultimate advancement of
the race.

And although the future of the race was forever present to the priests
of the cult, yet were men and women not expected to make any great
sacrifice beyond the immediate generations that succeeded them, the
institution of marriage being carefully maintained because it kept alive
the care of the parent, each for its own offspring, thus providing for
every generation the protection furnished by paternal pride and maternal
solicitude.

The purity of the domestic hearth, its reverential care of offspring,
the lifting of motherhood out of the irreligion of caprice into the
religion of sacrifice; the exercise in all these matters of the highest,
because the most difficult, of all the virtues--moderation--these are
the special concerns of the Demetrian cult.




CHAPTER IX

HOW IT MIGHT BE UNDERMINED


The discussion of these matters by Ariston and Chairo elicited an old
story which was to receive its sequel in my time and it is important,
therefore, to narrate it.

It seems that the year before my arrival among them Neaera had
encouraged the addresses of a certain Harmes--a brother of Anna of Ann,
and that Harmes was accused by her of having become so ungovernable that
it had given rise to a public prosecution. Harmes had been convicted and
confined to a farm colony, where he was still serving his term. The
incident had given rise to much vexation of spirit, for many felt that
Harmes was more sinned against than sinning.

The account Ariston gave of the matter was greatly to Neaera's
discredit; according to him, Neaera originally had designs on Chairo,
and he seemed willing enough to enjoy her society. Much thrown together,
both by politics and journalism, it was not unnatural that their
companionship should often extend itself into their hours of leisure.
But Chairo was far too clear-sighted not to perceive the capriciousness
and duplicity of his collaborator, and Neaera wasted her efforts upon
him.

Of this, however, she could never be convinced and she returned to the
charge over and over again. During one of the interludes she happened to
meet Harmes and took a liking to the freshness of his youth; he became
infatuated with her, and one evening he visited her at her apartment on
an occasion when Neaera's mother was absent and she was therefore alone.
It seems the young couple remained together so late into the evening
that Neaera on the following day, fearing that a rumor of the visit
might reach Chairo to her disadvantage, complained of Harmes's violence.
Harmes, with a devotion to Neaera of which Ariston did not think her
worthy, refused to defend himself against the charge. It is probable the
matter would have dropped had not some enemies of Neaera taken the
matter up, believing that, if prosecuted, Harmes would not refuse to
vindicate himself and injure Neaera.

The charge had therefore been brought first before the Demetrian
council; and the council, on the same theory as that adopted by Neaera's
enemies, and convinced that Neaera would be punished, put the matter
into the hands of the attorney general. Harmes's silence, however, only
served to vindicate Neaera and convict himself; and the community was
still undecided as to which was the culprit and which the victim.

I had an opportunity myself of forming an opinion on the subject, for
shortly after my conversation with Ariston and Chairo I received an
intimation from Neaera that she would like to see me at the office of
the _Liberty_ staff, and upon going there at the hour mentioned I found
Neaera busily engaged writing in a room that suggested other things than
labor; for it was furnished with more luxury than was usual, and there
were richly upholstered divans in it laden with piles of eiderdown
pillows; the air, too, was heavy with perfume.

Neaera, however, received me with her brow contracted; she was working
at an editorial, and I evidently interrupted the flow of her thought;
but the frown very soon passed away from her forehead, and standing up a
little impatiently she flung her pen down on the table.

"There!" she said, "I am glad you have come; I need rest."

She threw herself on the divan, and I could not help thinking as she
lay there that the Greek dress was less open to criticism in the fields
and open air than in a closed room. In town the longer mantle was worn
which came down to the feet; but the clinging drapery displayed the
lines of the figure in a manner to which I felt uncomfortably
unaccustomed.

"I sent for you," said she, "to speak to you seriously about this
lecture you are to give. Your views may have an important bearing and
you ought to know the evils of our system if you are to compare them
with the old."

"I am impressed," answered I, "with certain things--such as the absence
of poverty, the relative well-being of all; and this seems to me so
important that I am inclined perhaps to undervalue the price you pay for
them----"

"The price--that is it--the terrible price; we are subjected to a
despotism such as you in your times would not for a moment have
endured."

"Undoubtedly--in one sense of the word--despotism. But Ariston claims
that this despotism, though absolute, applies to only a few hours in the
day, whereas in our time there was for the mass as great a despotism
that controlled their entire existence. Some time must be given to the
securing of food, clothing, and shelter. The present government claims
to furnish this to all with less labor and less compulsion than under
our system."

We discussed this question at some length, but I could not help thinking
that some other thought was preoccupying Neaera's mind, and presently
she stretched her arms over her head and said, "Oh, I am tired of it
all!"--then turning on her side she laid her head upon a bare arm, and
looking at me, smiled.

It was impossible to mistake her gesture or her smile; it told me that
she had not called me to speak of serious things at all; it beckoned me
to her side on the divan, and I almost felt myself unconsciously
responding to her invitation. But I was aware of danger and refrained.
Nevertheless, I was curious to know whether I was accusing her
wrongfully, and I said:

"The thing that puzzles me most about you all is--" I hesitated
intentionally, and she helped me.

"What is it?"

"I don't know how to say it."

"Bashful?"

"A little."

"Can I guess?"

"I think you can."

"We are all as much puzzled about it as you."

"And yet I am told you pride yourselves on your good behavior."

"Some do"--she paused a little, took a flower from a vase by her side
and bit the stalk; she held the flower in her mouth a minute, looked at
me again, half closing her eyes; but I remained seated where I was.
Finding I remained unresponsive, she went on:

"We have all the faults that come from too great intimacy between men
and women. The men get so accustomed to the women that romance is dead.
We tend to become a vast family of brothers and sisters. Fortunately we
travel and receive travelers, and so the dreadful monotony is relieved.
_You_ are a traveler, you see."

I understood now why I was favored, but still I remained seated where I
was.

Perceiving that I was either stupid or resolute she jumped up from the
divan and came to where I sat. She was short, and as she stood by me,
her face was near mine and only a little above it. She had the flower in
her hand now, and handing it to me, said:

"Put it in my hair."

I did so. She lowered her head to help me. I thought the time had come
to effect an escape.

"Did you ever hear," said I, "the Eastern story of the man with the
staff, the cock, and the pot?"

"No, tell it me."

"There was once upon a time a man climbing a mountain. He had a pot hung
on his arm and a cock in his hand. In the other hand he held a staff. On
his way he perceived a young girl and invited her to climb the mountain
with him. With some little show of reluctance she consented, but as they
approached the last house on the mountainside she paused and said:

"'I shall go no farther with you!'

"'Why not?' asked he.

"'Because I fear that when we have gone beyond reach of these houses you
will kiss me.'

"'Nay,' answered the man, 'do you not see that both hands are
encumbered? In one hand I hold my staff; in the other is a cock and a
pot hangs upon my arm.'

"The maiden smiled and they pursued their way. But when they were gone
well up on their way the maiden stopped again and said:

"'I shall go no farther with you.'

"'Why not?' asked he.

"'Because I fear that now we are beyond reach of the houses, you will
stick your staff in the ground; you will put your cock under your pot,
and you will kiss me.'

"And the man did then at once stick his staff in the ground; he put the
cock under the pot and kissed her--as indeed all along she meant he
should."

She gradually edged away from me as I proceeded with my story, until at
last she sank on the divan again.

When I had finished she said, "That is a very old story, and if you will
permit me I shall get to work again."

I bowed very low and left her, feeling more humiliated than Neaera; and
I wondered why it was that virtue, in the presence of vice, sometimes
seems cheap and even ridiculous.




CHAPTER X

AN UNEXPECTED SOLUTION


Chairo had been kept informed of what was happening to Lydia until the
last day of the Eleusinian festival, and he believed that all danger of
losing her was over. The appearance of Lydia, therefore, in the
procession wearing the yellow veil was all the more a stupefying
surprise to him. I was standing with him and Ariston as the procession
passed, and was looking with eager and delighted interest at the
gracefully draped figures that succeeded one another to the sound of
music, which, with a subtle combination of majesty and grace, combined
the plain chant of the Catholic liturgy with the lighter fugues of Bach,
for in and out of great chords there ran intermingling strains of many
voices, very light and delicate.

The procession was headed by girls and boys, selected for their perfect
wholesomeness, who carried flowers and scattered them; they were dressed
in the old Greek _chiton_ which, fastened only above the shoulder,
betrayed every movement of their lithe young bodies, as, swaying with
the rhythm of the sower casting his seed, they threw their offerings
first on one side and then on the other. The governor of the State, the
mayor of the city, the commander of the militia, and their respective
cabinets and staffs followed, respectively arrayed in the insignia of
their office; the other cults also were represented; those of Jupiter
robed in purple; those of Asclepius; those of Dionysus, and others. In
striking contrast with these came next the novices and the nuns, swathed
closely and heavily, even the head being concealed within a fold of
drapery. The procession entered from the cloister, and on approaching
the altar where was kept burning the vestal flame, it divided so as to
allow the high priest and his acolytes to pass up between. The high
priest was followed by the choir, and after the choir walked those who
had accepted the mission.

It was upon these that the curiosity and impatience of the congregation
centered; it sometimes happened that there were none; in such case the
procession was closed by the Demetrians--that is to say, all who had
already accepted the mission and completed it. On this occasion a single
figure was seen to enter the portal, covered with the yellow veil and
so draped as to conceal her features. The head, however, more usually
bowed, was erect. For a sensible period of suspense it was impossible to
tell who it was that had assumed the yellow shroud; but presently those
nearest to her had discovered Lydia, and her name passed in an awful
whisper to where we stood. The name once pronounced, there could no
longer be mistake; Lydia alone of all the postulants could so hold
herself: _Vera incessu patuit dea_. I felt a clutch at my arm, and,
turning, saw the face of Chairo blanched and hard; but I was too
absorbed in the procession to take long heed of him; I saw the
procession close, and followed the ritual with breathless interest till
the congregation was dismissed, unaware that Chairo had already slipped
away from me and out of the temple.

As Ariston and I walked back to our lodging I asked what Chairo would
do. Ariston answered that he feared trouble. We were both deeply
affected, for even Ariston, votary of Demeter though he was, could not
but feel as I did, that there was something in the choice of Lydia
strange and portentous. We discussed it in low voices, and for many days
little else was spoken of. Meanwhile, anxiety regarding the action of
Chairo redoubled for he had disappeared. It was well known that the
Demetrian council was taking steps, but no one knew what the steps were,
and a sense of impending calamity weighed upon us all.

From the moment Lydia had decided to accept the mission, there seemed to
grow in her a strength that was not her own. She rose from the couch, on
which she had thrown herself upon leaving Irene, without a symptom of
her old irresolution; she stood without sense of fatigue while the
yellow shroud was so draped about her as to hide her face to the utmost
possible, for though she knew she could not escape recognition an
instinct in her set her upon the attempt to do so; and when in the
procession she entered the portals of the temple, a glow moved up from
her heart to her head that deeply flushed her countenance as she heard
the whisper "Lydia" grow from mouth to mouth into an almost angry
protestation. Nevertheless, she felt sure now that she was right; it was
easier as well as nobler to make the sacrifice than to yield. She walked
firmly, with head erect, until she sank upon her knees before the altar,
and the choir's triumphant processional was subdued in low responses to
the chant of the high priest.

At last he turned to her and lifted his hands in mute suggestion that
she should bring her tribute to the goddess. A Demetrian presented her
the flint which was to symbolize the strength of her sacrifice; the
priest gave her the steel that symbolized its cruelty; and striking one
against the other she lit a spark that added a new flame to the altar.
This was the irrevocable act. A great sigh mingled with many sobs broke
from those present in the temple; but _her_ eyes remained dry, and at
the close of the ceremony she walked back to the cloister as firmly as
she had left it.

But once returned, there came upon her the inevitable reaction; she
discovered that the strength which had come upon her suddenly could no
less suddenly forsake her; she threw herself upon a couch and asked to
be left alone. As the door closed upon her attendant she was half
astonished, half afraid to find sobs invade her and tears gush from her
eyes. What did it all mean? Had she a will of her own, or was she merely
the arena upon which instincts, half of heredity, half of education,
were fighting out their battle, independently of her? She seemed to have
become a mere spectator of it; alas, she must also be its victim. She
lay sobbing until the sobs slowly died away, leaving her exhausted, and
at last she slept like a tired child.

The next morning she awoke as weak as though she had had a long fever.
It was the custom for novices to be removed to a temple in an island off
the coast as soon as they accepted the mission--for, from the day of
acceptance they were secluded--living with Demetrians only, under
conditions which, though compatible with their mission were,
nevertheless, most conducive to gayety and health. But Lydia was too
weak to be moved; and she lay in her bed night and day, eating little,
sleeping little, very quiet. There was hardly room in her thoughts for
regret; she had committed the irrevocable act and now she must resign
herself; her body had been exhausted by the struggle and cried for rest;
and rest was given her.

Slowly her strength returned, and she was beginning to feel the time had
come to go to the island cloister when, suddenly in the middle of the
night, she was aware that some one had pushed aside the curtain at her
door and was standing in her room. She had neither seen nor heard
anything, but she was conscious of a presence, and a guilty delight in
her heart told her, however incredible, that it was--Chairo.

She raised herself in her bed on her hand and found herself seized in a
passionate embrace.

"For the love of God!" she heard his voice whisper to her, "don't
resist"; and compelling arms lifted her off her couch, wrapped the heavy
coverings upon it about her, and carried her like a child out of the
room. She was taken into the cloister; her head was covered, and she did
not wish to see. The weakness which had racked her bones and from which
she had barely recovered came back to her, but now how different! For it
wrapped a lethargy about her to which it was an ecstasy to surrender; no
pain now; no sorrow; not even contrition. She was in the arms of Chairo,
and it had happened without a sign from her; almost against her will;
without her consent. For a season, at any rate, Lydia surrendered
herself to the sweet self-deception that this had really all happened
without her consent. Deep in her heart, however, was the conviction that
she had strength enough to resist had she chosen; that a single cry
would have sufficed to thwart a desperate stratagem. She was a little
alarmed to find that this conviction could remain unshaken, and that,
nevertheless, there was a song of thanksgiving in her heart that the
strength of resistance had remained unused and the cry remained
unuttered.

Chairo's strong arms were about her as he silently hurried through the
cloister. Lydia heard other hurrying steps besides his; he had clearly
joined confederates; she was soon put into a carriage and whirled away
from the temple.




CHAPTER XI

THE PLOT THICKENS


The first news I had of the carrying off of Lydia was from Ariston. I
was just going down to breakfast when he abruptly entered the sitting
room we shared, and exclaimed: "Lydia has disappeared!"

To my inquiries he answered that the gate of the cloister had been
forced, and the janitor bound and gagged. Obviously several men were
involved, for traces of many steps were clearly visible--all shod;
Lydia's sandals and cothurni were still in her room: she had,
apparently, been lifted off her bed in the bed clothes; the absence of
all trace of bare feet indicated that Lydia had not put foot to ground.
Probably she had been gagged also, as no cry had been heard; everything
seemed to indicate that she had been carried off against her will. The
Demetrian council was swearing in special constables and had called upon
the state authorities for help to capture the intruders; on the other
hand, Balbus and others were collecting their followers, and armed
conflict was feared.

Ariston was in great perplexity; all his convictions were on the side of
order; but friendship made it impossible for him to join Chairo's
enemies. After an animated discussion we decided that he should go to
the council and endeavor to obtain a hearing, in the hope of persuading
the council to abandon the effort either to recover Lydia or punish
Chairo. Ariston begged me to go to Lydia First, explain to her the steps
he was taking, and put myself at her disposal should she have a message
to send him.

I hurried to Lydia First's apartment and found Cleon there. With flushed
face Cleon announced that Chairo and his sister had been captured; that
they were probably at that moment before the magistrate; that he had
rushed home to tell his mother, and that she was preparing to go to her
daughter.

Presently Lydia First entered the room; the events of the night had not
impaired the dignity of her manner but had deepened the lines in her
already timeworn countenance. She bade me seek Ariston, of whose
knowledge of legal procedure she felt in need, and hurry him to the
court where Lydia and Chairo were being examined.

Prisoners were entitled to counsel if they asked for it; but the
innocent seldom availed themselves of the privilege. The examination
might, therefore, be actually then proceeding unless either Chairo or
Lydia demanded an adjournment. It little suited the temperament of
Chairo to seek counsel, and the consciousness of innocence would prevent
Lydia from doing so. I hastened, therefore, with all speed and found
Ariston waiting to be introduced into the council chamber. He was still
ignorant of the capture. We hurried to the courthouse and Ariston, who
had no right to appear except at the request of one of the prisoners,
sent in a line both to Chairo and Lydia urging them to demand an
adjournment. The examination had already commenced. Both Chairo and
Lydia, however, asked that Ariston be admitted, and I was admitted with
him.

Lydia First was there and had already urged both Chairo and Lydia to ask
for counsel, and both had refused. The examination was not a public one,
only relations and friends or counsel being admitted; when, however,
Ariston's message was received, he was by general consent admitted, and
he immediately addressed the examining magistrate. He pointed out that
Chairo, being a member of the state legislature, enjoyed immunity from
arrest unless captured _in flagrante delicto_, and that Lydia was not
charged with any offense; both ought, therefore, to be released without
examination. A priest, however, who appeared for the Demetrian council
persisted that their doors had been forced, their sanctuary violated, a
vestal carried off without her consent, and Chairo found in the act of
flight with her; the priest maintained that this constituted arrest _in
flagrante delicto_. Chairo reminded the magistrate that he had not
sought to escape examination, but added that, mindful of the magnitude
of the issue involved in the case, he felt it ought to be fought out in
the political rather than the judicial arena, and that he was indebted
to Ariston for having reminded the court of an immunity which would
transfer the question from the courts to the legislature.

The magistrate decided that he would not proceed with the examination,
but in view of the seriousness of the offense he would hold Chairo until
the question whether legislative immunity applied to his case could be
decided by a full court.

Chairo was, therefore, confined in the house of detention, and Lydia was
restored to her mother.

We at once sought admittance to Chairo, and found him impatiently pacing
the room where he was confined.

"There was treachery," he exclaimed. "My carriage had been tampered
with; it broke down within a mile of the cloister. I am trying to think
who can have been guilty of it."

He continued pacing the room and neither of us was disposed to speak.
Suddenly he turned to Ariston:

"But I have not thanked you; I should have made a mistake had you not
interfered; and I know you belong to the other side." He put his hand
out to Ariston and they shook hands warmly.

"You may be of immense service at this moment," he continued, "just
because you belong to the government party. I was prepared for violence,
and Balbus is now collecting our friends; but this treachery makes me
doubtful of success; only some half dozen knew of my plan; the loyalty
of every one of them seems essential to us, and one of them is
a--traitor."

"You should be thankful that treachery prevented your resort to
violence," answered Ariston. "You have secured what must be the matter
of most importance to you: Lydia is restored to her home; she is removed
from the cloister and is given time for reflection. This you could
doubtless not have brought about in any other manner than by the plan
you adopted. But had you escaped there would have been only one
alternative; now the question can be settled without the shedding of
blood."

"But I have lost Lydia!" exclaimed Chairo, with haggard eyes.

"Not lost," said Ariston. "I have yet to learn just what part Lydia has
played in the matter. Did she consent?"

Chairo, who was still pacing the room, suddenly stopped and faced us; he
put out both hands deprecatingly and seemed about to answer, but
arrested himself and resumed his walk. Then very slowly he said:

"What do you mean by consent? Can she be said to have consented when,
under an influence that paralyzed her will she paid her tribute at the
altar? The question we have to bring before the state is not whether
Lydia consented to the cult or to me, but whether the influence
exercised by the cult is a wholesome influence or a damnable one."

"If you want this issue to be fairly presented," said Ariston, "don't
allow your case to be prejudiced by violence. Send orders at once to
Balbus bidding him abandon this gathering together of your followers.
The mere fact that he is preparing for violence will distort the issue,
and any attempt at rescue will prevent a calm and fair discussion of it
altogether."

"You are right," said Chairo. He took out a note book and made as though
he would write, but checking himself, he said: "I must put nothing on
paper," and turning to me asked: "Won't you go to Balbus at once and
explain to him that violence now would be a mistake? He would hardly
accept such a message from Ariston, who is known to be on the government
side; but from you it will seem less open to suspicion. Tell him if he
doubts you to come and see me, and hear my views from my own lips."

On leaving Ariston I was aware that a large force of special constables,
bearing the badge of Demeter--a sheaf of wheat--were gathered about the
House of Detention. I hurried to the office of _Liberty_ and found a
crowd there, through which it was difficult to penetrate. Obviously
something unusual was happening. I should never have got through to
Balbus had I not been able to state that I was the bearer of a message
from Chairo. This, however, opened every door to me, and soon I found
myself in a room where Balbus was engaged in giving rapid instructions
to a number of men waiting their turn to be received. Neaera was there
also, sitting at a side table, busily writing. As soon as I began giving
my message to Balbus, Neaera rose and came toward us. She was serious
and there was a slight frown upon her face. When I had finished, Balbus
turned to her and she answered:

"It is too late. Measures have already been taken. Besides, Chairo's
messenger"--and as she looked at me squarely in the face her brow
darkened--"is not accredited."

I explained the situation as Chairo had stated it and urged Balbus to go
himself to the House of Detention. But Neaera said quickly:

"If Balbus were to leave this office unescorted he would be arrested. He
is already compromised. Moreover, we cannot take our orders from a
prisoner."

"The House of Detention is strongly guarded," said I.

"And we are strongly armed," answered Neaera.

I felt that it was useless further to insist and proposed to retire, but
Neaera whispered a word in Balbus's ear, and he said to me, "I think I
shall ask you to stay with us a little while."

"I shall not stay with you except compelled to do so by actual
violence," I answered, with no slight indignation.

"Then we shall have to use violence," answered Balbus.

In a moment I was seized, bound, gagged, and hurried into an adjoining
room where I was tied to a chair and a band was fastened about my eyes.
In this uncomfortable position I remained for some hours.




CHAPTER XII

NEAERA'S IDEA OF DIPLOMACY


At first I was aware from a hum of voices that others remained in the
room with me; but after some time the hum ceased; next I heard the noise
of artillery not far off. It did not last long, but I recognized the
tearing screech of machine guns. When it was over, believing myself to
be alone, I sought to extricate myself from my bonds. The cords,
however, were so tightly fastened about my wrists that the skin was
torn, and every effort I made to loosen them occasioned acute pain. I
must have uttered a low cry, for I heard a voice I knew well say
mockingly:

"Does it hurt?" And the gag was removed from my mouth.

"I thought I was alone," answered I.

"We _are_ alone--quite alone," said Neaera. "Why don't you stick your
staff in the ground and put the cock under the pot?"

She was so close to me that I could feel her breath on my cheek.

"Release my hands and I will," answered I.

"Thank you, indeed! Do you think I have had you bound for that!"

"I do not flatter myself; but as you are disposed to chat, tell me what
is happening."

She took the band off my eyes and looked bewitching as she mocked me:

"Nothing is happening; and if there were something happening how should
I know it?"

"Who tampered with Chairo's carriage?"

I asked the question suddenly in the hope that I should take her by
surprise.

"What carriage?" asked she with an air of innocence, but the color
mounting to her cheek betrayed her.

"Chairo says some one treacherously tampered with his carriage."

"Nonsense," answered Neaera. "The accident to Chairo's carriage is not
the first carriage accident in the world. Chairo is thinking only of
himself."

"How so?"

"He wants Lydia; we want liberty."

My suspicions were confirmed.

"I suppose Chairo has made love to you--as have all the rest."

The dimple deepened in Neaera's cheek, but she busied herself
unfastening the cords that bound my wrist.

"I am going to give you liberty at any rate," she said. "For I want you
to do something for me."

"Stick my staff in the ground and put----"

"No; I have forgiven you; it is something very different from that."

My hands were free now, and I stretched them out in exquisite relief.

"Are you a little grateful?"

"Of course, I am grateful--but I am still more curious to know what you
want me to do for you."

"It is very simple." She showed me a sheet of paper upon which was some
typewriting. "I want you to sign this."

I put out my hand to take the paper and read the writing.

"Oh, no!" she cried, putting the paper behind her back. "I want you to
sign without reading." She looked at me with a smile which she meant to
be irresistible; and, assuredly, to most men the temptation would have
been great--for the smile said plainly that acquiescence would have its
full reward.

I had unloosed the cords about my feet and was standing in front of her
irresolute; not wishing to make an enemy of her by a downright refusal,
for I did not know what confederates might be within call and yet half
inclined to snatch at the paper and read it in spite of her. But I
suspected that she meant me to do this; that she shrewdly guessed a
playful struggle between us would increase the temptation to yield to
her beyond powers of resistance.

As I stood smiling at her, for the grace of her posture--leaning a
little forward and holding the paper behind her back--disarmed me, she
suddenly waved the paper before me as though inviting me to snatch at
it.

I cannot imagine what would have been the result of this little comedy
had not a distant hum from the street suddenly attracted our attention.
She ran to the window, threw up the sash and, taking up a field glass
that was lying on the table, looked down the street. One glance was
sufficient; when she turned back into the room her face was blanched;
every trace of coquetry had disappeared; she barely looked at me and
hurried from the room. She locked the door upon me as she left. I went
to the window, but on my way there picked up the paper she had offered
for my signature and which she had dropped as she picked up the field
glass. I was too much interested in what was happening in the street to
read it then. I thrust it in my wallet and saw without the help of the
field glass that the street was full of armed men hurrying to the
_Liberty_ building, and upon their shoulders the badge of Demeter--a
golden sheaf on a blue ground--was clearly visible. Obviously, Balbus's
attempt at rescue had failed, and instead of bringing back Chairo in
triumph to the _Liberty_ office, it was the special constables who were
crowding to its doors. Soon I heard a rush of steps up the stairs; there
was a fumbling at the door; the door was forced and there rushed in a
number of men, one of whom recognized me. I explained the message from
Chairo which I had brought to the office of _Liberty_ and, without
mentioning names, added that I had been bound and imprisoned there. The
cords in the room and the abrasions on my wrists confirmed my story. I
promised to hold myself at the disposal of the investigating magistrate
and was given my liberty.

The offices in which I had been confined were searched and every paper
in them carefully collected. I betook myself at once to the chambers I
shared with Ariston, but on the way I took the paper I had been asked to
sign out of my pocket and read it.


     "DEAR CHAIRO:

     "Balbus has confined, bound, and gagged me. I owe my freedom now to
     Neaera, who will see that this reaches you.

"VERB. SAP."

Not a word in this interesting document was literally false; and yet it
was obvious how falsely Neaera meant to use it.




CHAPTER XIII

NEAERA MAKES NEW ARRANGEMENTS


Neaera left the building in which were the _Liberty_ offices by an
entrance on a street other than that which she had seen threatened by
the constables, and hurriedly considered where she could find a certain
Masters to whom she had always determined to fly in case of defeat.
Masters was a man whose career had greatly contributed to the particular
phase of Collectivism which I found prevailing in the New England
States. Originally the state had undertaken to monopolize manufacture,
and for a long period--over a hundred years--had succeeded in giving
general satisfaction. During the first century of Collectivist existence
so much time was spent in transforming cities that there was no leisure
for individual enterprise; indeed, during this period the majority
worked as hard as they had ever worked under the competitive regime; for
although a half-day's labor only was exacted to earn a full share in the
national income, another half-day's labor was asked and freely given to
make those changes in the cities and towns which were obviously
necessary under the new regime. And a certain exchange of occupation had
taken place, masons and carpenters working all day at their respective
trades, while others worked all day at theirs, extra wages being paid
for extra work; these extra wages were applicable to the purchase of
luxuries, the most laborious and the most thrifty thus reaping the
reward of their labor and thrift. When, however, the cities, towns, and
villages had been so converted as to furnish practically equivalent
lodging to all, under conditions that were wholesome and with due regard
to the demand for the beautiful that, though expressed in my time only
by a few, is in fact latent in us all, there was no longer the same
imperious call for extra labor on the part of the state, and the leisure
enjoyed in consequence was soon employed in a manner not anticipated by
socialists of my day. And Masters had been the first to inaugurate the
new system. It happened in this way:

The state had exposed itself to much criticism as to many of the things
furnished by its factories, and when Masters was still a youth of
twenty-five years, the complaint on this subject became so wide-spread
that he set himself to correcting the evil. He was employed in a
wall-paper factory, and wall paper was just one of the articles that had
given rise to the greatest dissatisfaction; so one day when an artistic
friend was mocking at the work the state factory turned out, Masters
suggested that they should get a few others to join them in setting up a
factory of their own. The experiment was looked upon at first as a piece
of innocent child's play, but when some hundred young men and women
actually succeeded in producing a wall paper so preferable to that
manufactured by the state that theirs alone was purchased and the state
had to shut down some of the government mills, the question of the right
of individuals to compete with the state was brought up in the
legislature, and the issue became sufficiently serious to drive Masters
into politics for the purpose of defending what came to be known as
"Liberty of Industry."

The principal argument made against this so-called liberty of industry
was that Masters and his fellow-workers were becoming rich. The money
that formerly was paid to the state factory was now paid to them, and
thus the accumulation of wealth became possible which it was the
principal object of Collectivism to prevent. In vain Masters argued
that they applied their leisure to the manufacture of wall paper not in
order to become rich, but in order to have paper that suited their
taste; that the real value of Collectivism was to provide all men with
the necessaries of life so as not to subject poor men to a few rich;
that so long as the state provided necessaries against a stipulated
amount of labor it was quite immaterial whether a few chose by voluntary
labor to provide an article that was needed and incidentally increase
their own wealth; and that such voluntary labor benefited all. The cry
against accumulation was too powerful to be silenced, and Masters felt
some concession must be made to it; so he consented to a proposition
that all state money should have purchasing power only during a period
of two years; under this system hoarding or accumulation would be
prevented, because every two years the money so hoarded would become
valueless--all money being paper and bearing a date, gold being used
only by the state in foreign trade.

This compromise was adopted, and the effect of it was to give an immense
impulse to private industry. While the question was being discussed few
were willing to embark on an enterprise that might be declared illegal
and be appropriated by the state. As soon, however, as private
enterprise was indirectly sanctioned by the passage of this law it
became clear that any individual might devote his leisure to the
production of anything not satisfactorily produced by the state, and the
result of this new departure was considerable, for it not only greatly
increased the total wealth of the community but it stimulated the state
to maintain and improve standards of manufacture, contributing all that
is good in competition without tolerating those features of oppression
and pauperism which had made competition so evil in our day.

And Masters became a great man in the community; for not only was he
regarded as the author of private enterprise, but possessing the powers
of organization and the judgment in selecting his fellow-workers
essential to success, he soon became the head of numerous enterprises;
and although he was unable at first to accumulate wealth in the shape of
money, he did accumulate it in the shape of products of manufacture.
Moreover, the fact that he could not accumulate it in the shape of money
and that there was a limit to his power to accumulate it in the shape of
products of manufacture, drove him to distribute his earnings among his
neighbors with a prodigality so lavish that, possessing a naturally
generous heart and an attractive manner, he became a man of
enormous--some men said undue--influence in the state. Recently, too,
owing to the establishment of a banking system, accumulation in private
money became possible.

Masters had never married. His interests were so various and engrossing
that he had not felt the need of a wife. Nor was he ever at a loss for a
companion; the bath was his club; and a short evening--for he was an
early riser--was comfortably spent in the society of those with whom he
dined at the common table. But he was by no means insensible to feminine
charm, and Neaera had not ineffectually aired her graces for his
benefit.

Neaera had often decided that Masters was the best match in the country
and had schemed to secure him; but she was aware of his sagacity and had
so far refrained from any overture that might alienate him. She had,
however, never failed to improve an opportunity for displaying her
attractions in his presence, taking care to keep religiously away from
him at such times lest he should guess the plot that lay at the bottom
of all her performances. On more serious occasions she had had long and
confidential conversations with him, chiefly on political subjects; she
had indeed been one of his political lieutenants, but when engaged in
politics she had studiously avoided the slightest symptoms of coquetry.
Masters, on the contrary, had often allowed her to feel that he would
gladly have made their relations more intimate. She had seen the big
fish rise--a little lazily, it is true--at her cast; she had felt that
upon a sufficiently dramatic occasion she could land him; and now it
satisfied her sense of antithesis that so signal a defeat as that of her
party that day might be converted by her skill into an individual
victory.

It was about four in the afternoon--the hour when Masters should be
leaving his office for his apartment. If she walked in the direction of
the latter he would possibly overtake her; she did not wish to go to
him; she preferred to meet him accidentally; it would not do for him to
imagine she had counted on him. She walked, therefore, slowly and with a
pretty air of concern along the street he usually took, wondering
whether she would be favored by fortune before the arrest which she knew
was being prepared for her. She felt that the events of the day would be
likely to change the daily routine, even of so methodical a man as
Masters, and was beginning to fear she would have to take refuge in his
apartment, when she heard a step overtaking her, and to her great relief
his big voice said:

"Why, Neaera, what are you doing here? I thought you were in the thick
of it?"

Neaera looked up shyly and then down again.

"I am afraid all is over," she said very low.

"And where are you going?"

"I don't know."

"Is there any fear of arrest?"

Neaera brewed up a tear and cast an appealing glance at him. She was one
of those fortunate and dangerous women who could summon a tear to her
eye without at the same time bringing blood to her nose and eyelids.

"You must step into my apartment until we can take precautions," he
said.

"I'm afraid I'll compromise you."

"Compromise _me_!" exclaimed Masters, "never in the world! And as for
_you_, I'll send for your mother."

"Will you, indeed?" said Neaera, edging a little closer to him; but she
did not mean that he should do this.

They were at his door then; and touching her lightly on the elbow he
guided her past the porter's lodge, up the staircase and into his
rooms.

Masters bade her sit down and tell him how matters stood. Neaera took
care that her version of the story should, by keeping herself in the
shade, throw the whole responsibility on Chairo and Balbus. Masters,
however, plied her with questions which she parried with skill. At last
Masters exclaimed:

"But you are blameless in the matter; they cannot mean to arrest you;
and if they do, you will be immediately released."

"I am afraid," answered Neaera, "you are inclined to believe others as
frank and generous as yourself."

"I don't understand," said Masters, a little uncomfortable under the
flattery implied in Neaera's words--for he liked neither flattery nor
those who used it.

"I have not lived very long," said she, "but I have lived long enough to
know that failure brings discord between the best of friends. I have
believed that we could effect our reforms best through constitutional
measures; and the very fact that I have been right will unite them all
against me now. Of course I have done a great deal of the
writing--generally at the dictation of others"; Neaera, as she said
this, congratulated herself on having utilized the absence of all from
the offices except herself in destroying every shred of paper that could
compromise her, and even fabricating some that would exonerate her. She
paused a little, and then went on: "I don't even know who has survived
the disaster; some of them I could trust to the end; but others are
capable of any treachery. And then mamma"--Neaera's chin twitched a
little--"mamma does not know how far I am involved in the matter--and
she is so alone----"

And here Neaera's grief became uncontrollable; she jumped up from her
chair and burst into a flood of tears. As she stood there, her face in
her hands and her soft and rounded figure convulsed by sobs, compassion
filled the heart of Masters; all his nascent fondness for her suddenly
burst into a flame; he went to her, took her by the shoulders, and said:

"Don't cry, Neaera; I am very fond of you; it hurts me to see you cry;
tell me about it; let me help you; I can help you and I will--if you
will let me."

As he ejaculated these sentences he gently pressed her shoulders to give
emphasis to them; and Neaera yielded to his pressure, so that at the end
she was very close to him and her bowed head rested against his breast.

When Masters felt the pressure of her head against him, a rush of love
for her passed beyond his control. Looking down at her he observed the
delicate whorl of a small ear like a pink shell and a soft neck so
inviting that, bending his own head, he pressed his lips against it.

Neaera burst away from him and threw herself upon a chair.

"Masters, Masters," she said reproachfully, "you should not have done
that!"

He had often heard stories of Neaera to her disadvantage and at that
culminating moment her reproach became a conviction in him that those
stories were false. She was looking at him now with tearful eyes wide
open; Masters felt contrite; he had taken advantage of her at a time
when she was at his mercy; of a woman, too, whose talents and
conspicuousness had made of her a mark for envy and malice; she was down
now; anyone could hurl a stone at her; she had thrown herself upon his
generosity, and he had responded by insulting her. There was only one
reparation he could make, and that reparation his heart was already
urging him to make.

He threw himself on one knee by the side of Neaera as she sat, put both
his arms on her lap, and looking straight into her reproachful eyes,
said:

"Only one thing could have justified it; I love you, Neaera; have indeed
loved you long----"

Neaera bowed her head and said nothing.

There was a long pause. But Neaera allowed him to remain there, very
close to her, with his arms upon her lap. Then Masters moved his head
slowly nearer to her until it rested on her bosom. And Neaera folded her
soft round arms about his neck.




CHAPTER XIV

"I CONSENTED"


When I reached our chambers I found them empty. At the bath, however,
though Ariston was not there I learned the incidents of the day. Almost
immediately after my interview with Balbus he had headed the attempt to
rescue Chairo; it had been carefully planned, for exactly at three
o'clock there converged upon the House of Detention from every side no
less than six different lines of attack, which took shape only within a
few yards of the house itself, so as to avoid conflicts at points other
than the one upon which the attack was concentrated. But the cult had
taken precautions. Some machine guns had been put into position and
Balbus and his followers were blown out of existence, leaving a mass of
wounded men and but few unwounded survivors. The constables that day
sworn in had at once repaired to the _Liberty_ offices where I had met
them. Ariston was doubtless at that moment conferring with Chairo and
the authorities as to how far this act of violence was to affect the
procedure.

Ariston did not appear at our chambers until after midnight, and he was
then so weary that I did not press him for details. He informed me,
however, that my message to Balbus would probably constitute the pivotal
fact in his defense of Chairo; that Balbus was shot to pieces; and that
the question whether Chairo was to be kept in confinement would probably
be heard within a week.

The next morning Ariston had a long conference with me over the whole
situation, which was a complicated one. The courts, though fair, were
undoubtedly strongly Demetrian in their tendencies, and Ariston did not
believe they would set Chairo at liberty; but he felt it his duty as
Chairo's counsel to make the effort. Ariston did not conceal from me,
however, his conviction that Chairo was insisting on the effort being
made in order to use the decision of the courts on the political arena,
where the issue must be ultimately decided. He, Ariston, doubted the
wisdom of his appearing as Chairo's counsel under the circumstances, for
on the political issue Ariston would fight Chairo to a finish, and
Chairo knew this. But Chairo had declined to release Ariston. He claimed
that Ariston having offered to act for him, and he having accepted the
offer, Ariston was no longer free to withdraw except for better reason
than he could give.

The importance of the testimony I could give, and the fact that I was a
lawyer admitted me into all the conferences that were held. Chairo's
case was to come up on habeas corpus, and I undertook to prepare an
affidavit as to the message sent through me by Chairo to Balbus. In the
preparation of this affidavit I was confronted with the question whether
it was necessary to introduce Neaera's name; there was in me a strong
repugnance to doing so. If by involving Neaera I could save an innocent
man I should have been guilty in omitting her intervention in my
interview with Balbus; but the only person that to my mind could be
affected by her intervention was Balbus, and Balbus was dead. Nor would
his memory gain much by testimony that would tend to prove that the
incriminating act was done at the bidding of a woman.

Three days after Chairo's arrest I was still hesitating over this
question when I received a message from Masters asking for an interview.
I readily accorded one, and we met in Chairo's chambers which were put
at my disposal during his detention.

Masters opened the conversation by telling me confidentially that Neaera
had promised to marry him, and that he was naturally, therefore, anxious
to exonerate her from responsibility as regarded the rash attempt at
rescue. I let him speak preferring to hold my tongue till I learned the
story Neaera had told him. He admitted that Neaera had taken a strong
stand in favor of Chairo and all that Chairo stood for, but explained
the enormous difference between constitutional opposition and appeal to
force. Neaera had told him that no word of writing that she could
remember--save such as might have been written at the dictation of
others--could possibly compromise her, but that she did not know how far
some of the survivors might not seek to escape punishment by throwing
responsibility on her. Neaera had particularly asked Masters to see me
and find out how far this was to be feared.

I recognized the fine work of our astute friend in the story told by
Masters, and anxious to know just how far Masters was committed to
Neaera, I asked:

"When do you expect to be married?"

Masters lowered his voice as he answered:

"Confidentially, we are already married. I found her wandering aimlessly
about the street expecting arrest; so I took her at once to Washington
and married her there. I have left her among friends in a neighboring
state till this matter blows over."

The marriage having taken place, there was clearly no duty upon me to
enlighten Masters, so I said to him:

"Assure Neaera from me that I shall keep you informed of how matters
move and particularly if any witness testifies in a manner to compromise
her. No such testimony has been given as yet to my knowledge--but then,
none of the survivors of the rescue party have yet been examined."

I worded my answer in a manner to reassure Neaera so far as I myself was
concerned and Masters left me satisfied. _He_ deserved sympathy, at any
rate.

Ariston was extremely busy endeavoring to obtain affidavits from the
survivors as to Chairo's non-complicity in the attack, and asked me
therefore to see Lydia and explain to her the importance of silence at
this juncture. Accordingly I went to see her and found Aunt Tiny in a
state of great excitement. Lydia was ill and her mother was with her.
Aunt Tiny wanted to take the whole matter on her shoulders.

"Lydia will do just what I tell her to do," assured Aunt Tiny, nodding
her curls gravely at me.

"I think I ought to see Lydia myself if it can be managed," I answered.

"But she is so ill." Her lisp was childish and I unconsciously smiled a
little. My smile put the little woman in quite a flutter.

"I'll manage it," she said confidently. "You'll see; I'll manage it";
and the busy little body, in spite of her age, tripped out of the room.

Presently she returned radiant. "It's all right," she said. "You can
come; I told you I should manage it"; and she showed me to Lydia's room.

Lydia was lying on a couch with a shawl thrown over her knees; but the
chiton loosely fastened over her right shoulder showed all the beauty of
her bare arm. Very different, indeed, did she look from the girl I awoke
to find bending over me on the hill on Tyringham. The warm color of the
sun had left her skin, which was now white and extremely delicate. Her
head, then strong and erect, now leaned upon a pillow so gently that it
seemed

    "A petal of blown roses on the grass."

Her mother was standing as I entered and pushed a chair for me by
Lydia's side. I sat upon it, and taking Lydia's hand, kissed it. A tear
came in her eye at this act of sympathy and she said:

"I am glad you have come to see me."

"I would not have dared to come," said I, "were it not that I have to
warn you in Chairo's interest and in your own to say nothing for the
present."

"Say nothing!" she exclaimed, raising her head erect. "What! does Chairo
wish me to say nothing when I can by a word exonerate him altogether!"

"How so?" I asked.

"I consented," she said. "If the charge is that he carried me away it
must fall when I say that I consented."

"Lydia!" exclaimed her mother. "Do be careful! Our friend here can be
depended on; but such an admission might be used against you; it may be
no crime in law to have consented, but in the cult you will be disgraced
forever."

"Then may I be disgraced," said Lydia despondingly. "I did consent; and
Chairo must not suffer the odium of having carried me off against my
will. Besides," added she, erect again, "I am not ashamed of having
consented. I love Chairo. I am ready to declare it before the world. I
was wrong when I accepted the mission and those around me should have
known it. Not you, mother," added Lydia, as she saw her mother start,
"not you, but the priests--they should have known it--they did know
it--and yet they allowed me to accept the mission, loving Chairo."

Lydia put out her arms to her mother, who bent over and kissed her.

"The time will doubtless come," said I, "when you will be able to
vindicate Chairo. But at this moment I think, perhaps, it may be wiser
to say nothing. Chairo does not wish to be released. He wants the court
to decide against him. Such a decision will constitute a grievance which
will to his mind strengthen his cause with the people. I don't know," I
added, smiling, "whether I am altogether on his side upon all the
political issues he stands for; but I am on your side, Lydia. I want you
to be happy, and much depends upon the circumstances under which your
declaration is made. At this moment it may be wiser to keep silence;
they cannot compel you to testify until Chairo is tried, and he proposes
to postpone the trial, if he can, until the legislature meets. Masters
is taking a vigorous stand in favor of Chairo, and he may carry a
sufficient number of votes to constitute a radical majority. Up to the
present time Masters has voted upon most issues with the government."

Lydia listened to me with her long blue-gray eyes fixed on mine. It was
a luxury to look into them. I thought I was no longer in love with her,
but there was a fascination in those eyes to which it was a delight
innocently to surrender.

"Chairo is doubtless right," she said, "and you too."

"The priests will probably ask you for a declaration; you are ill enough
to make illness an excuse for keeping out of the case altogether. My
advice is not to antagonize them at this moment. You can let them know
that you propose to make no affidavit whatever, neither on one side nor
on the other--at present."




CHAPTER XV

THE HIGH PRIEST OF DEMETER


The affidavits read before the court by both sides brought out the facts
of the case in a manner to leave no doubt in a reasonable mind as to
Chairo's guilt. It was true that the person who actually forced the gate
of the cloister and overpowered the janitor remained unknown, but Chairo
had been arrested in the act of flight and in the company of Lydia,
whose capture was the only possible motive for the act. Then, too, on
the evening that preceded the capture a typewritten message had been
received by the high priest of the cult informing him that Chairo's
carriage would that night break down upon a certain road, and that the
cult would have an interest in watching the event. Clearly, therefore,
the capture had been planned by Chairo. Then, too, for every affidavit
read by Ariston to prove that the attack on the House of Detention had
been arranged as well as executed by Balbus a dozen affidavits were read
by the other side showing the preparations for violence that had been
made by Chairo prior to the carrying off of Lydia. The only question
that the court had to decide was, whether Chairo's immunity from
imprisonment as a member of the legislature applied to his case;
obviously he was an accessory to the crime after as well as before the
fact, even though he were not guilty of the crime itself; and he was
caught in the very act of carrying out the object for which the crime
was committed--that is to say, the placing of Lydia beyond the reach of
the cult. But Ariston argued that there was no obligation upon the court
to hold Chairo; the matter under the peculiar conditions which presented
themselves was practically left to their discretion; and he appealed to
them to liberate Chairo lest he should use his imprisonment as an
argument before the higher tribunal of public opinion, to which the
question must ultimately be referred. The court adjourned without
rendering a decision; and it was later arranged that Lydia be removed
from New York and Chairo released on parole not to leave the city limits
until the trial of his case.

Lydia, therefore, was taken to the Pater's farm at Tyringham; and I
gladly accepted an invitation to join the party there, which included
Ariston, Anna of Ann, the high priest of the cult, and a few others.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was much interested to learn there the particular form of Collectivism
which prevailed in the country districts of New England. The land, it is
true, technically belonged to the state, but the enjoyment of it had
never been taken from those farmers who were able and willing to pay to
the state the amount of produce exacted by it. Assessors periodically
visited every district to determine what crops the land was best fitted
to produce, and what amount of the designated crop the occupying farmer
should pay the state. The farmer was not bound to grow the particular
crop designated, unless a shortage in a preceding year obliged the state
to require a quota of the designated crop. He was free to furnish the
state some other crop according to a fixed scale, the bushel of wheat
constituting the standard--a bushel of wheat being equivalent to so much
hay, so many pounds of potatoes, etc. But the farmer generally grew
enough of the particular crop designated to furnish the amount required.
The state suggested the best rotation of crops and the farmer was left a
certain choice.

The working of the system was to eliminate all the incapable farmers,
leaving upon the land only the most capable. The eliminated were put to
other employments. The surviving fit generally enjoyed an enviable
existence; for the exactions of the state were not exorbitant, and it
had become a rule that no farmer should ever be deprived of a farm so
long as he paid the state contribution; thus, the state contribution was
practically nothing more nor less than a state tax.

The Pater had succeeded to his farm from his father, who himself had
succeeded to his, so that the same land had remained in the same family
since our day. There was no limitation of hours of work on the farm. The
occupation was regarded as so desirable that farm laborers willingly
gave their whole time; for during the summer their life was enlivened by
the arrival of city dwellers, who occupied the colony buildings adjacent
in the neighborhood; and in the depth of the winter, when the sporting
season was over, every farm laborer had his two or three months in town.
The owner of the farm, for so every farmer was still called, supported
his own laborers and supplied them with money for their annual city
vacation. His own wants, including the wages paid to the laborer, were
supplied by the sale to the state of the farm produce over and above
that required by the state for rent. The essential Collectivist feature
of the system consisted in the fact that no man was obliged by the
necessity of earning wages to work upon a farm. He could always refuse
to work for a farmer by taking work from the state. Only those farmers
who knew how to make their farms not only prosperous but attractive,
could secure laborers, the relation between a farmer and his hands being
that of man to man rather than that of employer to employee. Indeed, it
was the security every man and woman had of employment by the state that
had caused pauperism and prostitution to disappear; and with them the
dependence of one class upon another. In agriculture, as in manufacture,
employment of one individual by another was a matter of inclination, not
of compulsion; and under these circumstances every employer took care to
make his employment agreeable and to share equitably with his
fellow-workers the product of their joint labors.

As soon as the hearing of habeas corpus proceedings were concluded and
Lydia was transported to Tyringham she rapidly gained health. Chairo
wrote to her daily the progress of his preparations for the legislature,
which was to meet in a few days. He was assured of Masters's support in
favor of a bill of amnesty to all engaged in the carrying off of Lydia
and the attack on the House of Detention, and this bill would constitute
the first business to be brought before the Assembly. An identical bill
would be introduced in the Senate, and efforts were being made at once
to secure the approval of the governor.

Meanwhile we often had leisure at Tyringham for the discussion of the
Demetrian cult, which had given rise to so great a tumult. The day that
the high priest received intelligence of the proposed amnesty bill I
asked him his views regarding it.

The high priest was a tall, aged man, closely shaven--as indeed were all
the priests--and very slow and distinct in his way of speaking. Though
he occupied the highest function in the cult he was by no means its
controlling will. On the contrary, the Demetrian council was composed
almost entirely of women, that is to say, priestesses; but it had passed
into a tradition that in order to avoid too great animosity on the part
of the men, these last should be permitted a representation on the
council and the presiding officer and the head of the cult should be a
man.

The high priest answered my question with his usual deliberation and
care:

"I cannot tell you what my own views regarding this matter are; the
subject will be discussed by the council and its argument presented in
due time by its representative in the legislature, but I can tell you
some of the things that occur to me in favor of this measure and against
it:

"In the first place, it is clear that whatever may be the merits of the
Demetrian cult it is bound sometimes to occasion misfortune; misfortune
is seldom distinguished from injustice, and so the cult is made to bear
the brunt of every disappointment that results from the working of the
system, whether it proceeds from unwisdom, caprice, or accident. Now
against caprice and accident the cult is powerless; but as regards
unwisdom, whether it be in the council or in those to whom the council
tenders the mission, the cult is responsible, and must be held
responsible. Whether the misfortune in this case results from unwisdom
or not is a question which I do not care to discuss; but obviously
something has occurred that can be used to discredit our cult, and it is
the part of wisdom to diminish the evil resulting therefrom to the
utmost possible.

"In the second place, there has been recourse to violence, and violence
is the greatest crime against social welfare which any man can commit.
Are the persons guilty of this crime to be left uncorrected and free to
frame new plots of violence against the state?

"In the third place, a trial of all the persons involved in this matter
is going to give rise to a great public scandal. The trial is
essentially of a political character, and no political trial can be
conducted impartially; the very fact that political prejudice enters
into it necessarily impairs the impartiality of the court; and even if a
fair court could be secured, the defeated political faction would surely
accuse the court of unfairness.

"All these things make the decision of this question complicated and
difficult."

"But," asked I, "does not the very fact that your cult raises these
difficulties put into question the wisdom of the cult itself?"

"Do you mean to say that in your opinion the mission of Demeter, with
the beauty of its sacrifice and the blessing it must eventually bring
upon the race, should be abandoned because in a single instance it has
crossed the passion of a Chairo?"

"In the first place," asked I, "is it sure to bring a sensible benefit
to the race? And in the second, is the sacrifice a beautiful one? Is it
not rather inhuman and repulsive?"

"I shall answer your questions in the order you put them: Plato was the
first philosopher on record who proposed applying to the breeding of men
the same art as we apply to the breeding of animals--and he did not
seriously propose it; his proposition was spurned, as you know, by all
so-called practical statesmen up to the day of Latona, not because the
evil attending the existing system was not recognized, but because the
remedy proposed seemed worse than the evil. And, indeed, if men and
women were to be obliged to mate or refrain from mating at the bidding
of the state, one may well ask whether life would not become intolerable
to the point of universal suicide. The evil, therefore, remained
unabated. Consumption, scrofula, cancer, and other unnamable diseases
became rooted in the race on the one hand, and no attempt was made to
compensate the evil by selecting according to art. Not only so, but the
pauper proved the most prolific, the cultured the least prolific; so
that the breeding of man--far more important to human happiness than the
breeding of sheep--seemed contrived so as to occasion the minimum of
good and the maximum of evil. There seemed to be only two ways to
mitigate this curse: one, to restore marriage to the sanctity it
theoretically had under the canons of the church; the other, to appeal
to the self-sacrifice of a few gifted women. As to the first, Latona
believed marriage to be degraded in great part through the inability of
young men and women to choose their mates with wisdom, and she
instituted therefore the system of provisional marriage, tolerable only
in youth, and though possible in later years, tolerated then only under
extraordinary circumstances. As to the second, Latona instituted the
mission of Demeter.

"It is not easy yet to draw any definite conclusion from the practical
working of the system, for it has not been working long enough.
Nevertheless, it would be impossible, I think, to find anywhere a more
hopeful band of youths than those to whose education Irene and her staff
are now devoting themselves. Indeed, wherever the cult is in operation
the girls and boys who proceed from the cloister are, to my judgment,
immeasurably superior in the average to any similar number drawn at
haphazard from the community at large. And, indeed, how could it be
otherwise? Heredity must in the long run count for a great deal; and by
securing to the Demetrian issue, not only the highest conceivable
education and parental care, but a sense that they owe something more to
themselves as regards standard of conduct because they owe so much to
the state, we create an environment which gives hereditary tendencies
the best possible opportunities for development.

"Now, as regards the last part of your question, my answer is a very
simple one: The mission is beautiful only when wisely tendered and
wisely accepted; when unwisely tendered or unwisely accepted it is
likely to be, as you say, inhuman and even repulsive."

"But how are you going to learn wisdom," asked I, "in a matter so
difficult?"

"Experience has already helped us, I think, to avoid serious mistakes
except in such exceptional cases as this of Lydia. For your attention
has perhaps not been called to a profound difference that exists in
women little recognized in your day. This difference can, I think, best
be defined as follows: some women are essentially wives, others are
essentially mothers. Love is the key that opens the heart of the one,
maternity the instinct that animates the other. You are a lawyer, are
you not? Did you ever have any divorce cases?"

"Many!"

"Ransack your brain, then, and see if you do not find there evidence of
what I have stated."

He paused; and there came back to me an interview with a woman who
complained that her husband did not wish her to have children; and as it
was children she wanted--so she said--the husband was almost immaterial.
There came to my mind also many women I had known for whom the husband
ceased to have importance the moment a child was born.

"Our art," continued he, "consists in selecting the women who combine
willingness to sacrifice themselves with this maternal instinct; and not
the maternal instinct alone--most women have this--but a maternal
instinct that preponderates every other. We have made a double mistake
in Lydia: her love for Chairo is the prepondering instinct; and though
she has undoubtedly a strongly developed religion of sacrifice, she is
also fond of pleasure. That pretty little tip-tilted nose of hers," he
added, smiling, "should have warned us of this!"




CHAPTER XVI

ANNA'S SECRET


I saw very little of Anna during the first few days of my stay at the
Pater's. Cleon had drawn a bad number and was therefore drafted on a
detachment of workmen engaged in mending roads--a work all disliked, and
as no one volunteered for it, it had to be apportioned by lot. Anna of
Ann felt the absence of Cleon because, although he was young, he had
attached himself to her and she had learned somewhat to depend on his
companionship. In the absence of Cleon, therefore, I often joined Anna
in her walks and became more and more charmed by her singleness of
purpose. She seemed indifferent to everything except her art, cared
nothing for Chairo and his principles, had little conviction as regards
the Demetrian cult, and absorbed herself altogether in the joy to be
derived from beauty, whether in nature or in man. The idea that there
was something in man different from nature had become so familiar to
this century that the confusion between them from which the philosophy
of our time was only just emerging seemed to her altogether impossible,
and it was a hope of hers one day to compose a group or monument in
which man with his faculty of subjugating the forces of nature to his
use would be contrasted with these forces, typified either by animals or
undeveloped human races. She had shown me several models upon which she
was at work to typify these forces; among them I remember one of a negro
kneeling, with wonder on his thick lips and a superb strength about his
loins; she had modelled also a lion crouching at the bidding of an
unseen hand; but I had seen no model of Conquering Man. In an abandoned
sugar house which she had arranged as a studio, however, were many
unfinished busts hidden away which she did not show to me or to others,
and there was a good deal of curiosity and some little chaff as to the
secret so carefully thus concealed by her.

One morning, however, that I had risen early, tempted by the bright sun
of an Indian summer, I started for a short stroll, and passing Anna's
studio was surprised to find a window open. Looking inside the window, I
saw Anna so absorbed on a clay bust that she had not heard my approach.
I watched her work in silence without appreciating that I had surprised
a secret, until moving a little I saw clearly that the bust on which she
was working was a portrait of Ariston. Even then I was not clear that
Anna had been hiding this portrait from us; it seemed perfectly natural
that she should be engaged upon it. But when she at last perceived me
she blushed scarlet and threw a cloth over it.

"You have seen it," she said reproachfully.

"Why not?" asked I. "It was only a portrait of Ariston."

"Was it so like him that you saw it at once?"

"Did you not mean it to be so?"

"No!" she exclaimed, almost with temper, "and I did not mean you to see
it."

I apologized to her and suggested that she should join me in my walk;
but she did not answer me at once; she moved about the studio as though
agitated by my discovery, moving things aimlessly, taking things up and
putting them down again. I stood at the window waiting for an answer,
for I did not wish to leave her in this disturbed condition. At last she
looked me full in the face and her mobile lips twitched with
ill-suppressed emotion. Had she known how little I suspected the cause
of her trouble she need not have been so moved; but she had been so
long fighting against her love for Ariston that she imagined the
discovery by me of the portrait had betrayed her secret.

"You won't tell any one you have seen it, will you?" she said at last
appealingly.

"Certainly not," answered I. "But why are you so anxious to keep it a
secret?"

She opened her eyes at this question and then burst out, with a sob in
her voice:

"I would not have them guess it for the world."

At last I understood: this bust was not a portrait of Ariston; it was a
study for her Conquering Man, and she could not keep out of it the
features of the one she loved.

"See," she said, pointing to the corner where the uncompleted busts were
hidden, "they all look like him; even when I tried to model a face
without a beard, expressly to escape this haunting thought, you can see
it--somewhere in the brow," and she moved her hand over the brow. "At
every attempt I make, something betrays me," and she sat down on a low
chair and buried her face in her hands.

I stood by her, not daring to intrude; and presently she got up sadly
and said:

"Yes, I shall go with you--anything to get away from it all"; and
taking her cap from a peg, closed the window, locked the door, and
joined me.

"I had half an idea," said I, as we moved toward the wood, "that you had
a fancy for Cleon."

Anna smiled. "Cleon is a sweet boy and I am very fond of him; I suppose
he thinks he is in love with me; but we are accustomed to these 'green
and salad' loves; indeed, we are taught not to discourage them. It is
good for a boy like Cleon to be in love with some one much older than
himself that he can never marry; it keeps him out of mischief and does
no one harm. One day he will reproach me and tell me I have encouraged
him; I have not, you know, not the slightest; but he will say I have,
and honestly think it for a few days; a little later he will get over it
and be a good friend of mine to the end of my days."

We had a walk in the wood that has remained in my memory as one of the
sweetest hours I spent at Tyringham. She soon accustomed herself to my
knowledge of her secret, and this created an intimacy between us that
was rare and pleasant.

At that early hour the woods were dark and fresh, and the light upon a
meadow we were approaching reminded me of a forgotten poet:

    "I knew the flowers; I knew the leaves; I knew
    The tearful glimmer of the languid dawn
    On those long rank dark wood walks drenched with dew
            Leading from lawn to lawn."

I quoted them to her and she responded to them; wanted to know the
poet's name and more of his work; and as the autumn mist lay heavy on
the lower pastures and the heavy fragrance of the autumn woods filled
the air, I repeated to her those other lines of his:

    "The woods decay; the woods decay and fall,
    The vapors weep their burthen to the ground;
    Man comes and tills the earth and lies beneath,
    And after many a summer dies the swan.
    Me only, cruel immortality consumes
    Here at the Eastern limit of the day----"

She put a hand on my arm and stopped me:

"What is that again, 'Me only, cruel----'"

I repeated the line to her.

"What a subject," she said; "not for a Tithonus--no; what a thought to
work into my group!"

I saw her meaning: Man might subdue Nature to his use; what then? Was
he to be nevertheless forever consumed by immortality? Here was the
limit to his triumph; its shadow and reverse.

"What is the meaning of it all!" she said. "We are unhappy, do what we
may, and it is out of our very unhappiness that we find something that
replaces happiness--a sort of divine sorrow."

We had by this time traversed the wood and stood on a height which
commanded the now deserted colony buildings. The sun was well up on the
horizon; the birds hopping silently in the boughs, their spring and
summer songs over; but the torrent filled the air with its noisy music
as it dashed down the hillside, and beyond we saw it meandering in
peaceful curves among the meadows.

"It is very beautiful," she said. "After all, there is joy enough in
beauty, and it is no small thing"--she was looking absently over the
meadows as she repeated--"it is no small thing that we can by art add to
it."

"It is a mission of which you can well be proud," said I.

She looked at me and smiled gratefully.

As we returned I felt that she had shaken off some of the sorrow with
which she had started.




CHAPTER XVII

DESIGNS ON ANNA OF ANN


My stay at the Pater's farm was altogether delightful, for most of the
day was spent in shooting. October was the only month open to all; but
one permit was given to every ten inhabitants during November, and as
there were forty-four, including the Pater's family, on the farm, it was
easy to spare one to me. The Pater's younger son Phaines had another; he
was not only a keen sportsman but an agreeable companion, and we killed
much game, great and small. During a period of twenty years the shooting
of bear had been prohibited, and now, with the extension of forests,
bear had increased so as to be extremely plentiful. Deer, elk, caribou,
moose, wild boar, and such destructive animals as lynxes, foxes, and
wild cats, furnished all that a sportsman could ask in the way of
variety. As the amount of game we killed far exceeded the consuming
power of the neighborhood we daily telephoned to the County Supply
Department for instructions where to ship it, and we received our pay
therefor.

During the winter, country people took their principal meal in the
evening, the morning and midday hours being the pleasantest for being in
the open air. The farm hands and we sportsmen took our luncheon with us
and came home prepared for a large meal. Those who prepared the meal
preferred to spend the dark hours from four to seven in the preparation
of it, and to be free during the earlier part of the day.

The evening passed pleasantly. Every large farmhouse--and there were few
small ones, except such as were, so to speak, dependent upon the
large--had a room with a stage, specially applied to music and
theatrical performances; it could also be used for such indoor games as
squash or badminton. In this room those who wanted to practice music,
etc., would assemble, and here they would occasionally give
performances. When these farms sent their inmates to the city for a few
months in the winter, hospitality was gladly extended them for the
variety of performances which they could furnish; and by this exchange
of population, the city people going to the country to harvest in the
summer, and the farmers going to the city for amusement and instruction
during the winter, monotony of life was eliminated.

One day when I was returning from a day's sport with Phaines, a buck
packed on each of our horses, we were talking of marriage, and I asked
him whether he did not intend to marry.

"I want to marry very much," said he.

I looked at him inquiringly.

"I have asked Anna of Ann a dozen times to marry me and she won't,"
continued he. "I can't see why she won't, either; she doesn't seem to
care for anyone else; she might as well marry me, and then she could
give all her time to that art of hers she is so devoted to."

"But she would have to work some part of the day at the farm, wouldn't
she?"

"No; we are quite well enough off to let her give all her time to her
art if she wanted to. It's this way: we have to furnish so much butter,
or its equivalent in eggs, poultry, stock, etc., to the state for the
amount of land we cultivate; then we have to support our farm hands,
that is to say, either we have to give to each wages out of the surplus
produce of the farm, over and above what we pay the state as rent, or we
have to furnish the state extra produce for every farm hand we have.
Well, our hands prefer the former of these plans. The amount we give
each farm hand depends on the amount of the surplus; every one of us is
interested in making this surplus as large as possible. In this way we
really have a great deal more than we can spend, and I could easily
afford, out of my share of the surplus, to support Anna, so that she
need not work at all."

"You are very prosperous then?"

"Yes, and why shouldn't we be? Now that we get grain at what it really
costs instead of paying middlemen and speculators, railroad
stockholders, elevators, etc., etc., everything is half the price it
used to be. Then we need never fear that no one will buy our produce.
The Supply Department can always tell us just where what we have is
needed, and pays us for it on the spot. It does the transportation; and
so the state needn't ask us an exorbitant rent, and can always pay us a
remunerative price for our surplus."

"But you don't suppose Anna of Ann would be induced to marry you just
because you could support her, do you?"

"She's a fool if she doesn't, as she apparently does not care for any
one else."

       *       *       *       *       *

That night after dinner most of the party adjourned to the music room,
so I took a chair near the Mater who was knitting by the big fire in
the hall.

A benign smile lightened up her dear old round face as she made room for
me to get close to the fire. I was curious to know what she thought of
Anna, and said to her:

"Phaines tells me he wants to marry Anna of Ann."

"Isn't she foolish now not to marry him?" answered the Mater, putting
down her work. "I am so fond of her, and Phaines and she would make an
ideal couple. She could work all day at the art she is fond of and both
ought to be as happy, all the year long, as larks in the spring."

"I have sometimes thought," said I, wishing to draw the Mater out, "that
Anna looked sad."

"Well, she is a genius, and all geniuses look sad sometimes. It seems as
though somebody has to be sad in order that others may be happy. Now, I
am glad I am a plain farmer's wife and don't have to be sad. And yet,"
she added, taking up her knitting again, "I love to look at sad things.
Have you ever seen Anna's statue of Bacchus?"

I had seen it and wondered at it until it was explained to me that the
better Greek notion of Bacchus as the god of enthusiasm had been
restored to the Dionysan cult. Then I perceived that Anna had given to
the wine god something of the discontent that lends charm to the statues
of Antinoues.

"Anna's thought doubtless is," said I, "that the highest enthusiasm
springs from a sense of an unsatisfied need."

"Well, I like to look at it but I don't care to think about it. I like
just to toast my toes by the fire these long winter evenings and know
that our storehouse is full and our boys happy. But I do wish Anna would
marry Phaines."

Assuredly, thought I, man is a variable thing--constructed upon lines so
different that it is surprising one variety of man can at all understand
the other. And yet, in view of the variety of occupations in which man
must engage if he wants to satisfy his complex needs, how fortunate that
the Mater could be happy only on her farm, and Anna happy only in her
studio! And for the Mater and Phaines the question of marriage with Anna
was one that could tarry for its solution year after year; while for
Anna, her love for Ariston tormented her life, intruded into her art,
saddened and inspired it.

I was interested, however, to discover that she had escaped from the
thraldom of it for the time at any rate; for on the next day, when I
peeped into her studio early in the morning, she no longer threw a cloth
over her clay, but, on the contrary, beckoned me in.

And I saw dimly growing out of a gigantic mass of clay the noble
lineaments of an old man with shaggy projecting eyebrows and a beard
that rivalled that of the Moses of Michael Angelo.

"It is only the bust," she said. She looked very lovely as with
suppressed excitement she explained to me her thought, and her eyes
usually dim grew bright. "It is to be a colossal figure, standing; I
think there is something in it that is going to be suggested by the
Creator of the Sixtine chapel as he stands creating Eve; but then, too,
I see in the clay before me something more kindly, reminding me rather
of Prospero; and yet he is to be triumphant; I think one arm will be
lifted, half in joy and half in benediction, but his brow will be
thoughtful and sad."

"And you have got rid of Ariston altogether?" asked I.

She blushed and pouted a little.

"You must never speak to me of Ariston again. I am glad to be free from
him, in this at any rate--and it is your Tithonus that has rescued me.
If I were to put a legend to this sculpture--of course, I won't--but if
I were to do so, it should be 'Me only, cruel immortality consumes.'"

"And yet this would express only a small part of the whole thing."

"And that is why no legend should ever be attached to sculpture;
sculpture must tell her own story in her own way--legends belong to
literature. Sculpture must owe nothing to any other art than her own."
She was looking critically at the bust now, as though I were not in the
room, but presently becoming conscious of my existence again, she added:
"I value this legend because it started me on a new line of thought
unhaunted by the old."

For days Anna was so gay that I began to wonder whether Ariston had not
lost his opportunity, and I wondered so all the more when I saw little
advances to Anna on his part unresponded to. One evening when he had
felt himself discouraged by her, he said to me:

"I don't think Anna will ever care for anything but her art. I asked her
to show me what she is doing and she refused--a little curtly, I
thought."

"My dear Ariston," answered I, "do you suppose Anna is going to fall
into your arms the moment you open them to her? You have treated her
for years as though she did not exist, and now you are disappointed
because at a first lordly approach she does not at once fall trembling
at your feet."

"Am I really such a coxcomb as that?" asked Ariston.

"Don't take me too seriously," said I. "All I mean to suggest is that if
Anna is worth winning she is worth wooing; she is absorbed in her
work--her life is quite filled with it--and if you want her life to be
filled with you, you must take some little trouble and exercise some
little patience."

Ariston laughed good humoredly, and asked me how Lydia was doing. I had
seen little of her. We met at meal-time, but so many sat down to every
meal that I seldom found myself near her. I knew that she heard daily
from Chairo and wrote daily to him, but more than this no one knew.
Ariston explained to me that the forces marshalled in opposition to one
another were now fairly organized, but that it was impossible to tell
with whom the victory would rest. The leader of the government, Peleas,
was not a big man; on the contrary, many charged him with being narrow.
He was bitterly opposed to the amnesty bill; regarded Chairo as a
firebrand who must be suppressed, and asked, if blood could deluge the
streets of New York one day and amnesty be voted to those responsible
therefor the next, what security could the community hope for in the
future? Would not such action serve to encourage all discontent to take
the shape of riot and revolt?

There was, of course, much truth in his view. The Demetrian council had
met, but their decision was kept absolutely secret. Irene had now
altogether recovered and was expected to direct the Demetrian forces in
the legislature; she would not, however, take the floor; it was
considered that their spokesman ought to be a man. Ariston was
disqualified by the fact that he was acting for Chairo; so they decided
on an extremely judicious, though not very eloquent speaker, by name
Arkles. Ariston returned to New York the next day.




CHAPTER XVIII

A DREAM


The day that Ariston left, the Mater summoned me to her room to make
plans for the day, and I found Lydia there, engaged in moving a bracket
of beautifully wrought iron that she found too low. While I talked to
the Mater I found my eyes following Lydia's movements as she stood with
her back to me unscrewing the bracket from the wall. The Mater soon came
to an understanding with me and left the room to attend to her household
duties. I was left alone with Lydia.

She had by this time unscrewed the bracket and was holding it higher up
against the wall, estimating the height, prior to fastening it in again.

"You will never be able to fasten it at that height," said I, "without a
ladder."

She looked round at me, still holding the bracket against the wall, and
I wished I had the art of a sculptor to immortalize her as she stood.

She smiled as she said: "How about a chair, Xenos?"

I immediately brought a chair to her.

She stepped upon it but slipped. I was holding the back of the chair,
and as she slipped I put out my hands to catch her. For a moment I held
her in my arms. She had stumbled in such a way that her head was thrown
a little back over my shoulder, and before she could recover herself her
face was so close to mine that I could have kissed her with the
slightest possible movement of my face.

I thought that I had conquered the feeling which she had inspired in me
the first moment I set eyes on her on Tyringham hill. But the blood,
rushing through my veins, and my beating pulses, as I held her for a
moment in my arms, told me that I was still hopelessly in love with her.

She seemed altogether unaware of it, for recovering her balance she
laughed a little, looked at me straight in the eyes, her brows a little
lifted, and her lovely lips parted by a smile.

"I slipped," she said. "Wasn't it silly of me!"

And jumping on the chair she got to work again.

I watched her work and drank deep draughts of delicious poison as I
watched.

As soon as she had finished she looked at her work critically and said:
"That is very much better!" and turning to me, added, "Isn't it?"

I could not help wondering whether she was as unconscious of the effect
she produced as she seemed to be. But she gave me no chance of
discovering, for finding I did not answer but stood there silent, like a
fool, she added:

"I must be off! _Au revoir!_" and taking up her screwdriver and other
things, went with the appearance of utter unconsciousness out of the
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

All that day my mind was haunted by her; I knew it was folly to harbor
hope, and yet I harbored it fatuously; her image came in and out of my
mind as the sun on a rainy day in and out of the clouds, to delight and
to torment.

That evening the orchestra played a minuet of Mozart so charmingly that
Lydia rose, and saying, "We really must dance to that," made a sweeping
bow.

I jumped up at the challenge, and soon eight of us were on our feet.
Lydia was my partner. I was so absorbed by her every movement, so
entranced by the occasional touch of her ungloved hand, that I was
aware of nothing else in the room. Surely, thought I, there never was a
Tanagra figure to compare with hers.

When we separated for the night I was in a fever. It was useless to go
to bed, and I went out into the bright cold air. I saw the light in her
room and stood in front of it, cursing myself for a love-sick fool. But
the cold drove me in--and to bed. For hours I tossed about, and sleep
overtook me at last, but only to torture me; it played with me, threw me
on my back, as it were, at one moment, only to jump me on my feet the
next; and throughout it all I saw Lydia at odd intervals in every
conceivable mood; now smiling and beckoning, now turning from me as
though offended, and, again, treating me with indifference. But at last
I seemed to have passed through a period of deep unconsciousness, for I
woke suddenly to find Lydia before me more lovely than I had ever seen
her. I was not surprised--although I know I ought to have been--to find
her in a dress that showed her bosom, her hair hung like a curtain of
gold about her; her long eyes were wet with tears, and yet there shone
out of them a light so mystic and divine that I threw myself at her
feet. She held out a hand to me and lifted me up. I did not know the
meaning of her tears or of her graciousness, but as I rose nearer to
her she smiled. In an ecstasy I touched her lips with mine; she did not
withdraw them; nay, she kissed me on the brow and cheek, fond and
despairing kisses, for her tears fell upon my face and they were warm.

How long did it last? Was it for a moment or for all time? A blaze of
light pouring through my window roused me. I jumped out of bed and
looked stupidly out on the old sugar house that Anna had converted into
a studio. It was nothing but a dream.

"Nothing but a dream!" thought I exultingly. "But no one can ever
deprive me of it. I have felt her kisses on my lips and her tears. All
my life long that memory will belong to me--and suffice."

I sat down, weak and tired, closing my eyes to recall the vanished
dream; and it came back to me, every detail of it, so vividly that I
jumped up from my chair with the thought that it was not all mere fancy;
something had happened, something had actually happened, of this I felt
sure, and was it possible--I hardly dared entertain the thought--was it
possible she had dreamed also of me?

I dressed automatically, breakfasted automatically, strolled
automatically about the grounds. I must see Lydia. I returned to the
house, asked the Mater where Lydia was, and was told that she could be
found in the room where she had been the previous morning. I almost ran
there, and, on opening the door, saw her seated in a high-backed oak
chair, very erect, with her hair about her and something resembling
tears in her eyes as I had seen her in my dream. She had tapestry in her
hands, but they rested idly in her lap. She did not move when I entered.
She seemed to be expecting me.

I advanced toward her slowly with something like awe in my heart.

"Did you have a dream in the night?" I at last summoned courage to ask.

She did not answer, and the look in her eyes baffled me.

"Did you dream of _me_?" I asked huskily--almost aghast.

Still she said nothing but kept fixed upon me her inscrutable eyes.

I hardly dared to go on, but in my folly I continued.

"Did you"--stammered I--but I could not put my question in words.

Tears sprang to her eyes, and she sat there just as I had seen her in
my dream, save that she wore the usual chiton.

I was in an anguish of suspense, but it came to an end, for she shook
her head sadly.

"Don't!" she said. "Don't!"

I fell at her feet and buried my head in her lap. She did not shrink
from me. On the contrary, I felt her hand stroke my head, and I knew it
was not love but compassion.

I knelt there a full minute, but even to the luxury of grief I had not
the right to surrender. So I rose abruptly. I took her hand, kissed it,
held it for a moment in mine, and said:

"I shall not intrude on you again, Lydia; I love you consumedly, but I
shall not intrude on you again."

And laying her hand gently upon her lap I turned abruptly and left the
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next day I left Tyringham.

Almost the entire population of the farm--save only Lydia, her mother,
and the few farm hands necessary to care for the stock--and these last
had their holiday later--repaired to New York. Most of them went to the
building in which lived Anna's family. Ariston and I returned to our old
quarters.




CHAPTER XIX

THE LEGISLATURE MEETS


At the first meeting of the Assembly--for the Legislature now sat no
longer at Albany but at New York--Masters arose as soon as the opening
formalities were over and read a bill of amnesty for all concerned in
the so-called riot of the preceding month. He stated that an identical
bill was being at that moment offered in the Senate, and moved a joint
session of both houses to consider it.

Peleas, the leader of the government, consented to the joint session,
but asked that the matter be referred to a committee. He pointed out
that the facts were not clearly before the house, and that it was
essential that a committee should investigate the facts and present them
in a report to the joint session.

Masters opposed reference to an investigating committee. He contended
that the very object of the bill was to prevent the issues, that had
caused their streets to be stained by blood, from remaining confounded
by personal animosities. A great institution had been attacked; that
institution was, in the opinion of many, of the highest social value. It
was possible that in some respects it had a lesson to learn; it was
important that the lesson be learned free from the heat of such bitter
hatred as must result from an attempt to punish those who had been
driven by misguided zeal to acts of violence. Already the investigation
had shown how far the desperate effort of those implicated to shield
themselves might distort facts; it had even been alleged--and his
strong, honest countenance glowed for a moment with indignation as he
spoke--it had even been alleged that the whole responsibility for the
attack rested not upon Balbus and his followers but upon a woman! He
would not waste the time of the house now by pointing out the diverse
reasons why an investigation was to be avoided. Obviously, what the
country needed, and he thought he could say asked for, was oblivion.
Why, then, an investigating committee?

Arkles next arose--and as he was known to be the spokesman of the cult
he was listened to with breathless attention. He altogether appreciated
the weight of the argument against an investigating committee just made,
but as had also been justly said, it was possible that the cult had a
lesson to learn. In order to learn that lesson it had to know the facts,
and the facts had not yet been properly determined. Moreover, something
was due to law and order. It might, in the end, be considered the better
course to allow the punishment which those involved in the riot had
already suffered, to suffice, and to allow oblivion to obliterate, to
the utmost possible, the whole matter from their annals. But the state
would not do its duty if it did not thoroughly investigate the crime it
was condoning; and though he regretted to oppose a man who had always
been regarded as a pillar not only of the government but of the cult, he
nevertheless felt it to be his duty to support the government in asking
for the appointment of an investigating committee.

Masters, who in his heart, though he could not admit it to himself,
feared the consequences to Neaera of an investigating committee,
maintained his opposition; Chairo, also, who desired to avoid, at all
hazards, the necessity of Lydia's appearing before such a committee, was
opposed to the investigation. Both were also influenced by the desire to
carry the bill promptly by a _coup de main_, if this were at all
possible.

The motion of Peleas was carried by a large majority, and the result
produced much discouragement in Chairo's ranks. Masters, however,
immediately arose and moved that in view of the importance of the
question and the impossibility of calmly discussing any other matter
until the fate of the amnesty bill was settled, the house adjourn, and
not sit again until after the elections and after the joint session of
both houses had completed its mission.

Peleas and Arkles both approved of this motion, and the passage of it,
with only a few scattering votes in the negative, to a certain extent
restored the confidence of the opposition. For if the government to this
extent recognized the importance of the issue raised by the amnesty
bill, it was possible that in the end some compromise would be agreed
upon that would give substantial satisfaction.

Ariston took no part in this preliminary skirmish. As we walked home
together he expressed to me his satisfaction at what had occurred.
Peleas had not displayed all the narrowness of which he was capable, and
the judiciousness of both Masters and Arkles indicated a willingness on
the part of both to bring the matter to a fair adjustment. I was myself,
however, concerned by the probability that I should now have to appear
before the investigating committee. My regard for Masters, as well as a
liking for Neaera, of which, in spite of her duplicity, I could not
altogether rid myself, made me unwilling to state all that had occurred
when I conveyed Chairo's message to Balbus. I had hoped that the passage
of the amnesty bill would have made the hearing of testimony
unnecessary; so I asked Ariston whether I would be compelled to testify.
To my great relief Ariston assured me that my peculiar position as a
guest of the community, made it quite possible for me to ask and obtain
a dispensation; he promised to arrange it for me.

On reaching our quarters we betook ourselves as usual to the bath,
which, at this season of the year, was warmed to a suitable temperature,
and after our plunge, as we lay upon our couches smoking cigarettes, I
asked Ariston whether he had seen Anna of Ann since our return to New
York.

"No," answered he, "it is difficult to see her; she is working all day
at the factory, in order to earn a full month's holiday later; she is
eager to complete the sculpture on which she is engaged; and that father
of hers never invites any one to his house!"

"I have never met her father," said I. "Her mother I have seen at the
Lydia's, but her father--what kind of a man is he?"

"He is a miser!"

"A miser!" exclaimed I. "In a Collectivist state! How is that possible?"

"It could not be possible in a purely Collectivist state; but as soon as
individual industry took an important development it became possible."

I was not clear about this, and Ariston, seeing the confusion in my
face, explained.

"Take this case of Campbell's, for example"--Campbell was the name of
Anna's father--"as soon as Masters got at the head of several industrial
enterprises and had obtained a valuable credit in the community,
Campbell saw that there was here a credit to exploit and a real service
to be rendered to the public, so he induced Masters to start a bank, and
the bank of Masters & Campbell is known all over the United States. But
Campbell can explain all this better than I can; and although Campbell
never asks any one to his house, we can ask him to ours; or, better
still, we can ask the whole family to dine at Theodore's--you must see
Theodore's; his restaurant is one of our institutions. Come," he added,
"let us go at once to their building; we may catch Anna of Ann in the
tea-room, and agree upon a day."

We dressed rapidly, and on the way I expressed my disgust at Anna's
having to work in a factory when all her time might, under other
circumstances, be given to her art.

"Are you quite sure," asked Ariston, "that the enforced rest from her
artistic work is such a bad thing? How much of Michael Angelo's time was
spent in the purely mechanical part of his art? Then, too, there is no
reason why she should be compelled to work in the factory at all. Men
are all obliged to give the required quota of work to the state, but
women have always been granted dispensations, provided somebody
undertook either to do their work for them or to relieve the state of
their support. Now if Campbell were not a miser Anna need never do state
work. And if Anna were to marry an industrious and capable man she need
never do state work."

I looked at Ariston significantly, and he caught my eye.

"I saw Irene yesterday," he said, "and we spoke of it. She is a noble
woman, and the eagerness and delight with which she heard me speak of
Anna made my eyes fill. She is altogether devoted now to her work in the
cloister; she is absorbed in her boy, who seems to combine all the vigor
of Chairo with her own gentleness; she teaches not only him but a class
of boys of his age, and is doing a splendid work there. I have quite
given up the idea that she will ever marry again."

It was pretty clear that, although Ariston was willing to admit he had
given up the idea of marrying Irene, he was not willing to admit that he
was seriously entertaining the idea of marrying any one else. So I
returned to our original subject:

"But how can Campbell hoard?" asked I. "Isn't your money valueless two
years after its issue?"

"Yes, but Campbell has made a money of his own; besides, before he did
this, he hoarded gold."

"But I thought all the gold was owned by the state and used exclusively
for foreign exchanges?"

"So it is--as currency; but the state could not refuse to allow skillful
workers in the precious metals to exercise their skill in ornaments, and
so there comes into the market not only state manufacture of gold and
silver, but also for some years past the products of individual
enterprise. Don't you remember the beautiful necklace Neaera wears?
Lydia, too; even Irene wears a heavy bracelet of solid gold.

"And do you mean to say that Campbell hoards ornaments?"

"My dear fellow, there is nothing unusual in hoarding ornaments; most of
the wealth of the Rajahs at the time of the conquest of India consisted
of ornaments and precious stones; and later, the hoarding of ornaments
by the natives constituted one of the financial difficulties with which
the English Government had to contend. Then, too, a miser is not
actuated by intelligence; he is the slave of an instinct--the hoarding
instinct. He must hoard something, and as there is no gold coin to
hoard, Campbell hoards gold ornaments."

We found that both Ann and Anna had left the tea-room, so we ventured to
the inhospitable door of their apartment. Anna opened it to us and
ushered us into a room where her father was sitting. He was a small man
with an intelligent face, but the hair grew on his head in a manner that
was characteristic; some people would have called him bald, but he was
not bald; the hair was extremely thin, so thin that it gave his scalp
the appearance of not being perfectly clean. He greeted us courteously
and inquiringly, as though we could not have called upon him except for
some definite purpose. So Ariston at once suggested that he and his
family should join us that evening at Theodore's.

"We should be delighted," said he. "But we are expecting our boy this
evening--Harmes."

Harmes was the young man who had been convicted of using violence with
Neaera and had been sent to the Penal Colony.

"You will want to spend your first evening with Harmes _en famille_,"
said Ariston, "so let us say to-morrow."

Campbell consulted his wife, and accepted.

"When does Harmes arrive?" asked Ariston.

"We are expecting him every moment," answered Campbell.

"To-morrow, then, at Theodore's at seven," said Ariston, and we left.

The absence of all shame as to the imprisonment of Harmes struck me as
remarkable, but Ariston soon set me straight.

"You are possessed by the notions that prevailed in your day--notions
that resulted in great part from the fact that most of your criminals
were poor and dirty. Your system created a residuum--a criminal
class--as surely as the thresher by sifting out the wheat leaves behind
the residuum we call chaff. And the residuum of your competitive system,
which recognized practically only one prize (that is to say, money),
necessarily consisted of those who being unable to earn this prize
became destitute; of these the most enterprising were criminals, the
least enterprising, paupers. This is the state of things to which
Collectivism puts an end. Because all work for the state all are
entitled to an equal share in the national income; there are no
destitute, no paupers, no criminal _class_. Indeed, it may be said that
the criminal, such as you were accustomed to see him in your police
courts, does not exist among us at all. Occasionally a man is tempted
beyond endurance, as in the case of Harmes, or in the case of Chairo and
his confederates. But if Chairo were convicted and sent to a penal
colony, he would on his release recover the social position to which he
was by his conduct entitled without regard to the fact that he had
served a term. No one would think of applying the Word 'criminal' to
either Chairo or Harmes. Of course there are men born among us, as among
you, with what may be termed truly criminal instinct--moral perverts who
take pleasure in causing pain. Such are rarely curable. They seldom
return to social life. They are treated like lepers. We try to make
their lot as little wretched as we can. But we recognize that the
happiness of the entire community must be preferred to that of these
exceptions; they are kept in confinement, and above all, they are not
allowed to perpetuate the type."

There was nothing new in all this. We were as familiar in my day with
this reasoning as Ariston. But we were dominated by our institutions,
our penal codes, our criminal lawyers, our prisons, and, above all, our
amazing doctrines of individual liberty, which vindicated it for the
criminal and disregarded it for the workingman. So that the industrious
were bound to as enforced labor as the convict all the time, whereas the
convict was periodically let loose on the community to idle and to
steal.




CHAPTER XX

ON FLAVORS AND FINANCE


Next evening we met at Theodore's restaurant and sat down to a dinner,
which reminded me of the best I had ever tasted in Paris.

Theodore himself was a type. Rather short in stature and stout, he had a
large head off which was combed thick hair, treated very much as a
sculptor would treat hair in a monument. For Theodore took himself very
seriously. He believed gastronomy to be one of the fine arts, and that
he was its high priest. He would never allow any one to joke about it,
and admitted to his restaurant only those who behaved toward him with
the respect to which he felt entitled.

He received us at the door with a napkin over his arm, for of this
napkin he was as proud as a British peer of his robes; it was the emblem
of his art, and as such he bore it proudly. Ariston greeted him and
introduced us to him each by name. He bowed at every introduction.

"And now," said Ariston, turning to us, "you have before you the
greatest culinary artist in the world."

Theodore smiled sadly--as indeed he might--for possessed of the finest
palate in New York, he had for years been confined, by an ungovernable
indigestion, to a milk diet.

Theodore showed us to a private room, and explained that he meant to
open the ceremonies with a _pot au feu garbure_, and that the cheese
used on the toast had just arrived from France. He left us to seat
ourselves, and very soon after we were settled, the door was thrown open
by his son and Theodore appeared, with an air of almost stern solemnity,
holding a silver soup tureen in both hands, the inevitable napkin on his
arm. He placed the soup tureen on a side table, lifted off the lid, and
with religious care ladled the soup into plates, carefully providing
that each had his share of the preciously prepared toast.

A chorus of approval from us brought the sad smile back into his face
again, and as we sat he told us that he had "created" a new dish for us.
He was very particular about the use of this word "created." He kept a
list of his special dishes, and Ariston told us afterwards that he had
once asked Theodore for this list, describing it as the list of his
inventions. Theodore had offendedly corrected him. "_Creations_, you
mean." The dish he had created for us that day was a pheasant stuffed
with ortolans, all cooked in their own juice--_braise_--over a slow fire
during six hours. He explained that it was a great mistake to roast
pheasants. For those who insisted on his roasting them he provided
himself with vine twigs (sarments), the fire made with them imparting a
subtle flavor to the meat. But the meat of a pheasant though delicious
was dry, and the method he had adopted was altogether the best for
bringing out the full meaning of the bird. The same was true of
ortolans.

Theodore did not appear more than twice: at the opening ceremony of the
soup and at the climax--the newly created combination. While we were
partaking of this last, he told us of a great discussion that was about
to be settled as to the respective flavor of three kinds of mutton. He
had been enlisted on the side of the Long Island breed, and had that day
selected the sheep which was to have the honor of representing Long
Island interests. He explained that much depended on the choice of the
animal. In his selection he had picked out one upon whose hind legs were
the tooth marks of the shepherd dog, for these marks showed him to be
so keen on sweet pasture that it took an actual bite to drive him from
it.

Theodore was a determined individualist and warm supporter of Chairo's.
It was insufferable, he said, that an artist like himself--and bowing
condescendingly to Anna, he added--"and our young lady, too"--should
have to work half the day for the state, when under individualistic
conditions thousands of rich men would have been delighted to cover him
with gold in recognition of his services. I could not help thinking of a
distinguished cook I had known in Paris once who, under these very
individualistic conditions, had struggled with debt all his life and
never escaped from it.

After Theodore had served the birds he withdrew. We were enjoying the
dish when Anna surprised us by saying, as though she had just made the
discovery:

"This is really quite nice!"

"Why, my dear child," said her father, "it is a _chef d'oeuvre_! What
have you been thinking about all this time?"

"I have been looking at Theodore; do you know, he has a good head to
sculpt."

We all laughed at this view of Theodore, and Harmes said:

"This kind of thing is rather a jump from what we have at the colony."

"Is the food bad there?" asked I.

"No, not bad; but nothing nice until we can afford to pay for it with
the wages we earn."

This led to a long account by Harmes of how the colony was managed and
the system--often proposed in my day--for slowly restoring the inmates
of a reformatory to social life.

Harmes spoke so freely of the whole subject that I ventured to ask him:

"And Neaera--was it her fault or yours?"

Harmes' eye flashed a moment, and then looking around the table, and
finally at Ariston, asked:

"Can I speak freely?"

"Certainly," said Ariston. "Our friend here knows, perhaps, more about
Neaera than you do."

"Am I to condole with you, then?" asked Harmes.

"No," I answered. "I had the advantage over you of age and experience."

"She is a little devil," said Harmes. "And the devil of it is that if I
were to see her to-morrow I believe I should want to make love to her
again."

"Harmes!" exclaimed his mother protestingly.

"Oh, I have learned my lesson! I won't make love to her again; but the
amazing thing is that after all she has cost me I cannot make up my mind
to dislike her as I ought."

"You needn't dislike her," said Ariston, "any more than you need dislike
a stone that breaks your leg."

"I cannot but think, however," said Campbell, "that the punishment was
out of proportion to the offense."

"No," said Ann, to my great surprise. "You must not say that. No one has
suffered more from Harmes' confinement in the colony than I, and yet I
am bound to say that violence is to my mind--and to the mind of all of
us women--so dangerous a thing that I prefer my son should be an
innocent victim than that it should go unpunished."

We had a delicious bottle of California Burgundy with our birds, and I
asked whether this was provided by the state.

"Fortunately," said Campbell, "the state has never taken the vineyards
out of the hands of those who owned them at the time of the new
constitution. It monopolizes the distillation of liquor, but all wines
not containing more than six per cent alcohol are produced by individual
enterprise. The owners have to contribute a stipulated quota to the
state, as in the case of all agricultural products. The surplus belongs
to them; but as the money they get from the state has no value two years
after issue, we find in this very class the best customers for our
bank."

We had by this time finished our dinner; the coffee and cigars were
before us, and the company settled themselves for a long talk on the
working of their system, all of which was of great interest to me, a
traveller from the past.

The minutes passed rapidly in this interesting exchange of experiences
until Anna and Ann, who had long shown signs of _ennui_, arose to
depart, and Ariston, noting their desire to leave, paid the bill and we
left.




CHAPTER XXI

THE INVESTIGATING COMMITTEE


Meanwhile, the investigating committee had been appointed, and the day
came when witnesses were to be examined. The committee sat in the
afternoon only, so as to make it possible for all to attend without
sacrificing their state work. Masters, of course, was there, Chairo,
too, and Ariston, who continued to act for Chairo. Ariston had consulted
with me as to the wisdom of preparing Masters for the testimony
implicating Neaera, which we knew would be elicited. But I preferred to
allow events to take their course.

The first witness called was one of those who had attacked the House of
Detention and been wounded. He had clearly remained devoted to Chairo;
for to every question put to him, which tended to implicate Chairo, he
displayed astonishing forgetfulness; but as soon as the examination bore
upon my interview with Balbus, at which he had been present, he stated
every circumstance exactly as it had happened, except that he was,
perhaps, more severe on Neaera than she deserved.

"She would not allow Balbus to speak," he said. "She walked right over
from the corner where she was writing and wouldn't allow Balbus to say a
word."

He even insisted that it was Neaera who had ordered my arrest, and
personally supervised the act of binding me to the chair.

Masters' brow grew dark at this attack on Neaera, and he undertook to
cross-examine the witness, but did it clumsily and ineffectually. His
principal effort was to induce the witness to admit that Neaera had
already received orders from Chairo that an attempt at rescue was to be
made whatever apparently contradictory messages might be received,
whether purporting to come from him, Chairo, or from others.

This line of cross-examination incensed Chairo who was indirectly
charged by it with having sent me on a message for the purpose of
assuming an air of innocence, when he all the time intended the attempt
at rescue to be made.

Ariston with great difficulty kept Chairo from angry interruption; and
on redirect examination, which he was allowed in Chairo's interest to
conduct, strengthened the evidence of Chairo's good faith.

The next witness was clearly of Hibernian descent, for he at once took
the entire committee and audience into his confidence. "I'll tell you
all about it," he said. "I'm the janitor of the 'Liberty' offices, and I
know all about it from the beginning."

He then proceeded to give a complete history of his own life from the
earliest years he could remember, and he assured us that he would go
still further back if he could; that he had nothing to conceal from the
committee, and would tell them "all about it from the very beginning."

Over and over again he was interrupted by the committee, who complained
of the irrelevancy of his testimony. "And would you have me hold
anything back?" he said indignantly. "Haven't I sworn to tell the whole
truth as well as nothing but the truth?"

"We only want to hear you in connection with the organization and arming
of forces by Chairo with a view to violence and the subsequent attempt
upon the House of Detention."

"And haven't I known Chairo all my life," responded the witness
triumphantly, "and isn't that just what I'm telling you? Just leave me
quiet," he added, "and I'll tell you the whole thing from the
beginning."

The committee, thinking time would in the end be saved, gave the witness
rope, of which he was not slow to take advantage, for he interlarded his
narrative with stories so comic that the committee was at last obliged
to interfere again. But his wit was equal to every emergency, and after
an hour spent in the futile effort to extract information from him, he
was released. A broad wink at Chairo as he left the witness box set the
audience in a roar, but did not help Chairo's case.

The third witness was another of the party which had attacked the House
of Detention, and he clearly was actuated by no desire to shield Chairo,
for he testified to details so damaging to him that no one had any
longer any doubt as to Chairo having organized a vast conspiracy against
the State. He had himself been one of Chairo's lieutenants, and he gave
the names of the men that had joined him, the weapons that had been
secured, the date of his first instructions from Chairo, and their
tenor; in fact, nothing was left untold. He was not present when I
carried Chairo's message to Balbus.

Ariston cross-examined him with great skill, tripped him up as to some
of his dates and details, and even threw some confusion into his
testimony regarding the character of the instructions. But as to the
main facts his testimony was unshaken.

The examination and cross-examination of these three witnesses occupied
the whole of the first day; and as Chairo, Ariston, and I returned
slowly to our quarters we found it difficult to speak. Chairo was still
angry with Masters, and expressed himself on the subject in a few
explosive sentences. Ariston reminded Chairo that Masters was an old
admirer of Neaera's, and I felt almost guilty at withholding from them
that he had actually married her.

After our plunge, Ariston and I brightened up a little, but Chairo
remained profoundly depressed.

"The fact is," he said, "I am beginning to look at things from a
different point of view. This military organization of ours was a
gigantic mistake."

"Violence can only be justified," said Ariston, "by some public
necessity or injustice; no isolated personal grievance can possibly
justify it."

"We thought that this whole Demetrian cult had become a social evil, but
others evidently do not."

Chairo's manner had so changed from what it was when I first met him
among the hills of Tyringham that my mind was set upon inquiring as to
the cause, and I could not help suspecting that his misgivings were for
the most part due to Lydia.

I felt that I was _de trop_ and found some excuse for leaving them.

Later Ariston told me that although Chairo was profoundly discouraged,
strange to say, he had expressed little concern about himself or his
political aims; what he used to describe as "The Cause," and really
meant his own ambition, seemed to have entirely passed out of his mind;
his whole concern now was for Lydia.

The examination of witnesses during the next few days resulted in a
confirmation of all the facts brought out on the first day; Chairo had
clearly undertaken a vast and dangerous conspiracy against the state; he
had, in good faith, sought at the last moment to prevent violence, and
Neaera was wholly responsible for the attempt at rescue. Masters and his
following alone persisted in endeavoring to shield Neaera. According to
them, instructions had been given by Chairo to both Balbus and Neaera
that in case of any accident happening to himself, the attempt was to be
made to rescue him, and that this attempt was to serve as an excuse for
the violence which they felt indispensable to the defeat of the
Demetrian cult.

As the examination was drawing to a close, Ariston pointed out to me
that I was probably the only man who could persuade Masters of his
mistake; he also urged that not only Chairo's fate hung in the balance
but Lydia's also.

Ariston told me that Lydia's letters to him plainly showed that her own
hopes as to the passage of the amnesty bill had come to an end, and that
the subject under discussion between them now was what they should do in
case the amnesty bill was not passed.

While we were talking over the matter in our apartment, we were
astonished to receive the visit of Masters, for of late Masters had
failed to recognize any of our party in the courthouse, and we feared
that the issue regarding Neaera's responsibility had occasioned a
permanent break in the ranks of the opposition.

When Masters entered the room he made no pretense of cordiality; he
apologized conventionally for intruding, and explained that his visit
was due to a letter received from Neaera that day, in which she had
urged him to see me, as she was convinced I could set his mind at rest
regarding her innocence.

I perceived without difficulty that Neaera must have been reduced to
desperate straits in order to have recourse to such a reckless measure,
and that the correspondence between Masters and her must have betrayed
considerable doubt in Masters's mind as to the truth of her statements
concerning her connection with the business. I was determined to learn
from Masters as far as possible what was his present attitude to Neaera.
So I asked:

"You have heard the witnesses; what is your own impression of the
matter?"

"You could not expect me to believe them, could you?"

There was an expression of agony on Masters's brow which made me feel
strongly drawn to him.

"Shall Ariston stay while we talk about this?" asked I.

"Yes," said Masters, turning to Ariston. "It is well that you should
know that Neaera is my wife."

Ariston put up both hands with an involuntary expression of dismay, the
significance of which Masters did not fail to take in. He looked at me
half in despair, half in inquiry.

"Ariston understands now," I said, "why you have undertaken to vindicate
Neaera."

"I should have undertaken to vindicate her in any event," answered
Masters. "She is a woman, and a concerted effort is being directed
toward making a scapegoat of her."

"The witnesses," I answered, "are certainly unanimous on the subject."

"From what you say," Masters said, "I gather that you do not disbelieve
them."

The veins in Masters's forehead were swelling with the effort he was
making to hide his indignation.

"I have been at great pains to be released from the obligation of
testifying," I answered, "because I have not wished to injure her,
because, above all," I added, "I have not wished to injure you."

We had remained standing during this conversation, but when I said
this--and in saying it I tried to make Masters feel that I was sorry for
him--he turned away a little and sank sideways upon a chair. He leaned
one arm on the back of it, bowing his head upon his hand, and after a
moment's pause turned to me again; his face was white now.

"If that is your reason for not testifying I am obliged to you," he
said. "But which is your real reason--to spare Neaera or to spare me?"

"I have no more reason for sparing Neaera than that she is a woman; I
have every reason for sparing you."

Masters looked at me inquiringly.

"I have nothing to conceal from you," I continued.

"Then tell me just what happened," answered Masters.

I took a seat and so did Ariston, and thought for a moment how I could
tell the facts in so far as they concerned the attempt at rescue without
disclosing Neaera's designs upon myself. I confined myself to the part
she played when I gave Chairo's message to Balbus.

"Might not this have been done by Neaera," asked Masters, "in compliance
with a prior understanding with Chairo?"

"I cannot believe," said I, "that there was any such understanding;
indeed, I am convinced that if Neaera was not herself the cause of
Chairo's capture, she was a party to it." I told then the story of the
tampering with Chairo's carriage.

"Could not this, too, have been a part of the plot?" pleaded Masters
desperately.

"A part of Neaera's plot, not a part of Chairo's. No one can talk ten
minutes with Chairo now without being convinced that his first object
was to get possession of Lydia; the political intrigue in the latest
stage of the affair became altogether a secondary matter."

"Neaera was not," interrupted Ariston, "pleased with the role Lydia
played in the matter. At one time there was no small intimacy between
Chairo and Neaera; Neaera is not a woman to see her place taken by
another without vindictiveness. In preventing the escape of Chairo she
was serving a double purpose; she kept the issue alive, and she
satisfied a personal pique."

Masters looked at me as though to learn my opinion on this view.

"I gathered this: from a few words Neaera dropped after she had set me
free," I said; "she told me that all Chairo wanted was Lydia."

Masters jumped up from his chair.

"Then you would have me believe," said he, "that my wife is a vixen!"

At this I jumped up too.

"Masters," I said, "I have told you the facts because I felt you were
entitled to them. If you cannot stand hearing the facts you should not
have asked for them."

There was a moment when it seemed doubtful whether we might not come to
blows; but the flash went out of Masters's eye as he looked at me, and
presently he held out his hand to me and said:

"I am sure you have intended to render me a service, and I suppose in
the end"--he paused a moment as he shook my hand, and added--"in the end
it will prove to be so."

Then, taking up his cap and cloak, he said:

"At any rate there need be no hard feeling between myself and Chairo,
but I am a little dazed by what I have heard, and so I shall ask you
both to keep this interview confidential for a time. In a few days I
shall know better just how to act."




CHAPTER XXII

"TREASONS, STRATAGEMS, AND SPOILS"


But as Masters walked homeward his irresolution disappeared. He saw that
his love for Neaera and his _amour propre_ had blinded him to the real
significance of the testimony elicited by the investigating committee.
Taking together the unanimity of this testimony, the breaking down of
Chairo's carriage, the _tendresse_ that Neaera had certainly once
entertained for Chairo, the duplicity with which he had over and over
again heard Neaera charged, certain ambiguities in some of her own
statements, and this last barefaced appeal to me, there could be no more
doubt. He rehearsed the interview at which he had asked her to marry
him; he had been trapped by a show of indignation and a tearful eye.

By the time he reached his rooms his mind was made up. He sat down and
wrote the following letter:

     "DEAR NEAERA: I am afraid that the facts which have come to my
     knowledge leave no doubt as to your being responsible for the
     attack on the House of Detention. You are charged, too, with having
     tampered with Chairo's carriage in order to prevent his escape with
     Lydia. Shall I investigate this matter, or would it not perhaps be
     better for you to turn over the leaf and start a clean page
     somewhere else? I am prepared to do what is needful in order to
     make this easy to you, and send you by the messenger who hands this
     to you money for your immediate necessities. Should you wish your
     mother to accompany you, I shall provide for her also. Meanwhile,
     of course, we can arrange to undo the marriage that was somewhat
     hastily celebrated.

"Yours,

  "MASTERS."


Neaera was not far from New York. She and her mother were both occupying
a cottage belonging to Masters in New Jersey, behind the Palisades. Her
mother was a widow and a cipher. She had been a helpless spectator of
her daughter's too brilliant adventures, and was accustomed to sudden
changes.

When Neaera received Masters's letter she sent word to him she would be
in New York that night. Masters on receiving the message packed a small
portmanteau and went to Boston, leaving word with his aunt, who kept
house for him, to receive Neaera should she arrive.

Masters was unwilling to subject himself to a scene with Neaera. While
his messenger was away evidence had been presented to him which left no
doubt as to Neaera having tampered with Chairo's carriage; and this was
more than sufficient as a last straw. He felt he had been unaccountably
weak in his previous personal encounters with her and that she was now
counting upon this weakness. It is not easy for a man to turn a woman
out of his house, nor to hand over to the authorities a political
refugee who has entrusted herself to his care. To keep Neaera in his
rooms under the circumstances would have been consistent neither with
what he owed the state nor with what he owed himself. He trusted,
therefore, to Neaera's intelligence to conclude from his departure that
his decision was irrevocable.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, Lydia had left Tyringham and returned to New York. This had
not happened without considerable negotiation, for it had been part of
the understanding upon which Chairo had been released on parole that
Lydia was to remain away from New York. The intention of this
arrangement was to prevent Chairo from further compromising Lydia,
pending the determination of his case. But Lydia had been of late so
much disturbed by Chairo's letters that she had come to a decision which
she proceeded at once, if possible, to carry out, and as a first step
toward doing so, it was indispensable that she should go to New York.

She sent, therefore, to Irene the letter from Chairo which had
particularly exercised her and asked Irene whether, under the
circumstances, she could not once more be received at the cloister, no
longer as a Demetrian but as one in retreat, in order that she might
concert with Irene and other members of the council as to the course she
proposed to pursue.

The letter from Chairo--or rather the extract from it--which she sent to
Irene ran as follows:

     "I could ask no one but you to believe how differently my own acts
     appear to me when I looked back upon them some weeks ago with the
     glamour that self-deception threw around them and when I hear them
     to-day coldly recited in the witness box. During the examination I
     have asked myself whether the witnesses I have heard testifying
     before the investigating committee were really telling about me, or
     were not rather telling of events which have happened only in a
     nightmare. And when I push my self-examination further, I see that
     the difference lies in this: At the time I prepared our forces for
     violence I was thinking of myself; now, I am thinking of you.

     "I do not disguise from myself that the story narrated by more than
     a dozen witnesses regarding my actions prior to your acceptance of
     the mission, condemns me to an extent that makes the passage of an
     amnesty bill--so far as I am concerned--difficult if not
     impossible. The question, therefore, arises, What am I to do? I am
     perfectly prepared to take my punishment myself, but it almost
     makes me die to think that I am dragging you with me into disgrace.
     I have thought that probably I am at this moment the chief
     difficulty in the way of a conclusion of this business; that if I
     were not fighting for my own release, the others would be pardoned
     easily enough. I would willingly bear the brunt of it all were it
     not for you. My perplexity is, that in fighting for you I am
     fighting also for myself."

Irene discussed the possibility of Lydia's return to the cloister with
her colleagues, and the extract from Chairo's letter was read to them.
Masters, also, was consulted; for his effort to defend Neaera's
reputation had enlisted him against Chairo on the side of the cult, and
he had, therefore, been occasionally admitted to their counsels. It was
finally decided that in view of Chairo's present attitude--the sincerity
of which very few were disposed to doubt--and in view of the course
Lydia proposed to adopt, she should be readmitted to retreat in the
cloister, though it was deemed wise to give as little publicity to this
return as possible.

Masters, however, had told Neaera of it, and when Neaera arrived at
Masters's rooms to find that he had left New York, her agile and
vindictive mind immediately set itself to a combination of "treasons,
stratagems, and spoils," in which somehow or another she wanted Lydia
and Chairo to play a part--a part that would give some satisfaction to
her spite. Then, too, there was somewhere in her mind the possibility
that if, as she understood, Chairo was hard pressed, and if, as she
hoped, Lydia was to any degree alienated from him through the influence
of the cloister, Chairo might be induced to share her evils with her.
There were chapters in their past that he might not find it distasteful
to rehearse.

Neaera on arriving in New York found Masters's aunt fussily desirous to
be useful to her, and yet very anxious at the thought that she was
harboring a political runaway. Neaera had arrived after dark, so veiled
as to escape recognition. She was nerved for an encounter with Masters,
in which she was by feminine dexterity to dissipate the suspicions to
which he had fallen too easy a prey, and the news that he was gone had
for first effect to make her restlessly anxious to do something. She
therefore asked whether two notes could be delivered by private
messenger that night, one to Lydia and one to Chairo. After inquiry,
arrangements were made to do this, and Neaera sat down to contrive her
little plot. The first part of it was simple enough. She wrote to Lydia
that she had come to New York at great personal risk expressly to see
her on a matter of vital importance, and asked her to come the next
morning punctually at ten. To Chairo she showed less solicitude: she
confined herself to the bare statement of her whereabouts, and that she
would be alone next morning at a quarter past ten till half past. The
messenger was directed not to wait for an answer to either note.

The next morning, punctually at ten, Lydia, to Neaera's delight, was
shown into Masters's study.

"I had to see you," said Neaera, kissing her. She dismissed the aunt,
begging her not to admit any other persons without announcing them, and
put Lydia down on a sofa. She sat next to Lydia and took her hand.

"I am afraid you don't like me," she said.

"On the contrary," answered Lydia, "I like you, but I differ from you."

"Yes, I know; we differ on almost everything; on the cult, on state
employment, on personal liberty, etc., etc., but then, we have one thing
in common, we are both women."

Lydia looked a little puzzled. This abstract conversation was not what
she had been prepared by Neaera's note to expect.

"I am not at all sure," she said, "that it is not just about womanhood
that we differ most."

"Lydia!" answered Neaera reproachfully.

"I did not mean to wound you," said Lydia quickly. "There is so much
room for honest difference of opinion that I do not undertake to set my
opinion against yours, or indeed anyone's. But is it not dangerous for
you to be here?"

Neaera smiled consciously, and said:

"I am not thinking of that. I came to see you because I felt you ought
to be put right, and I want to do right; in the first place, you will be
misled if you believe the wicked falsehoods that are being circulated in
order to put the whole blame for what has occurred upon me. I should
never have left New York of my own will. Masters forced me to go, and I
am occupying his cottage at Englewood. I am prepared at any time to
return to New York and set things right, and I can; I can testify to the
message sent by Chairo, to my efforts to induce Balbus to give up the
attempt at rescue, to Balbus's refusal to listen to me, to his having
arrested Xenos and bound him, to my having released Xenos--and Xenos
will, I am sure, if I ask him, confirm my testimony. This will set
Chairo right before the committee; only I don't want to see Chairo. He
has been imploring me for an interview. I don't want to complicate
things; you have suffered enough, you shall not suffer any more through
me----"

Lydia was about to rise and leave the room; she would not by word or
gesture admit the inference to be drawn from Neaera's words--admit the
possibility of inconstancy on the part of Chairo; but at the moment she
was about to rise a ring was heard at the door, and presently the aunt
appeared excitedly, and announced that Chairo was there. Neaera jumped
up and shut the door.

"You must not see him here," she said to Lydia. "Come into this room,"
and she beckoned her into an adjoining parlor, separated from the study
only by a curtain. Lydia, who was under a promise not to meet Chairo,
had no option but to follow Neaera, but she followed with a cheek
flushed with indignation. She sat stiffly in a chair while Neaera left
her to receive Chairo. She heard the door of the study open and
Neaera's voice in the adjoining room say:

"Chairo, my poor Chairo!"

Then she buried her face in her hands and her fingers in her ears so
that she should not be an unwilling listener. She would be staunch to
her faith in Chairo, for this was the one rock under the shelter of
which in the shifting and stormy skies she felt there was any longer any
safety for her.

Lydia heard in spite of herself Neaera's cooing treble and the rich
vibrating notes of Chairo's voice; she heard them laugh once, and then
there came what seemed to be a silence that was terrible to her. Later,
the voices resumed again. She passed a half hour of anguish, striving to
listen and striving not to hear, and during that half hour she thought
she heard the voices in the adjoining room pass through every gamut of
emotion; they were sometimes raised as though each was striving to outdo
the other, then they would sink into silence again. Would it never come
to an end--this interview between the man she loved and a woman she
despised? At last she heard a door close; she removed her hands from her
head and tried to look composed.

Neaera came to her with her cheeks flushed.

"Did you hear anything?" asked she.

Lydia arose.

"I have been here too long," said Lydia. "You have nothing else to say,
I think," and she moved out of the parlor into the study and was moving
out of the study into the hall when Neaera stopped her, and said:

"You are not mistaking Chairo's visit, are you?" There was the prettiest
little dimple in Neaera's cheek as she said this. "Nothing but
politics," she added, and the dimple deepened.

"Good-by," said Lydia, without holding out her hand.

Neaera burst out now into a little laugh, for Lydia had passed her and
was at the door.

"Nothing but politics," laughed Neaera, as Lydia shut the door behind
her.




CHAPTER XXIII

A LIBEL


As Lydia hurried back to the cloister she had a humiliated sense of
having been in contact with something foul. Indignant at the trap which
had been laid for her, sore at the struggle neither to listen nor to
doubt, one thought only occupied her: to get back to the cloister and
wash her mind and body clean of the whole concern.

She had not been allowed to respond to Neaera's invitation without a
long discussion with Irene and the Mother Superior. The compact upon
which she had come to New York was that she was not to meet Chairo
there; to insure this, it had been the unexpressed understanding that
she would not leave the cloister until Chairo's case was judged--or at
least not leave it without the permission of the Demetrian authorities.
So when Neaera's message was received, Lydia at once showed it to
Irene.

Neaera's role in the whole matter was such an important one, and so much
depended on what it could be proved to have been, that the Mother
Superior judged it worth the risk to allow Lydia to visit Neaera. When,
therefore, Lydia returned to the cloister, Irene at once questioned her
as to the result of the interview.

But Lydia was not prepared to lay bare even to Irene all she had
suffered at Masters's rooms. It was already pitiful enough that her love
for Chairo had become a subject for public discussion, and, indeed, a
matter of political concern. This last agony she would keep to herself;
she felt unable to talk about it to others, so she answered Irene
imploringly:

"Do not ask me. Nothing has come of it which can be of the slightest
importance to the cult or to any one. Neaera is a worse woman than I
thought."

Irene hesitated. She did not wish to intrude on Lydia, and yet she knew
the Mother Superior would not be satisfied with this answer. But there
was no reason for forcing an answer from Lydia at once, so she
accompanied her to her room.

"I want a bath," said Lydia. "I feel contaminated."

"Physically contaminated?" asked Irene, smiling.

"The mere presence of that woman is a physical contamination," answered
Lydia.

"Well, let us go down and take a plunge together," answered Irene,
laughing.

"Will you?" asked Lydia. "And then we can go to the temple afterwards.
That will be the best of all."

The two women stepped down to the swimming bath and donned their
swimming dress.

Lydia stood on the plunging board, and as she raised her beautiful arms
above her head and straightened herself for the plunge, she said:

"Ah! Irene, if life were all as simple and as wholesome and as
delightful as this!"

Reinvigorated by the fresh salt plunge, they resumed their draperies and
walked slowly to the temple. The service was coming to an end and they
knelt to hear the closing chorus of the Choephoroi. The words came with
refreshing distinctness to Lydia, and the hopefulness of them filled her
heart with strength. They told of the beauty of women, of their
devotion. Beauty was a snare, but it was also a sanctuary. For the
goddess gave beauty to the good and to the evil alike--so had the Fates
decreed. And the evil would use it to the undoing of man, but the good
to the building of him up. And the goddess loved good and hated evil.

Then came the prayer of the women; they prayed to Demeter to give them
charm to delight and courage to renounce, that love and moderation bring
in the end happiness and peace.

And the priest lifted his hand in benediction:

"Go forth, for the goddess hath blessed you, and hath bidden you take
heed that, pitiless though be Anagke, even her empire may at last be
broken by the fruit of your womb."

The congregation knelt at these words and remained kneeling while the
choir marched out singing a recessional, solemn and strong. Then came
the novices, the Demetrians, and, last of all, the high priest bearing
the sacred emblem.

When Lydia and Irene left the temple and followed the arcade to the
cloister, all doubts and fears seemed to have fallen from Lydia, as
scales from eyes blinded by cataract.

"How beautiful the cult of Demeter is!" exclaimed Lydia, "and how
strengthening."

Irene passed her arm round Lydia's waist. "You know now," she said, "how
easy my sacrifice has become! Oh, we have to pass through the fire, but
once the ordeal is over, happiness comes unbidden and unexpected. Come
to my boy--my boys, I should say. I left them at work and I shall
probably find them at play; but they are truthful and innocent. Their
innocence is a daily delight to me."

And the two women returned to their duties. Lydia forgot that she had
heard Neaera whispering to Chairo. She had taken in a draught of
strength, and she needed it, for another trial was at hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lydia was allowed to sleep that night the sleep of the innocent, but the
next morning while she was engaged in the hospital ward, Irene came to
her with an expression of agitation on her face that was unusual. She
carried in her hand a newspaper, which Lydia was not slow in
recognizing, and asked Lydia when she would be through her work, as she
had an important word to say to her.

Lydia promised to hurry and be back in her room within ten minutes.
Irene said she would go at once to her room and wait there. The moment
Irene left the room the probable contents of the newspaper flashed upon
her, and she saw the folly of her reticence. She was putting the last
bandage about the leg of a child when suddenly, at the thought of the
false construction that might be placed upon her silence, a weakness
came over her that made it almost impossible for her to finish her task.

"What is the matter, Aunt Lydia?" asked the child; "you look pale."

Lydia collected herself. "Nothing," she said, "I shall be all right
presently." She passed her unoccupied hand over her eyes and was able to
resume and complete her work.

When she had sewn up the bandage she put back the small wounded limb
into the bed, tucked in the sheets, and, preoccupied as she was with her
new concern, was moving away without giving the child the customary
kiss.

"Aunt Lydia!" cried out the child, holding out its little hands.

"Darling," answered Lydia, and as the soft arms closed around her neck
and she felt innocent lips upon her cheek, tears gushed from her eyes,
of which--relief though they gave her--she was nevertheless ashamed.

The child looked wonderingly at her, and she said:

"It is nothing at all, and Aunt Lydia is very grateful for a sweet
little kiss."

The child patted her cheek with a dimpled hand as she bent over him,
and Lydia left, wondering how often she would have to be reminded that
happiness did not depend only upon the satisfaction of our own desires.
She had left the temple full of this thought, and yet a suspected
attack, directed by a newspaper against her own particular designs, had
in a moment blackened her entire horizon. When she reached her room and
found Irene there she was once more calm and strong.

She found Irene sitting down, with the newspaper open on her knees. It
was published by a few devotees in vindication of the cult, although
lacking its support. The cult had, indeed, often tried to suppress its
publication but had not succeeded. It had been able only to compel the
publishers to change its name, for it had been published at first under
the title "The Demetrian." The cult had pointed out that this title gave
the impression that it was an authorized organ, whereas it was not only
unauthorized but published in a spirit opposite to that taught by the
cult. So the name had been changed to "Sacrifice," this word having been
selected in opposition to the word "Liberty"--the title of its rival.

In the issue of that morning was the following paragraph:

"We are incensed to learn that although Chairo was given his liberty on
the express understanding that he was not to use it in order to
consummate his outrage on Lydia, and although Lydia was allowed to come
to New York only on the condition that she was to remain confined to the
cloister and not to see Chairo, these two, who have already scandalized
the cult and the whole community beyond endurance, managed yesterday to
meet clandestinely at the rooms of Masters, between ten and eleven in
the morning. Masters is not in New York, so he cannot be held
responsible for this assignation; and Masters being out of town it is
hardly necessary to point out that on this occasion the guilty couple
were quite alone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lydia thought when she entered her room that she was braced to endure
anything, but when she came to the closing words of the paragraph the
blood rushed to her face. She managed, however, to avoid further
expression of her indignation.

"It is false, of course?" said Irene.

"No," answered Lydia, and with burning cheeks she turned her tired eyes
on Irene. "It is not false--and it is not true."

"What do you mean?" asked Irene anxiously.

"Chairo was there."

"And you saw him?"

Irene was bending over her breathlessly.

A fearful agitation tormented Lydia. Must she indeed renew the anguish
of that hour--nay, treble it, by laying it bare to all the world? She
could have told it to Irene, but to tell it to her as a vindication of
herself would involve the telling of it to the Mother Superior and to
the rest. And who would believe that she had not seen or spoken to
Chairo, that far from seeing him, she had crouched in an adjoining room
with her fingers at her ears in agony lest she should hear and lest she
should not hear?

She remained silent, with her head bowed over the offending sheet.

"You _must_ tell me," Irene pleaded; "I need not tell it to any one--at
least I think I need not," added she, hesitating, "but I know you have
done no wrong; you must clear yourself, Lydia; for the love of the
goddess, tell me."

"For the love of the goddess," repeated Lydia slowly; she paused a
moment, and then, mistress of herself again, she said:

"I neither saw Chairo nor spoke to him. _You_ will believe this, but who
else will?"

"Your word is enough for me," answered Irene, "and I shall make it
enough for them all."

The women arose and embraced each other, then Lydia said:

"Too much has been already said about the most secret as well as the
most sacred matters of a woman's life. It belongs to us women to
preserve the dignity that we derive from Demeter, and that we owe her. I
shall say no more on this matter. Am I not right?"




CHAPTER XXIV

NEAERA AGAIN


Neaera's attempt on Chairo had proved a humiliating failure, and when
she confronted Lydia her cheeks were flushed, not with success as might
have been imagined, but with the effort to escape without disgrace from
a situation for which she had no one to thank or blame but herself.
Chairo had certainly at one time been attracted by Neaera beyond the
limits of mere companionship, but he had not taken long to discover that
the glances that tended to bewitch him were no less bewitchingly turned
on others, and he soon put Neaera where she deserved in his
acquaintance.

She was extremely useful to him in his political plans and on the staff
of "Liberty"; and although he was dimly conscious that Neaera would to
the end--at every moment that the strain of the actual work was
relieved--endeavor to bring into their intimacy the element of coquetry
of which she was a past master, Chairo treated this disposition with
something of the amused sense of her charm that would be elicited by a
pet animal. And this willingness to be amused by her Neaera understood
to mean a tribute to her attractiveness that might on a suitable
occasion lead to an exchange of vows at the altar of matrimony.

But she little understood Chairo when she attempted to force the
occasion of their meeting at Masters's into a channel so opposite to his
present disposition. When he entered the room where Neaera awaited him
the lines in his face and the fatigue in his eye elicited from Neaera an
ejaculation in which, strange to say, there was some real sincerity. She
was truly sorry for him, and she was woman enough to guess that the
weary face before her was due to no mere political reverses, for the
face was not only that of a tired man, it was also that of a man who had
been chastened. She was restive under the thought that the chastening
influence could be his love for Lydia, and the problem before her grew
complicated when she guessed how difficult it would be for her to elicit
from Chairo any word that could sting the woman whom to that particular
end she had secreted in the adjoining room. Then, too, although she was
mistress of her own voice, she was not mistress of Chairo's, and the
possibility that Lydia might close her ears was one that did not enter
within the scope of Neaera's imagination.

After having expressed her sympathy for Chairo and found that it
elicited little or no response from him, but, on the contrary, that he
was eager to know the reason of her presence in New York and of her
message to him, she launched upon a highly imaginative account of her
relations to Masters, and with her command of humor very soon got Chairo
laughing over the success with which, according to her story, she had
pulled the wool over Masters's eyes. Chairo had no reason to love
Masters, and he had long ceased to regard Neaera as a responsible
person; the immorality of her proceeding affected him, therefore, no
more than if he had observed it in a monkey or a cat.

Neaera told her story in words so rapid and a voice so low that Lydia
could hardly have understood it had she tried, and Neaera felt that she
had scored a point when she had made Chairo laugh. Then, anticipating
the effect of silence on Lydia, she had handed Chairo some selected
passages from Masters's letters to read, and as Chairo burst again into
laughter over certain passages in them, Neaera began to feel she might
venture farther. Laughter, especially over an unrighteous matter, tends
to make all righteousness seem superfluous, but when Neaera got near
Chairo, in a pretense of reading over his shoulder, a very slight and
almost unconscious movement of Chairo away from her made her understand
that any further effort in this direction would be a mistake.

So Neaera set herself to discussing very seriously the situation with
Chairo, assured him that she was prepared to sacrifice herself, and with
a tear in her eye admitted to him, almost in a whisper, that she had
tampered with his carriage.

"I knew it," said Chairo.

"But did you guess why?" asked Neaera, very low.

Chairo did not answer, but looked inquiry.

"Then you shall never know," continued Neaera.

This was the psychological moment of the interview. She had intended,
had Chairo given her the least encouragement, to throw herself into his
arms and confess to him that she had never loved any man but him, that
so great was her love for him that she was prepared now to face the
investigating committee, tell the whole story, and telling the story by
so much exonerate him. She had expected that if there was a spark of
affection in Chairo's heart for her, his chivalrousness would be roused
by this offer, and he would share her fortunes rather than permit her
sacrifice to assure his.

But the possibility of this imagined scene had been dissipated by that
little unconscious movement of Chairo's away from her. Then, too, she
knew that Lydia was in the next room, and she almost regretted now that
she was there, for if Lydia had not been there she might have risked the
venture. But that Lydia should witness a humiliating rejection was a
risk she could not take. So she had spoken very low and rapidly in the
hope that although Lydia might not hear any specific word that would
hurt, she might gather a general impression that would sufficiently
torment her. She little knew how completely she was, to this extent at
any rate, succeeding.

"My dear Neaera," answered Chairo, "you are a very charming and
complicated person and I do not pretend to guess why you chose to thwart
my plans. But you have done me a great wrong in many ways. Should you
decide now to repair them--in so far as this is possible--you will be
behaving in a manner which, though proper, would hardly be consistent."
He smiled a little as he said this; Neaera wished he would not speak so
loud, and was even betrayed into a gesture which he interpreted as a
gesture of protest, but was really an instinctive effort to induce him
to lower his voice.

"You are very cruel to me," said Neaera, and she lowered her eyelids so
that her long, black lashes swept her cheek.

"And you are a charming little _comedienne_," laughed Chairo, "and you
ought to have devoted yourself to the stage."

"The world's my stage," she said, raising her eyes with a flash of
indignation. "And there is upon it every kind of character. But while I
have made a fool of many I have always respected you, and this is how
you pay me for it!"

Chairo was not deceived by her pretty little air of indignation, but he
said to himself that though it was a part she was playing, she played it
well; so he arose, and, taking her hand, said:

"I do not mean to be unkind, Neaera, and for anything you do to help me
I shall be profoundly grateful."

"What shall I do, Chairo?" she asked, looking up appealingly to him.

"Ah! that is in your hands," he answered.

"You can count upon me," she said, holding his hand in both of hers.

Chairo did not wish to prolong the interview, so by way of farewell he
lifted her hands to his lips. Then she fell upon her knees, kissed his
hands not once but many times, and bathed them in her tears. He lifted
her gently and put her in her chair.

"Good-bye, little woman," he said gently, "and be sure that whatever you
may do, I shall feel kindly toward you," and disengaging himself from
her, he left the room.

Neaera saw him leave with something like real affection in her heart.
"He is the best of them all," she said, "and I might have loved him
really." And whether it was that there was in her something that might
have responded to him had he love to give her or whether it was mere
reaction from her own trumped-up distress, there was a moment as Neaera
sat there when the little woman did sincerely think herself in love.

But the recollection that Lydia was in the next room came to her, and
she wondered how much Lydia had heard. She looked in the mirror and saw
there the reflection of the very agitation she wished Lydia to suspect,
and so before the trace of it could disappear, she hurried to her
victim. Perhaps, thought she, Lydia had heard something without hearing
too much.




CHAPTER XXV

THE LIBEL INVESTIGATED


Chairo was sitting at the head of one of the tables in the hall of our
building, and Ariston and I were on either side of him, when the morning
papers were brought in. Since the disappearance of "Liberty," only two
morning papers were daily published in New York: the state paper,
entitled "The New York News," and "Sacrifice." Chairo rapidly perused
"The News" and handed it to me. I was absorbed half in consuming the
oatmeal, with which our breakfast usually closed, and half in reading
"The News," when I was suddenly aware of an agitation in my neighbor
which caused me to look up at him.

I was surprised at the shape this agitation took; Chairo was a choleric
man; as I first remember him, very slight causes of annoyance sent the
blood to his face and found expression at once in a few violent
sentences. This morning, the first impatient gesture over, he sat very
still, pale, and with beads of cold perspiration on his forehead.

"What is it?" asked Ariston.

Chairo pushed the paper to him.

Ariston, after reading the passage indicated, said:

"Of course I understand that publicity of any kind on such a subject
must be odious to you; but after all, it is a lie, and can be easily
proved to be such."

"It is not altogether a lie," answered Chairo. "I was at Masters's rooms
at the hour indicated, but Lydia was not there--at least," he added,
correcting himself, "I did not see her there." For already he began to
suspect that Neaera had been at her tricks again.

"I shall go to the editor at once," continued Chairo, "and insist on the
publication of an apology."

The paper had by this time been handed to me and I had read the libel.

"Don't go to the editor now," urged Ariston. "You are justly indignant,
and you have a man to deal with, in the editor, who will only add to
your exasperation. Write a simple denial of the fact that you have seen
or spoken to Lydia at any time or place since your arrest."

"I won't drag her name into the paper again," exclaimed Chairo. "If I
write anything it must be so contrived as not to introduce her name. I
have a right to insist that my private affairs be no more discussed in
the paper."

"You have the undoubted right under our law to demand this, but don't be
impatient if I answer you that this matter is not a purely private one;
it is a matter of grave public interest."

Chairo flashed a look at Ariston that we both understood; it meant a
sudden revival of his aversion for the cult, which made of this private
matter one with which the public had a right to meddle; but the look
died away, and Chairo's face resumed the settled expression of
discouragement which had marked it since the sessions of the
investigating committee began.

"Let me see," said Ariston, "if I cannot draw up a letter which the
paper will have to publish," and he scribbled on the newspaper band that
Chairo had torn off and thrown aside. Very soon he produced the
following:

     THE EDITOR OF "SACRIFICE."

     "SIR: I avail myself of my right under the law to insist on your
     publishing this letter in the same place and in the same type as
     the paragraph to which it refers.

     "The statement that I have in spirit or in letter violated the
     compact under which I was released is not true. I was at Masters's
     rooms at the hour indicated, but I met no one there.

     "Should you add anything to the libel already published, by way of
     comment, head line, or otherwise of a nature to cast a doubt upon
     the contradiction herein contained, I shall at once have you
     prosecuted with the utmost rigor of the law.

     "I beg also to inform you that I shall regard any further reference
     to this incident as an improper meddling with my private affairs,
     and shall proceed accordingly."

Chairo glanced at the proposed letter, and said:

"It is quite satisfactory except as to one statement in it. I did not
meet Lydia at Masters', but I did meet another woman there."

Ariston and I looked at one another in surprise.

"An indiscretion?" asked Ariston.

"Not at all," said Chairo, "but a secret."

This was very awkward.

"I need not hesitate to tell you as my counsel, in confidence,"
continued Chairo. "But I think it must go no further."

We looked our inquiry.

"It was Neaera," said Chairo very low.

Ariston and I opened our eyes.

"That woman again!" exclaimed Ariston.

But Chairo rose, suggesting that it would be more prudent to discuss the
matter in our rooms, and we followed him there.

Chairo then told us of his interview with Neaera, leaving out of it all
that might have explained or reflected on her motives. Both Ariston and
I felt certain he was leaving out something.

"Well, we must modify our letter," said Ariston, and after some
discussion it was decided to leave out the statement that Chairo had
been at Masters's rooms altogether, and to confine the letter therefore
to a bare denial.

Ariston advised Chairo to go at once to Arkles and explain the facts, so
as to put the cult in a position to write a similar denial. Ariston and
I proceeded to the office of "Sacrifice."

On our way there we discussed Chairo's interview with Neaera.

"You may depend upon it," said Ariston, "she has lost Masters, and is
making a desperate effort to get back Chairo."

"And she had Lydia secreted in an adjoining room," guessed I.

"That's it," said Ariston; "she is a devil!"

"But can Chairo insist on the publication of his letter?" asked I.

"Certainly," said Ariston. "In this we have but copied an admirable
provision of the French law in your time. We have added to it a right
for every man to prohibit any paper from publishing any matter regarding
his private movements or his private affairs. The effect of this rule is
that as every paper wants to be free to publish what is known as society
news, and it can only do so with the tacit consent of those who make up
society, it has to take care to publish nothing that even borders on
libel. Libel and slander, I think I have told you, we regard as one of
the greatest of social crimes."

We found the editor of "Sacrifice" in a condition of sanctimonious
self-satisfaction. His article had produced a sensation, and he was
triumphant in the thought that he was accomplishing for the cult what
the cult itself was too feeble to accomplish for itself. He assumed an
air of portentous gravity when he learned the object of our visit.

"I hold Chairo in the hollow of my hand," said he, "and I do not mean to
let him off."

"You will have to publish his letter," insisted Ariston.

"I shall publish his letter and I shall brand it as a lie," retorted the
editor.

"You will do so at your peril," answered Ariston.

"I fear no consequences," said the little man, straightening himself in
his editorial chair. "When Chairo denies that he was at Masters's rooms
between ten and eleven yesterday morning, and Lydia denies that she was
there at the same hour, it will be time to resume investigation. So bare
a denial as this"--and he threw Chairo's letter contemptuously down on
his desk--"is not worth the paper it is written on."

"What is your proof of the correctness of your statement?" asked
Ariston.

"I need not produce it," said the editor pompously, "but I have nothing
to conceal," and after looking among the papers on his desk, he found
and handed us a typewritten statement of the fact constituting the
alleged libel. I was pretty sure that I detected here the hand of
Neaera.

"Before publishing this anonymous statement," continued the editor, "I
was careful to confirm it. The janitor of the building, upon being
questioned by me in person as to who had passed his lodge during the
hour in question, mentioned, of his own accord, both Chairo and Lydia.
They arrived each alone and at an interval of a few minutes. It was an
assignation. There is no doubt of it."

"You had best not tell Chairo so," said Ariston.

"Don't threaten me, sir," exclaimed the editor. "Your own role in this
matter will not bear investigation."

Ariston rose suddenly and advanced on the editor, but I interfered.

"You have come here," said I, "on an errand as counsel for Chairo,
because you feared he would not control his temper. Are you going to
lose yours?"

I had clutched Ariston by the arm, and at first he tried to extricate
himself from me, but he saw the force of my argument, and, looking a
little mortified, he said:

"Xenos is right. I have no right to prejudice Chairo's case by taking up
a quarrel of my own. Xenos, however, is a witness to the words you have
used and the animus you have shown. Now publish a word of comment if you
dare!"

Then, turning abruptly to the door, we both left the room.

As soon as we were out of the building Ariston, who was trembling with
suppressed passion, said:

"This man has to be scotched! He means mischief and is in a position to
do mischief unless we can make Chairo's innocence in this matter clear
as day. Let us summon the janitor at once before an examining magistrate
and get _all_ the facts from him. You understand me--_all_!"

I understood him, and appreciated the value of a procedure that enabled
any citizen to demand at any time the examination of any other citizen
before a magistrate--subject, of course, to a heavy penalty in case the
proceeding turned out to be unreasonable and vexatious. Had either of us
gone to the janitor ourselves we would have been accused of having
influenced him, so we addressed ourselves directly to a magistrate who
sent a messenger for the janitor and secured his attendance within half
an hour.

The janitor answered rapidly under interrogation as to the attendance of
both Chairo and Lydia at the hour named.

"Now tell us," asked Ariston, "who was in Masters's apartment at the
time."

"Masters's aunt."

"Was no one else there?"

"Yes, a messenger of Masters went backward and forward several times."

Ariston demanded the name of the messenger, and the magistrate at once
sent for him.

Ariston continued the examination.

"Was no one else in Masters's apartment besides his aunt?"

"I do not _know_ of any one else being there."

He emphasized the word "know."

"When did Masters leave?"

"About two in the afternoon."

"Did no one else go to his rooms from two in the afternoon to the
arrival of Lydia next morning?"

"Not to my knowledge."

Again he emphasized the word "knowledge."

"You do not know of your knowledge just where every one who passes your
lodge goes?"

"No."

"Who passed your lodge and went to Masters's staircase on the day before
Chairo and Lydia went there?"

The janitor mentioned here a large number of persons, and then added:

"There may have been others; I don't see every one who passes the
lodge."

"Did any one that night gain admission after dark?"

"A great many."

"Did you get the names of all?"

"Yes--of all--at least, there was one I did not get."

At last the janitor hesitated, and it seemed clear that Ariston was on
the right scent.

"Who was it?"

"I don't know. I was sleepy, I did not insist."

"Did no one pass out next day whom you had not admitted on the previous
night?"

"I did not notice any one particularly; I could not distinguish; so many
come and go."

The janitor seemed to think a little and hesitate.

"Go on," said Ariston. "Of whom are you thinking?"

"A veiled woman passed out that day and put a piece of money in my
hand."

"Over-astute Neaera!" thought I.

"Did you not recognize the woman?" asked Ariston.

"No, she was veiled."

"Would you be surprised if I could guess at what hour she passed out?"

The janitor looked at Ariston stupidly.

"She passed out within an hour after Lydia."

"Yes," nodded the janitor, "just about that."

"Have you seen or talked with Masters's aunt since that day?"

"No."

Ariston then asked the magistrate to send for the messenger and
Masters's aunt.

The janitor was asked to wait in case he should be needed, and we
adjourned for lunch. While lunching Ariston and I agreed that we were
going to get at the facts, and that it would be better not to let the
editor know them till after to-morrow morning. "I mean to give him
rope," said Ariston. "He'll hang himself, I think."

The messenger arrived shortly, and from him the identity of the veiled
lady was very soon elicited. He had evidently received his piece of
money also, and endeavored to avoid a direct admission, but Ariston got
the fact out of him with but little difficulty, and his hesitation to
admit it only brought out the more clearly the means Neaera had adopted
to cover her tracks.

Masters's aunt arrived a little later in a state of utmost trepidation.
She came up to Ariston at once and implored him to tell her what the
matter was; had she done anything wrong; she would tell anything that
was wanted, but there were some things she could not tell; really, was
Ariston going to ask her to tell things she really could not tell?

But Ariston calmed her, and told her the magistrate was there to protect
her.

She bustled up to the magistrate, who stopped her by handing her the
Bible, upon which she was told to take her oath.

The judicial severity of the magistrate subdued her at once; she took
the oath and sat down. Ariston whispered to the magistrate, begging him
to conduct the examination, and pointing out that the object of it was
to elicit what occurred at Masters's rooms and whether or not Chairo and
Lydia had actually met there.

The magistrate asked her a few leading questions, and as soon as the
witness had recovered from the subduing effect of the magistrate's
presence the floodgates were opened, and she poured forth the whole
story, leaving a strong presumption that Lydia had not seen Chairo, and
that Chairo had ignored the presence of Lydia.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late in the afternoon before the examination was closed. We found
Chairo resting after his bath. He told us that he had seen Arkles, shown
him a copy of the letter Ariston had drawn, and agreed with Arkles that
a similar letter be written by Lydia.

Ariston told Chairo that we had not been idle, but that we judged it
wiser for the present not to disclose to him what we had done. It would
be advantageous later to be able to say that we had acted upon our own
responsibility. We took Chairo after dinner to hear some music, and
tried to make him forget the dreadful incidents of the day, suspecting,
as we did, that a still more bitter dose was awaiting him next morning.

And the editor did not disappoint us. We breakfasted earlier than usual
in order to receive the papers in our rooms. "Sacrifice" contained
Chairo's letter just as Ariston had submitted it. Next came a shorter
letter from Lydia to the following effect:

     "SIR: It is not true that I have met Chairo since his release,
     clandestinely or otherwise, whether at Masters's rooms between ten
     and eleven day before yesterday, or at any other time or place.

"LYDIA SECOND."

But an editorial carried out the editor's threat of the day before. It
stated that in compliance with the law, letters signed by Chairo and
Lydia respectively had been that day published denying the truth of the
charge made against them on the previous day, but that a sense of the
duty which the paper owed to the public made it impossible to comply
with Chairo's order to refrain from further comment on the matter. It
was not of a private nature. On the contrary, it was a matter of the
gravest public concern. "No one," it went on to say, "is less interested
in Chairo's private affairs than ourselves, and we fully appreciate the
reasons why he should prefer that his private affairs be not at this
moment, or any other, exposed to public scrutiny; but he is charged with
having violated the sanctity of the cloister, with having outraged a
Demetrian, and with having, in violation of his oath, sought to
consummate the crime, the perpetration of which had been prevented by
the vigilance of the Demetrian cult. Is this a matter of purely private
concern?"

The editorial then proceeded to explain the carefulness with which it
had verified the truth of the statement published, compared the
circumstantial evidence produced by themselves with the bareness of the
denial published by the parties incriminated, and closed with the
following words:

"We have always stood, and we stand to-day, for peace, purity, and
cleanliness of life. Chairo stands for violence, lust, and turpitude. We
shall not allow ourselves to be intimidated by him or diverted from our
plain duty to brand his contradiction as a lie."

It was a paper containing this outrageous attack on Chairo that Ariston
brought into our room, flourishing it over his head with an air of
triumph, and crying:

"We have him--we have him. Good-bye, 'Sacrifice'"; and making a
semblance of blowing it into the air, he handed it to Chairo, but before
Chairo could read it he held it away from him and said:

"This is going to exasperate you--but believe me it is the best thing
that could happen. We have already secured sworn evidence taken before a
magistrate that vindicates both you and Lydia--don't ask us what it
is--I shall be responsible for all I do. The intemperance of the
language you are going to read is going to do you more good than all the
eloquence you can command in yourself or in others."

When Chairo read the article he insisted on Ariston's telling him what
evidence we had, and Ariston explained the proceedings of the previous
day at length; he added that he knew Chairo would object to bring home
the responsibility to Neaera, but that what Chairo might have reasons
for not doing he, Ariston, had no reason for not doing, and that he
proposed to make it clear that he, Ariston, was responsible for the
whole proceeding and not Chairo.

"Well," said Chairo, "you have gone beyond the point where I can either
stop or help you."

"Exactly," argued Ariston, "and this is exactly where I wanted to put
you. This last attack upon both you and Lydia--for, of course, she is as
much included as yourself--leaves you no alternative but to prosecute
the editor. I propose to present to-day's article to the magistrate who
took the testimony yesterday. He will grant me an order of arrest
against the editor for libel, and both you and Lydia will be vindicated
as you deserve."

As Ariston spoke, a note was handed to me from Anna of Ann begging me
urgently to go and see her that afternoon at tea time. I showed it to
Ariston, and we wondered what new development things were taking that
could include Anna of Ann.

"Harmes!" exclaimed Ariston.

I was puzzled.

"What do you mean?" asked I.

"Neaera is playing her last card."

Then it flashed upon me.

       *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon I went to see Anna of Ann and found her in profound
dejection. Ariston had guessed right. A few days before Harmes had
received a letter from Neaera and absented himself the whole afternoon.
He had returned much absorbed, and the next afternoon he had absented
himself again. Anna had asked him if he had not heard from Neaera, and
he had answered indignantly that all were conspiring to make a scapegoat
of her. Anna had protested, but every word she said had only contributed
to increase his indignation. He was evidently caught in the siren's
meshes and hopelessly under her influence. What, asked Anna, should be
done?

I pointed out to Anna that Ariston was much better able to help her in
such a matter, and asked to be allowed to send Ariston to her the
following day, but she demurred. I guessed at the reason of her
objection and suggested her father calling on Ariston. But her father
knew nothing of the matter and Anna thought it unwise to let him know.

"Then let your mother call on Ariston at his office," suggested I.

"That would be better," answered Anna.

And I arranged to let her know next day when Ariston would be at his
office.

Ariston was much interested to learn that he had guessed right, and very
willingly gave an appointment for the next day.

Meanwhile, the district attorney had obtained an order of arrest against
the editor, and next day's issue was edited by a new man. It contained a
statement of the arrest of the editor, professed to suspend judgment
until after the trial, and submitted under the circumstances the wisdom
of silence on the subject.

But the affair had made a profound impression upon the public and the
legislature, and although Chairo's guilt as to conspiracy was clear, it
was felt to be equally clear that he had sincerely done what he could to
prevent the attack upon the House of Detention. Moreover, he was now
being unfairly treated and this created a revulsion of feeling in his
favor. Ariston was much encouraged, for he did not conceal from me his
conviction that, as matters stood before this incident, the feeling of a
large majority of the legislature was that an example ought to be made
of Chairo. So long as this feeling prevailed, no amnesty bill could have
been passed that included him, and there was no reason to believe that
he could expect anything less than the full penalty of the law at the
hands of the courts.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE ELECTION


I often heard Chairo and his friends discuss their plans for the coming
electoral campaign, but have not set these things down because there was
in them nothing that was necessary to my story or very different from
the political campaigns of our day. There was less corruption, for there
were no needy persons in the state; but corruption was by no means
unknown, especially since the development of private industry had
created a private and transferable money system, and the relatively
large wealth of such men as Campbell and Masters caused them to be
feared. Campbell, however, had no political aspirations; his hoarding
instinct occupied his time and devoured his ambition. Masters, on the
other hand, had a large fund at his disposal which it was feared he
might use in his unreasoning desire to vindicate Neaera. But when
Masters returned from Boston and read the testimony taken by the
magistrate he called on Chairo to express regret at the attitude he had
taken and to agree with him as to the coming campaign.

Masters was still in favor of the amnesty bill, but he saw that a
general bill that would include Neaera could not, and ought not, to be
passed. He doubted the possibility of pushing through the legislature
one that would altogether protect Chairo, and frankly told Chairo so. He
was surprised to hear Chairo admit his own concurrence with this view.

"I cannot play a conspicuous part," said Chairo, "in a campaign in which
I am so deeply involved; I propose to stand for the legislature in my
own district, but I shall address my constituents only once, and then I
shall make it clear to them that I shall not regard my election as a
vindication of the course I have adopted in setting myself against the
state, but as evidence that upon my frank avowal that I was wrong I
still have their sympathy and confidence."

Masters suggested that they should attend on the governor, who was
standing for reelection, and agree with him as to the course to be
taken, with a view to diminishing to the utmost possible the chances of
a serious collision between the government and the opposition on the
amnesty question.

I was very much surprised one day to find both Masters and the governor
dining at our table in our hall, and to learn that although the governor
had offices in the capitol he lived with his family in the same
apartment in which he had always lived, and, except when he was actually
engaged in the duties of his office, there was nothing to distinguish
his manner of living from that of the humblest of his fellow citizens.

He was a man of an extremely simple exterior, though his head was
distinguished and his language chosen. We conversed about the political
outlook, and over our coffee, which Ariston made himself in our rooms,
the governor summed up the position as follows:

"The country districts will send us a large majority hostile to Chairo,
because they are conservative and abhor violence. Chairo will have from
the city and most of the large towns a small but staunch and intelligent
following. Masters will influence a large number of votes, as will also
the Demetrian cult. I don't myself think the state can afford to allow
any man to organize an armed rebellion--not even Chairo--without putting
upon him some mark of its authority, and I think it would be unwise in
Chairo's interests to ask that he should escape without censure and even
punishment. I propose in my electoral address to advise pardon for all
who have been led by others into rebellion, severity for those who led
them into it, and for those leaders who can plead extenuating
circumstances, moderation."

We all felt that the governor's attitude was not only wise on general
political grounds, but also from the narrower point of view of Chairo's
personal interest.

The nomination of candidates at the primaries evinced a political
animosity against Chairo of which we were altogether unaware. To our
amazement the notion that Neaera was the victim of a concerted effort to
exonerate Chairo at her expense had so widely prevailed that neither
discussion nor argument was any longer of any avail. All who defended
Chairo were hounded down as the persecutors of a defenseless woman, and
were it not for the votes of the women, who were less obtuse on the
question than the men, neither Chairo nor any of his following would
have received a nomination. As it was, Chairo was nominated only by a
dangerously narrow majority, and most of his party were dropped
altogether, But the very women who were not deceived into vindicating
Neaera went far beyond the limits of wisdom in their defense of the
Demetrian cult. Although Arkles and Irene did their utmost to keep the
enthusiasm of their supporters within reasonable bounds, the belief that
the cult was attacked caused the nomination of a class of candidates
who, if elected, were likely to do Chairo scant justice by their votes.

For some weeks I lived in a turmoil of political campaigning. It was a
relief to be wakened on Christmas by a peal of Cathedral bells, and
these over, to hear in the distant corridors an approaching hymn swell
its note of praise as it passed our door and die away as it disappeared
in the distance. We were all glad to feel that the electioneering was
over, for Christmas Day is devoted entirely to the morning ritual and
afternoon family gatherings; the 26th is devoted to final athletic
competitions, the crowning of the victors, and public balls; and the
27th to the silent vote.

I am ashamed to say that although I had often delighted in the exterior
of the Cathedral from a distance, I had never entered it till Christmas
morning, for our quarters were some distance from it, and such religious
exercises as I had attended with Ariston were held either in a
neighboring chapel or at the temple of Demeter. The scene as I
approached the Cathedral reminded me of what my imagination had
sometimes constructed out of mediaeval chronicles around the spires of
Chartres. It was a cold day and all the approaches to the Cathedral were
crowded with men, women, and children, covered with outer garments that
far more resembled those we see in the thirteenth century tapestries
than the Greek dress that had first surprised me at Tyringham and in the
interiors of New York. I learned that even in summer it was usual to don
a special dress when attending a church service, not only out of respect
for the church, but out of a sense of the artistic inappropriateness of
a Greek dress in a gothic Cathedral.

The gigantic doors of the main entrance were thrown wide open, and as I
mounted the long flight of steps that led to it, I was delighted and
bewitched by a facade, wide as Bourges, richly sculptured as Rheims, and
flanked by spires more beautiful than those of Soissons. From the deep,
dim Cathedral itself came the pealing notes of the organ which, as we
entered, made the air throb; I was rejoiced to find that the secret of
old glass had been rediscovered, but so great a blaze of light came from
the five great western portals that I did not fully appreciate the
mystic colors of the _vitraux_ till the doors were closed. Thereupon,
from an entrance in the south transept there marched in a procession
which, though more familiar than that I had already witnessed in the
temple of Demeter, far exceeded in splendor and impressiveness anything
I had seen before. Less graceful, perhaps, than in the Demetrian cult
but more solemn and devout, marched in the acolytes, swinging censers;
they were followed by the choir, singing a Gregorian chant, than which
assuredly nothing more subtly conveying the Christian idea has ever been
composed. In order came after them the great officials of the city and
state, including the mayor and the governor, a full representation from
the priests and priestesses of Asclepius and from those of Demeter; the
procession was closed by the lesser ecclesiastics bearing the cross, the
canons, and, last of all, the bishop. The ritual did not differ much
from that of the Roman and Anglican churches, except that the music was
rendered with as much care and effect as at Munich or Bayreuth.

The sermon did not last more than ten minutes, and closed with an
earnest reminder that in casting our votes we were exercising the
highest act of sovereignty of which man is capable, and an entreaty so
to cast them that the church--and all that the church stood for--might
feel itself strengthened in the legislature as well as in the hearts of
the people.

Whether on emerging from the Cathedral this solemn exhortation left as
little trace in the shape of actual conduct as in our day I, of course,
cannot tell, but I think the language of the headstrong during the
succeeding days was less violent and the animus evinced less bitter for
it.

The Christmas dinner which followed the service was held in the common
hall, for it was deemed an occasion when all should join and contribute
to make the day a happy one. Families either arranged to dine at
separate tables or united to dine at one, and on this great festival
wine flowed in abundance at the expense of the state.

Our own party consisted for the most part of the Tyringham colony, to
which, however, were added many new city friends. Ariston sat between
Anna of Ann and Irene. We missed, however, Chairo and Lydia; the one
dined alone from discretion, the other remained at the cloister. We were
not a merry party, for the prospect for both of these two was dark, and
when we drank the toast of "absent friends" there was a tear in many an
eye.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE JOINT SESSION


Election day passed quietly; it resulted in an overwhelming majority in
favor of the government, and the character of the majority was clearly
animated by the intention to visit heavily upon Chairo the consequences
of his actions.

We had all understood that Lydia's return to New York was due to some
determination on her part, but what that determination was not even
Ariston knew. The first session of the legislature on the 1st of
January, '94, was attended by the deepest misgiving on the part of all
Chairo's friends; nothing could be determined by the proceedings of that
day--which were purely formal--but on the next an incident occurred
which showed how matters stood. The previous Speaker of the Senate who
would, if reelected, preside at the joint session of both houses, was a
man of moderate views, who had for years impartially administered the
duties of his office. It was a matter of course that he should be
renominated as the candidate of the government, and a motion to this
effect was duly made by Peleas. But it was seconded by Masters, and this
produced the effect of an understanding between the government and
Chairo's men which exasperated the irreconcilables; one of them,
therefore, in a moment of impulse nominated a distinguished Asclepian
priest, who had been elected on the platform of war on Chairo; his
nomination was hotly seconded by a chorus of voices, and although he was
opposed by the government party and by the supporters of both Chairo and
Masters, he was beaten only by a dozen votes.

The situation looked critical for Chairo when Masters stood up to bring
the amnesty bill before the joint session; he was received in a manner
signally different from that which usually greeted him; the applause of
his own particular adherents sounded faint and hollow and only served to
accentuate the silence of the rest. He did not speak at length,
reserving himself till after the report of the investigating committee
had been read. He was followed by several speakers, who repeated the
unreasoning vituperation which had marked the electoral campaign, all of
them opposed to the passage of an amnesty bill of any kind.

The real incident of the day was the reading of the report of the
investigating committee, which, for the first time, officially brought
out the facts as they were. The chairman of the committee who read the
report concluded by a brief expression of personal opinion to the effect
that after the reading of the report it was impossible for any one duly
conscious of his duties to the state to approve of the amnesty bill as
read. Doubtless many--perhaps, indeed, most of those concerned--had been
unduly influenced by others, and for these he was himself prepared to
cast a vote of pardon. But all the guilty parties were not before them.
He was interrupted here by a loud murmur of approval and by a counter
demonstration of those who still believed in Neaera's innocence. He did
not propose to try any one in their absence (applause), but assuredly it
was not proper to pardon any one in their absence either (loud
applause). There was one case which demanded particular attention; he
referred to the man who had organized the whole conspiracy. (There was a
deep silence here, and many involuntarily turned to where Chairo sat
erect and immovable with his arms crossed.) There was evidence to show
that after he had effected the particular personal end he had in view,
he had sent a message intended to put an end to further violence. He
asked the legislature to consider how far this tardy, unsuccessful, and,
as it appeared to him, half-hearted effort at reparation deserved to be
taken into account in mitigation.

This conclusion was greeted with the wildest applause; members stood up
and, with vociferating gestures directed at the corner where Chairo sat,
demanded justice and the full measure of the law.

It was expected that Masters would take the floor, but in the heated
condition of the house he judged it wiser that Arkles should be heard
before him. So Arkles slowly rose, and straightening himself to his full
height, addressed the speaker. The disorder which had followed the
speech of the chairman of the committee immediately subsided, and the
spokesman of the Demetrian cult was listened to in respectful silence.
"It is my honor," he said, "to address you on behalf of a religious cult
which has been outraged, upon the question whether this outrage shall go
unpunished or whether the cult shall be vindicated by the visitation on
the guilty of the full measure of the law."

He used advisedly the very catchword "full measure of the law," which
had never failed to secure applause at the meetings held by the
indignant supporters of the cult, and his purpose was fulfilled, for he
at once got them on his side, as the approval that greeted his opening
fully showed. He then reviewed the history of the cult, its principles,
the benefit it had bestowed; he dwelt upon the earnestness of its
devotees, and contrasted the social conditions that prevailed where the
cult was strong with those that prevailed where it was non-existent. For
two hours he kept the unflagging attention of the audience with the most
carefully reasoned exposition of what the cult stood for that that
generation had heard. Clearly the conclusion to be drawn from his
argument was, that an institution so essential to public welfare was
entitled to the further protection of the state, and that an outrage
upon it must be so punished as to render any repetition of the offense
to the highest degree improbable. Sure of this conclusion, the
irreconcilables joined with the government ranks in loud approval of
Arkles's discourse. But here Arkles turned an unexpected corner, for
after having demanded justice, in tones that filled the house with a
reverberation of applause, he suddenly asked the question: "And in this
case, what is the justice we have a right to ask?"

He turned at this point to the desk by him, filled a glass with water,
drank it, and continued:

"The Demetrian cult is not founded on legal enactment. It is not propped
by any state authority. It derives all its strength from the appeal it
makes to reason and morality. So long as it finds support in the public
conscience it is strong; the moment it appeals from conscience to the
state it confesses a weakness of which the cult is not to-day aware.
Nay, there never was a day when the cult was more strong than now, never
when it was better able to vindicate its rights upon its own merits,
that is to say, not by appeal to the state for protection, but by appeal
to every man and woman in the commonwealth for support.

"And here it is essential to make a careful distinction between acts
committed in violation of the law of the land and those committed in
violation of our sanctuary. As to the first, he, as spokesman of the
cult, had nothing to say; the state alone could deal with them. As to
the last, they had received the prayerful deliberation of the Demetrian
council, and he was instructed now to read the following resolution:

     "'Inasmuch as the exercise of our duties can be justified only by
     the extent to which this exercise is approved, not merely by the
     worshippers of Demeter but by the community at large;

     "'Inasmuch as such exercise deals with the most sacred and intimate
     passions of the human heart;

     "'We now solemnly declare that we count only upon devotion to the
     cult for protection, and deem it wiser to suffer sacrilege to go
     unpunished than by retaliation to keep alive in the hearts of the
     guilty or of those who support them, a spark of hostility or
     resentment.'"

A profound silence followed the reading of this resolution, and Arkles
concluded as follows:

     "It has been the policy of our commonwealth to abandon the
     principle of punishment for crime. Those who are unfit for social
     life we remove from social life and try to make them fit; until
     they are fit for it, we keep them isolated. Do not let us depart
     from a salutary rule in the interests of the cult, which the cult
     itself has largely contributed to introduce and which it is deeply
     interested in keeping alive. There are contingencies, Mr. Speaker,
     when the highest justice is mercy."

When Arkles sat down he left the session in a state of suspended
judgment. There was applause, but it was the applause of men convinced
against their will, and the irreconcilables remained absolutely silent.
The day was drawing to a close, and the session adjourned almost in a
state of confusion.

As we walked home to our quarters we none of us were inclined to speak.
"That speech of Arkles will bear fruit," said Ariston. But Chairo was
gloomily silent, and I did not have the heart to speak words of
encouragement I did not feel. We were joined at the bath by quite a
number of our house, who seemed anxious to cheer us up by the gossip of
the day. All were much exercised by the result of the four-mile race
which had just been run. It was the first time a woman had ever entered
for this race, and she had succeeded in making a dead heat of it.
Chairo, who had excelled in these sports, was gradually aroused from his
discouragement, and, without much reason for it, we returned to the
session next day in a better humor than circumstances warranted, for the
whole day was taken up in violent harangues against the incriminated
parties, some attacking Chairo not only as a conspirator but as a coward
for treachery to Neaera, others attacking Neaera without vindicating
Chairo.

That evening Chairo left us to dine with a few of his followers, who,
feeling the situation desperate, advised a conference with Peleas,
Masters, and Arkles, with a view to suggesting an amendment to the
amnesty bill that would secure a majority without going to the extremes
demanded by the irreconcilables.




CHAPTER XXVIII

LYDIA TO THE RESCUE


Political offenses, such as the one with which Chairo was charged, were
punished not by confinement in farm colonies but by imprisonment in a
fortress, and had this disadvantage that, whereas the term in the former
case could be diminished by good conduct, in the latter case it was
fixed for a number of years and was generally of inordinate length. This
was the remnant of a code prepared at a time when social crimes were not
much feared, whereas political crimes were regarded as of utmost danger
to the commonwealth. The maximum term of imprisonment was fifty years,
and this for Chairo would be practically equivalent to imprisonment for
life. The irreconcilables clamored for nothing less than this. It was no
small credit to Chairo's character in the community that with so heavy a
sentence impending over him, it occurred to no one--not even his worst
enemies--to ask that special precautions be made to prevent his escape.
That he would keep his parole was never for a moment doubted.

The difficulty attending any conclusion arose from the heterogeneous and
unorganized character of the irreconcilables; they were split up into a
number of factions, agreed only upon one thing--the "full measure of the
law" for Chairo; in every other respect they differed, some demanding
what they called justice, on grounds which they could not explain, but
the reasonableness of which they made a matter of conscience and
morality; others declared themselves to be vindicating "principles"
which, upon examination, turned out to be pure assumptions built upon
prejudice and temper; others professed to be acting as champions of the
cult, too helpless to be able to defend itself, and although willing and
anxious to discuss and explain their attitude, could never be brought to
any other conclusion than the "full measure of the law"--a phrase which
had obtained as complete a mastery over them as the "sleep" of a
hypnotizing doctor over a hypnotic subject.

The third day of the session opened in as great uncertainty as before.
Peleas had not spoken, and was unwilling to speak, until some amendment
could be hit upon which had a reasonable chance of uniting a majority.
The debate was, therefore, left almost entirely in the hands of the
irreconcilables, who vied with one another in the application to Chairo
of epithets that were picturesque and vituperative. Toward the close of
the session, however, an incident occurred that was unexpected and
startling: Arkles arose and asked that the courtesy of the floor be
extended to Lydia Second. Chairo half rose in protest, but Masters, who
sat beside him, whispered a word in his ear and he resumed his seat,
burying his chin in his breast. A loud murmur of excitement filled the
chamber; the motion was put, and it was carried without a dissenting
voice; the house sat wrapt in silence awaiting the entrance of the
speaker. Soon Irene was seen coming down a side aisle, and by her side,
shrouded by a veil, a figure, which all immediately recognized as
Lydia's. When they reached a point half way down the aisle they paused;
Irene said a word to Lydia, and Lydia removed her veil.

I had not seen her since we parted at Tyringham; as I looked at her
preparing herself to speak I experienced a conflict of emotion that
brought beads of perspiration to my forehead; my love for her now
kindled into admiration, the hopelessness of it, the fate of Chairo, an
undoubted admiration for him and yet a jealousy of him that tortured
me, willingness, nay, almost a burning desire to effect Lydia's
happiness at any cost--all these things struggled within me for mastery,
as with compressed lips I sat waiting to hear her speak. She was
obviously suffering from an emotion that made her eyes water and her
throat dry; she lifted her hand to her bosom once or twice in futile
agitation, but mastering herself, she stiffened, and, at last, as it
were by a supreme effort, lifting her head high, began:

"I do not presume, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen of the legislature, to
present myself before you trusting in my strength. I depend rather on my
weakness, for I am a woman, and because I am a woman who has
faltered"--she corrected herself--"who has suffered, you will hear me."

She spoke very low but very distinctly, and there was in the chamber a
silence so complete that she could be heard at the utmost corner of it.

"For him who has joined with me in this misadventure I do not presume to
speak at all. He is a man, and among men, able to hold his own. But you
cannot strike him without striking me, and it is for myself I plead."

Chairo's chin buried itself deeper in his breast, but he controlled the
impulse to protest. Indeed, there was a note in Lydia's voice that
brought a lump into his throat. He could not have protested had he
dared.

Irene had sent for a glass of water; Lydia partook of it, and then,
raising her voice, proceeded:

"Ever since I was restored to my home I have kept silence, because I
felt--and I was so advised--that a moment would come when I should be
better understood than at a time when the public mind was inflamed by
revolution and bloodshed. As to these things, I have cruelly felt the
extent to which I was the occasion of them, but I ask you to consider
whether indeed I was the cause. And I ask you, too, not to confuse the
question raised by the cult of Demeter with those other questions for
which the rebels stood. In these last I have had no share and to them I
shall not again refer. They have no part in the question you have to
decide. To give them a part would be to do me a great wrong.

"And as regards the cult of Demeter, there is no devouter daughter of
the cult than I; and that I should stand to-day, arrayed in the eyes of
some of you against the cult, chokes my utterance and fills my eyes with
tears. Nor should I have had strength to plead my cause with you to-day
had I not come to you leaning on one of Demeter's worthiest votaries."

Here Lydia put her hand on Irene's shoulder, and Irene looked into her
face and smiled.

"For in my heart there is a reverence for Demeter so profound that when
the mission was tendered to me, I felt that a cubit had been added to my
stature; I felt a strength grow in me to make what sacrifice was
needful, and as day passed day the sacrifice grew less and my strength
grew more.

"But oh, fellow-worshippers of Demeter," and she looked here at the part
of the hall where the irreconcilables had grouped themselves, "do not
frown on me when I say that there was also in my heart another
reverence, another strength, of which I was not sufficiently aware; and
in your faith in the cult you serve, do not blind yourself to that other
cult to which, whether we will or no, we are all--yes, all--subject. We
may harden our hearts to it, we may bring it as a sacrifice upon your
altar, but if it has once grown deep enough, it overpowers all the
rest--I am not ashamed to say it here--before you who ask mercy for
Chairo and you who ask for his destruction, I am not ashamed to publish
it to all the world--stronger than reverence for Demeter, stronger than
the unutterable honor of the Demetrian mission--is the love of a woman
for a man."

She paused; there was no applause, but the breathless silence that
reigned bore a higher tribute to the impression made than any spoken
word or gesture.

"And when love came it brought with it a sense of duty to another, so
that I no longer stood merely between Demeter and my love, I stood also
between Demeter and Chairo"--a loud murmur of disapproval greeted these
words. Lydia, however, went bravely on. "But I looked with suspicion
upon an argument that so favored my own inclination, and believing duty
to lie in resistance to inclination rather than in consent to it, I
strangled my love, and with a pride in my own sacrifice that was false
and bad I accepted the mission."

Again a murmur of disapproval filled the hall. This time Lydia
acknowledged it by turning to the corner whence it came.

"Yes, I repeat it--with a pride in my own sacrifice that was false and
bad--for it gave me strength to do a thing that was wrong! What is
heroic in one is vanity in another. And I thank you for that expression
of disapproval that reminds me to distinguish those to whom it is an
ugly hypocrisy. There are women--and may their names be blessed--who,
before their hearts have been kindled by love, bear within them a
capacity for sacrifice and a longing for maternity which makes of them
fitting subjects for the Demetrian mission; but when a woman has once
harbored the young God Eros, when she has by implication, if not by
express promise, sanctioned the harboring of him in another, then the
strength that can disown her love and break that promise is drawn from a
vanity that is foolish, or a conceit that is contemptible; and as I look
back to the day when, after weeks of weakening struggle, I arose from
the bed of torment strangely endowed with a strength that enabled me to
make unmoved my final vows, I see that my strength came not from Demeter
but from self-righteousness and self-conceit. And I make this bitter
confession before you all that the fault may rest where it should, not
upon you, priests and priestesses of Demeter"--and here she looked up at
the gallery where they sat--"not upon him"--and she turned almost
imperceptibly to Chairo--"but upon me."

Her voice sank as she said these words, and there broke from many of us
a murmur of sympathy.

"But these things," she continued in a louder voice, "are of little
importance by the side of what I have yet to say. Pardon me, if I have
had to speak of myself; it is not often--and, indeed, it is distressful
that so private a thing as this should become matter of public concern.
But you have to decide an issue in which the conduct of one least worthy
of your attention has become set up, as it were, before you as the
conduct of all my sex. It is not I that am judged, but all who are
unworthy of the mission--or shall I not rather say--unfitted for it. For
though I am willing--nay, desire--to accept my full share of blame, yet
am I not willing that my sex shall in my person be judged less worthy
than it is. Believe me, that noble as is the mission of Demeter, noble
also is the love of a woman for a man, and though I bow my head as I
confess my unfitness for the one, in vindication of the other I hold my
head erect."

She straightened herself at these words, and her stature helped to give
to this vindication both dignity and strength. There was something
splendid in the gesture, the emphasis, and the inflection with which
these words were said. For the first time Lydia's speech was here
interrupted by applause; it began far away from her and was soon caught
up by others, it swelled through the building, and feelings long pent
up in hushed attention to her now found relief in an expression of
triumphant approval; a few in their excitement rose to their feet, then
more, till all, except Chairo, who remained resolutely seated, stood
wildly gesticulating their admiration for the girl who had the courage
to face them in vindication of a love upon which some had wished to
throw disgrace, but which now she held up to universal honor.

The applause lasted several minutes; if it died away in one corner it
was vociferously renewed in another, and when at last, out of very
weariness, it came to an end, Lydia resumed:

"But all I have said is but a preface to what I have still to say: I
have spoken to you of myself, but what shall I say to you of Chairo? I
have told you of a duty I felt to him, but to every duty is there not a
corresponding right? And if Chairo had rights does he not stand, too,
for the rights of all his sex?"

Once more the chamber rang with renewed applause, and Chairo for the
first time raised his head and looked at Lydia. Now at last she had
lifted the subject to a level which eliminated him. He was no longer the
issue; she was speaking for all men, for the rights universal of
manhood, which the cult had, in his case, ignored and must at last be
vindicated.

"I have told you that by implication, if not by express words, Chairo
had reason to know I loved him; was he to stand by and see the rights I
had given him denied, rights for which he has stood, not for himself
alone, but for all men long before his own became involved? He stands
charged here with sacrilege and with violence. Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen of the legislature, so far as I am concerned, he is guilty of
neither the one nor the other."

A deep murmur passed through the chamber as Lydia's voice impressively
lowered on these final words.

"Had the woman he snatched from Demeter's sanctuary been indeed fitted
for it, then he would have been guilty of both. But he knew I was not
fitted for it, he knew that I belonged to him, he knew that once I felt
his presence in my room I would consent--_and I consented_."

Chairo, whose eyes had remained riveted on Lydia ever since he raised
them, now lowered them again, and he covered his face with his hands.
That so sacred a thing to him as Lydia and his love for her should be
dragged into a public discussion was cruel to him, but that the story
should be told as Lydia told it, filled his heart with a mixture of
triumph and bitterness he could not endure to show.

"And so, Mr. Speaker, with my confession of consent, the charge against
Chairo of sacrilege and violence falls to the ground. As to those who
against his bidding sought to rescue their leader from his bonds I have
this to say: When there shall have disappeared from the hearts of men
the loyalty, devotion, and sacrifice that prompted an act of violence
forever to be deplored, then let this world and all that is in it
disappear from the constellations of God. They erred, but they erred in
a cause they believed to be righteous, and I protest--I plead the state
is strong enough to grant them pardon.

"Every institution, human and divine, has to pay a price for the
blessings it bestows--_dura lex sed lex_. Eventually, perhaps, wisdom
may so increase among us that the price all pay shall grow less and
less; eventually, the mission may be neither offered to nor accepted by
those unfit for it; perhaps, indeed, the events of last month may
contribute to this wisdom, but to-day, O priests and priestesses of
Demeter, join with me in the prayer to our legislators that they do not,
by visiting on these men too severely the consequences of their errors,
bring discredit upon a cult so precious and so noble as that of the
goddess you serve. Great is Demeter! But great also is Eros. May wisdom
so guide your counsels that Eros, no longer tempted to destroy the
altars of Demeter, may strengthen them and build them up, and so,
through continence and sacrifice, remain for us as beautiful as he is
strong!"

Lydia bowed her head over these words and gave her hand to Irene. We all
sat motionless; not a sound was heard as they slowly turned and
proceeded to leave the chamber. Then, with one accord, we rose, and in a
breathless silence the two women passed out.

We resumed our seats, and for some minutes no one spoke. At last Arkles
moved that, in view of the remarkable and touching words they had just
heard, the joint session adjourn for the day. "For," he added, "neither
I, nor apparently any of my colleagues, are able or willing by any word
of our own to efface or modify the impression they have left upon us."

"You have heard the motion," said the speaker. "In the absence of a
dissenting voice the session will adjourn for the day." Not a voice was
heard; we rose and left the chamber in silence.




CONCLUSION


My narrative has now come to a close: an amnesty bill was passed that
included every person charged, except Neaera, and deprived Chairo of his
political rights until the legislature should by a joint resolution
restore them; the editor arrested for libel was found guilty and
committed to a penal colony.

Lydia married Chairo. And Anna of Ann did not visit on Ariston his
indifference too heavily, but her nuptials were darkened by the absence
of Harmes. Out of a bold and crooked game Neaera had secured this one
small satisfaction.




  LONDON:
  PRINTED BY A. BONNER,
  1 & 2, TOOK'S COURT, E.C.

  (_All Rights Reserved._)


    Transcriber's Note:
    _Underscores_ have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts.
    Inconsistent hyphenation has been left as written.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Woman Who Vowed, by Ellison Harding

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WOMAN WHO VOWED ***

***** This file should be named 37821.txt or 37821.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/8/2/37821/

Produced by Anna Hall and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
