The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Louie, by Oliver Onions

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of Louie

Author: Oliver Onions

Release Date: October 24, 2011 [EBook #37838]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF LOUIE ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa McDaniel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)







  Transcriber's note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.
  Words printed in italics in the original document are represented|
  here between underscores, as in _text_;




     THE STORY
     OF LOUIE

     BY
     OLIVER ONIONS

     Author of "In Accordance With the Evidence,"
     "The Debit Account," etc.

     GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY
     NEW YORK

     _Publishers in America for Hodder & Stoughton_




     TO
     GWLADYS




CONTENTS


                          PAGE

     PROLOGUE                9

     PART ONE
     RAINHAM PARVA          25

     PART TWO
     SUTHERLAND PLACE      109

     PART THREE
     MORTLAKE ROAD         175

     PART FOUR
     PILLAR TO POST        213

     PART FIVE
     THE CONSOLIDATION     259

     ENVOI                 356




PROLOGUE

I


In an old number of _Punch_, under the heading "Society's New Pet: The
Artist's Model," is to be found a drawing by Du Maurier, of which the
descriptive text runs:

   "And how did you and Mr. Sopley come to quarrel, dear Miss
   Dragon?"

   "Well, your Grace, it was like this: I was sitting to him in a
   cestus for 'The Judgment of Paris,' when someone called as wished
   to see him most particular; so he said: 'Don't move, Miss Dragon,
   or you'll disturb the cestus.' 'Very good, sir,' I said, and off
   he went; and when he come back in an hour and a 'alf or so he
   said: 'You've moved, Miss Dragon!' 'I 'aven't!' I said. 'You
   '_ave_!' he said. 'I 'AVEN'T!' I said--and no more I 'adn't, your
   Grace. And with that I off with his cestus an' wished him
   good-morning, an' I never been near him since!"

Du Maurier may or may not have been wrong about the newness of this
craze of "Society's." If he was right, the Honourable Emily
Scarisbrick becomes at once a pioneer. Let there be set down, here in
the beginning, the plain facts of how, a good ten years before the
indignant Miss Dragon "offed with" Mr. Sopley's cestus, the Honourable
Emily found a way to bridge the gulf that lies between Bohemia and
Mayfair.

Except in the case of one person not yet born into these pages, the
report that the lady had engaged herself, early in the year 1869, to
"Mr. Buckley, her drawing-master," had only a short currency. It was
probably devised by the Honourable Emily herself in order to soften
the blow for her brother, Lord Moone. The real name of the man to whom
she engaged herself was James Buckley Causton. Under this name he
appears on the rolls of the 4th Dragoon Guards as a trooper in the
years 1862-1867; and as "Buck" Causton he attained some celebrity
when, in the last-named year, he vanquished one Piker Betteridge in
the prize ring, in a battle which, beginning with gloves and ending
with bare knuckles, lasted for nearly nine hours.

For all we know, it may have been Miss Dragon's Mr. Sopley who, seeing
the magnificent Buck in the ring, first put it into the ex-trooper's
head to become an artists' model. However it was, an artists' model he
did become, and, as such, the rage. No doubt Sopley, if it were he,
would gladly have kept his discovery to himself; but a neck like a
sycamore and a thorax capable of containing nine-hours-contest lungs
cannot be hid when Academy time comes round. Sopley's measure was
known. If Sopley painted an heroic picture it was certain he had had a
hero as model. The Academy opens in May; before June was out Sopley's
find was no longer his own. Sir Frederick Henson, the artist who moved
so in the world that in him the tradition of the monarch who picked up
the painter's brush for him might almost have been said to live again,
saw Buck, marked Buck down as his own, and presently had sole
possession of Buck.

The Honourable Emily Scarisbrick already had possession of Sir
Frederick. To be sure, it neither needed a Sir Frederick Henson to
teach her the stippling of birds' eggs and the copying of castles for
the albums of her friends, nor was the great Academician accustomed to
stooping to the office of salaried drawing-master; but--the Honourable
Emily was a Scarisbrick, of Mallard Bois.

In Henson's studio the Honourable Emily first saw Buck Causton.

To say that she fell in love with him would demand a definition of the
term. Certainly she fell in something with him. Perhaps that something
was the something that at the last thrusts baronies and Mallard Boises
aside as hindrances to a design even larger than that in which they
play so important a part; but we have nothing to do with large designs
here. Call it what you will: something proper enough to legend, but of
little enough propriety in a modern lady's life; a feeble echo of
Romance, perhaps, but never itself to become Romance unless, of it or
present scandal, it should prove the stronger. At any rate, it was a
very different thing from anything she felt, or ever had felt, for
Captain Cecil Chaffinger, of the White Hussars, her brother's nominee
for her hand.

It was a word dropped by the gallant Captain, himself a follower of
the fancy, that led her to the discovery that the hero of some feat or
other of extraordinary skill and endurance, and the young Ajax, all
chest and grey eyes and brown curls, who did odd jobs about the studio
in the intervals of posing for Henson's demigodlike canvases, were one
and the same person. Her already throbbing pulse bounded. She herself
was twenty-eight, a small, dark, febrile woman, given over to
discontents based on nothing save on an irremediably spoiled
childhood, and perhaps hankering after an indiscretion in the
conviction that indiscretions were of two kinds--indiscretions, and
the indiscretions of the Scarisbricks. Naturally she became conscious
of a quickened interest in her art.

The first indication that this interest passed beyond birds eggs and
castles was that she began "Lessons in Drapery." If here for a few
moments her story becomes a little technical, it may be none the less
interesting on that account.

The study of Drapery _as_ Drapery has not much interest for anybody
unless perhaps for a student of mechanics. For all that, it is, or
then was, regarded by drawing-masters as a self-contained subject, to
be tackled, ticked off, and thenceforward possessed. To the study of
Drapery in this unrelated sense the Honourable Emily apparently
inclined. Seeing her therefore, in this fundamental error, Sir
Frederick, a master of Drapery, took from her the "copies" which had
already supplanted the "copies" of castles in her portfolio, and
good-humouredly began to tell her what she really wanted. What she
really wanted, he said, was to rid her mind of the idea that folds
existed for their own sake, and to endeavour to realise that their
real significance lay in the thing enfolded. Miss Scarisbrick thanked
him.

So, at first from the lay figure, and then from Henson's model, she
began to draw Drapery with special reference to the thing draped.

About this time she gave Captain Chaffinger for an answer a "No" which
he refused to take. His devotion, he said, forbade him. If by his
devotion he meant his devotion to his creditors, his constancy
remained at their service. In the meantime he was still able to pay
his old debts by contracting new ones.

The Honourable Emily's studies became diligent.

There is little to be said about these things except that they do
happen. A word now about Buck's attitude.

Had the Honourable Emily's maid thrown herself at his head he would
have known what to do. His sense of the holiness of social degrees
would have received no shock. But the Honourable Emily, who could
command her maid, could not command what in all probability her maid
would not have had to ask twice for. The most she got (when after much
that is omitted here, it did at last dawn on the bashful Buck that she
had any will in the matter at all) was a blush so sudden and violent
that it compelled an embarrassed reddening of her own cheeks also.
Buck was not personally outraged. It was his sense of Order that was
outraged. He remembered the lady's station for her, and, stammeringly
but reverentially, put her back into it.

Now to be merely reverential to a woman who is in love with you is to
provoke impatience, anger and tears. On the other hand, to see a woman
in tears because you will not permit her to humiliate herself is to
have the other half of an impossible situation. It was one
luncheon-time (the Honourable Emily now lunched frequently at the
studio) that the tears came.

"Oh, you don't care for me--you don't care for me!" she sobbed.

Buck could not truthfully have said that he did care for her; but
there she was before him, in tears.

"If it were that Dragon girl, now----"

Buck, while not failing to see the force of this, could only make
imploring movements for the Honourable Emily to calm herself.
Presently she did calm herself, sufficiently to change her tone to one
of irony.

"Do you read your Bible?" she shot over her shoulder.

"Yes, miss," said Buck--"that is--I mean----"

The reason for Buck's hesitation was that he had suddenly doubted
whether the Honourable Emily would know a Racing Calendar by the name
she had just used.

"Do you mean _The_ Bible, miss?" he said, fidgeting.

She snapped: "Yes--the one with the story of Joseph in it----"

She burst into tears anew.

"Oh, that I should have to beg a man to marry me! I hate myself--I
hate you!"

Her hatred, however, did not prevent repetitions of the scene. At the
last repetition that need trouble us here her tears conquered. The
helpless Buck comforted her after the only fashion he knew anything
about--the fashion he would have used towards her maid--on his knee.

He still, however, called her "Miss."

They were privately married in the June of 1869.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Don't_ call me 'Miss'!" she broke out petulantly one day in the
middle of the honeymoon. "And you are _not_ to have your meals with
the servants! I shall lunch in my room to-day, and you are to be ready
to take me out at three o'clock."

"Yes, m'm," said Buck.

       *       *       *       *       *

Probably Lord Moone had less to do than he supposed with the
separation that took place in the September of the same year. We may
assume that a much more potent factor was the Honourable Mrs.
Causton's remembrance of her own words, "That I should have to beg a
man to marry me! I hate myself--I hate you!" She did very soon hate
both herself and him. Poor Buck merely hated the whole subversive
anomaly.

He accepted the proposal that they should separate with perfect
docility. It seemed to him entirely right. Indeed the only thing he
had not accepted with docility had been his introduction to Lord
Moone, on the only occasion on which the two men ever met, as "Mr.
Buckley, the drawing-master." Buck hadn't liked that much. He had made
himself Buck Causton in nine hours of terrific combat, and as Buck
Causton he preferred to be known. But all else he suffered with
touching obedience, and at the proposal that they should go their
several ways his finger flew to his forehead.

"Yes, miss," he said; and his heart, if not his lips, murmured the
prayer that begins: "God bless the Squire and his relations----"

They parted.

They only met once more. This was in the January of the following
year, in the great antlered hall at Mallard Bois, that was as
regularly used on all occasions as if there had not been salons and
galleries and drawing-rooms in a dozen other parts of the great place.
The Honourable Mrs. Causton lay on a couch drawn up to the fire-dogs;
her husband looked submissively down on her, dwarfing the suit of
armour of Big Hugo by which he stood.

She made a new proposal. It was that he should put it into her hands
to set herself free once for all.

"Yes, miss," said Buck.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Then," said the Honourable Mrs. Causton a quarter of an hour later,
"there's the question of cruelty."

Buck's thoughts wandered slowly back to the Piker.

"Yes, miss," he said.

"I need hardly tell you that as far as--er--procedure--can be
stretched it will be stretched."

"Yes, miss. Thank you, miss."

Then wistfully Buck's eyes wandered from Big Hugo's suit of armour to
his wife's face again.

"Beg your pardon, about that cruelty, miss," he said unhappily.
"Couldn't I go down--just for once, Miss--as Mr. Buckley?"

"No; but I can assure you that _I_ don't want this talked about more
than must be either. Perhaps I ought to tell you that I shall probably
marry again."

Buck's finger went to his forehead again, this time in a duty to his
successor. Then his eyes grew grave. His wife had made a slight
movement.

"If I might make so bold, miss--there's another thing----"

She knew what he meant.

"You've nothing to do with that," she said quickly.

Buck would have thought that he had, but if a lady said he hadn't,
well, he hadn't, that was all.

"Yes, miss.... And asking your pardon again--about that cruelty?"

"Oh, that's over," said Mrs. Causton, closing her eyes. "Six months
ago."

"I--I don't remember," said Buck; but once more, if a lady said it was
so, so it was. Again the grave look came into his eyes, and again she
understood.

"I can have it looked after better than you can," she said.

"And--please--you will?" he dared to supplicate.

She nodded.

Still he hesitated.

"If it's a little boy, miss--I might be opening a Sparring
Academy--strictly for the gentry--I wouldn't charge him nothing----"

And after a little further discussion the shameful piece of collusion
came to an end.

They were divorced in the March of 1870. On the 15th of April the
child was born--a girl. Fifteen months later the Honourable Emily
married Captain Cecil Chaffinger, of the White Hussars.


II

The child never got on well with her mother. Mrs. Chaffinger never
forgave her her paternity. The gallant Captain, on the other hand,
treated her as he would have treated his own child--that is to say, he
bought her extravagant toys if the proximity of a toyshop put it into
his head to do so, pinched her arms and cheeks and neck jocularly
whenever he found her head at the level of his waistcoat, and then
departed, as likely as not to pinch maturer arms and necks, not Mrs.
Chaffinger's, elsewhere. He took his wife's former _mesalliance_ with
perfect serenity. She had paid his debts and enabled him to spend a
day or two in his father's house when he cared to do so, and the
Captain, who was a gentleman and not very much else to boast of, held
faithfully to his part of the bargain. He even dropped in once or
twice at Buck Causton's new _Salle d'Armes_ in Bruton Street. The
child was called by his name--Louise Chaffinger; he called her Mops,
because of her quantities of thick brown hair. The Honourable Emily
became querulous and an invalid; took to falling into dozes no matter
who was present, and waking up again with alarming cries; and she
busied herself with charitable works performed in an uncharitable
temper.

Louie was not pretty; but the jocular Captain pinched no prettier neck
than hers, and he declared, as the child grew, that her "points" would
be best displayed could she go about in the largest and shadiest hat
and the most closely fitting tights possible. His house (which, by the
way, he had begun to encumber again) was Trant, in Buckinghamshire;
but the child was packed off occasionally, to be rid of her, to
Mallard Bois, Lord Moone's seat, there to romp with her cousin, Eric
Scarisbrick, already preparing for Eton, and such small fry as climbed
trees and cheeked the gardeners with him. Here she revelled in the
liberty that was denied her at home; and perhaps she already realised
instinctively that her mother's relief at having her out of the way
was tempered only by the invalid's resentment that the child could be
happy out of her own not very cheerful company. Be that as it may, the
girl was told, at twelve years of age, that she was getting too big to
kick these limbs her stepfather so admired about among growing boys.
She was given half-long skirts and French and English governesses: the
French one, though she did not yet know it, as a preparation for
sending her to a Paris convent.

At fourteen years of age she had not heard of the man whose grey eyes
and perfect shapeliness of body she inherited. The Scarisbricks, be
sure, had allowed that episode to be hushed up. But the day was bound
to come when she should hear of the Honourable Mrs. Causton and
identify that lady with her mother. The day did come, no matter how;
and, inwardly trembling but outwardly resolved, she sought her mother.
Mrs. Chaffinger had just come with a cry out of a doze. Her daughter
demanded to be told who the Honourable Mrs. Causton was. She was told
that there was no such person.

"Then who was she?" the girl demanded. There were few of her questions
to her mother that were not demands.

"Who's been telling you about her?"

That did not seem to Louie to matter. She repeated the question.

"She was a very great fool," Mrs. Chaffinger snapped. "Why aren't you
with Mademoiselle?"

"Who was she besides being a very great fool?" the child persisted.

It had to come out.

"Then papa _isn't_ my father?" Louie said, pale. All through her life
she was pale in her moments of stress.

"I'm your mother, and I tell you to go to your French lesson at once."

But Louie did not move.

"Then who was my father?" she asked.

"Who do you suppose he is, when I was Mrs. Causton?"

"Is?... Then he isn't dead?"

Mrs. Chaffinger compressed her lips.

"I was going to tell you all about Mr. Causton all in good time" (her
daughter looked coldly unbelieving), "but since you are here I'll tell
you now. Sit down on that chair and stop fidgeting----"

And she told the girl the facts, not to be denied, of the divorcing of
Buck.

The end of the matter was that Louie now hated, not only her mother,
but her father also.

Her stepfather she thenceforward addressed as "Chaff." He liked it.

Three months later she was sent to Paris.

Eight months later still she turned up again, not at Trant, but at the
Captain's club in London. She announced that she had run away from the
convent and did not intend to return to it. Her arrival, though not
unwelcome, was inopportune, for the Captain had a little party that
evening and seemed disconcerted. The toyshops, he reflected, were
closed, and then he looked at his stepdaughter again.... It could not,
after all, have been one of the more characteristic of the Captain's
parties, for he took Louie to it, pigtail and all, and for a whole
evening pinched nobody. Then he took her to his chambers, winked at
his man in token of something extraordinary, hesitated, and then, with
an "Oh, be hanged to it!" expression, gave Louie the key of his own
sleeping apartment. Louie examined his prints a little wonderingly,
but approved of his ribboned haircurlers and large frilled pincushion,
and then went to sleep. The next day the Captain took her down to
Trant and left her there.

The next few years were a constant succession of wrangles with her
mother. She had flatly refused to return to the convent, and if the
Honourable Emily was petulant, her daughter was merciless. She had
been put off with the drawing-master version of her mother's marriage,
but that was enough; she held it over her mother's head, and Buck, if
he had desired revenge, had it. She knew herself to be hybrid, and
treated the Scarisbricks and their drawing-masters with equal scorn.
Worse, she treated them equally with a contemptuous tolerance. She
harped with pride on the baser strain. In a word, there was no doing
anything with her.

She reached the age of twenty-one.

At twenty-two she expressed a wish to go on the stage. The Captain,
who was genuinely fond of her, stopped that. At twenty-three she
declared plainly that "a girl in her position" ought to have a means
of earning her own living--not necessarily drawing. The Captain being
averse from this also, she took the matter into her own hands by
writing to the secretary of a Horticultural College in Somersetshire,
paying her fees, and enrolling herself as a student without saying a
word to anybody. She packed her boxes, and in the second week of
January 1894 presented herself before her mother, dressed for
travelling, and announced that she had very little time in which to
catch her train.

"Oh, by the way," she said, turning at the door, "if you write, you
might address letters to me in my own name--Causton."

Then she left.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Was die Mutter traeumt, das vollbringt die Tochter._" Here, with its
repetitions of and its departures from that of the Honourable Emily,
follows her story.




PART I

RAINHAM PARVA


I

The Horticultural College at Rainham Parva, now defunct, was hardly a
college in the modern sense at all. Its technical books were
antiquated; it had only one or two old microscopes; and it totally
lacked the newer trimmings of specialisation. Its founder, a Bristol
seedsman called Chesson, had bought the place cheaply, house and all,
a dozen years before, and having five hardy daughters eating their
heads off at home, had, as the saying is, economically emancipated
them. That meant then (whatever it may mean now) that, realising that
the wages of two men and a boy might be saved, he had had them down to
Rainham Parva and had set them to work.

The second Miss Chesson, Miss Harriet, had shown a real aptitude for
the work. She had won, after three years, a Diploma, and this Diploma,
together with the presence in the house as paying boarder of a niece
of Chesson's, had put an idea into the seedsman's head--the premium
idea. With the Diploma properly advertised, its grantee made
Principal, a premium or so forgone (called a Scholarship) and the
proper person installed over all as Lady-in-Charge, Chesson had
foreseen a good deal of his work being done by young women who would
pay for the privilege of being allowed to do it. There is no need to
describe the development of the idea. The enterprise had prospered,
and when Louie Causton had put her name down on the books and paid her
fees the complement of thirty girls was full.

She did not, after all, travel down alone. Her stepfather, hinting
that it was not necessary to say anything about this to her mother,
made the journey with her. The pair of them shortened the hours by
guessing which of the young women in the same train were to be Louie's
fellow-students; and when they alighted at Rainham Magna station the
Captain put Louie and her traps into one of the nondescript vehicles
that only saw the light when the Rainham girls arrived or departed,
and drove off with her to the college. There he shook hands with the
Lady-in-Charge, Mrs. Lovenant-Smith, and asked her whether she was
related to Lovenant-Smith of the 24th. Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's reply did
not actually affirm her regret that she was so related, but the
Captain's affability dried up suddenly. He was returning to town by
the four-o'clock train; before doing so he took a turn round the place
with Louie.

"Well," he said, as Louie took her leave of him at the gates, "it's a
good growing country, I should say; rum idea of yours though....
You've heard me speak of Lovenant-Smith, haven't you? Adjutant eight
or nine years ago; not a bad chap at all, _I_ should have said. She'll
be one of the Shropshire lot, I expect. I knew he had people down
there.... Well, mind you don't run away with a gardener. 'Bye,
Mops----"

And he was off, tugging at his moustache and inwardly commenting that
the whole escapade was "just like Louie."

It was a good growing country. Chesson said that the mildness of the
winters was due to the Gulf Stream; Miss Harriet Chesson attributed it
to ozone--ozone having been a word to conjure with at the time when
she had taken her Diploma. Ozone or Gulf Stream, it provided wild
violets in December, lemon-verbena that grew in trees up the sides of
the cottages and had to be cut away from the upper windows, and filled
the deep lanes with the hart's-tongue fern. It also brought forth rich
produce. The dairy business and poultry farm flourished; crates and
parcels and returned empties kept the goods clerk at Rainham Magna
station busy; and, when the heather bloomed on the hill that rose
between Chesson's and the sea, the "Rainham Heather Honey," green as
bronze and thick as glue, was at a premium. At the crest of the hill
the seedsman's estate ended. Beyond that, dropping abruptly to the
west, lay deep wooded coombes, green to the very rocks of the shore.

Louie's age put her at once out of the class of the "new girl" who, in
the school tales, sits pathetically on her box and waits for somebody
to speak to her. She was twenty-four, and probably only one other
student, the copper-haired girl with the long thin neck and the
"salt-cellars" showing through her white flannel blouse, who asked her
her number and offered to show her the way to her cubicle, was more
than twenty-two. Her large black feathered hat (see the first part of
the Captain's advice as to how she would make the most of herself),
and her expensively simple navy blue coat and skirt down to her toes,
further distinguished her among the tweed jackets and ankle-length
skirts of the younger girls. No doubt she had her perfect management
of these and her numerous other garments from her mother's former
interest in the study of Drapery. If the Captain did not think her
face pretty, it must be remembered that the Captain had standards of
prettiness of his own. Pretty in the professional-beauty sense her
irregular mouth and long chin perhaps were not. Her large, clear,
pebble-grey eyes at any rate were arresting.

The copper-haired girl, having shown Louie her cubicle, offered to
show her the rest of the house also. They began upstairs on the first
floor, where the girls slept. The place was an old mansion in the form
of a hollow square, and as they came to each latticed embrasure Louie
stopped to look at the famous Rainham yew that almost filled the
grassgrown inner courtyard. The corridors were dark, and sudden steps
where no steps were to have been expected made of the uneven floors a
series of booby-traps for those not familiar with them. Memories of
the Monmouth Rebellion seemed to linger round the corners and to be
shut up in the cupboards of the place. They passed downstairs. Through
the doorway of the handsome Restoration facade they saw the yew again,
dark beyond the shining flags of the hall. Louie had already been in
the reception-room and Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's private apartments on the
right of the doorway; on the left, she was told, were the quarters of
Miss Harriet (who alone of Chesson's daughters remained there) and the
staff. The domestics slept at the top of the house; the four male
gardeners (all married) occupied the farm a furlong away at the back.

"But wouldn't you like some tea?" said the copper-haired girl. "It's
in the dining-room."

"I was told to report myself to Miss Chesson at five," said Louie,
looking at her watch.

"Well, you've just time, if you're quick----"

They sought the room where the housekeeper ran cups of tea from the
tap of a large and funereal bronze urn.

It was ten minutes to five when Louie entered the dining-room. Before
the clock had struck five she had taken a certain position in the
college.

She herself hardly knew how it happened. The room was full of noise
and chatter, and near Louie, talking louder and making more noise than
anybody else, was a lanky child of sixteen, to be a tall blonde beauty
in another three or four years' time, but so far only a mass of
unadjusted proportions and movements that lacked co-ordination. She
had several distinct voices, and in one of these she was now engaged
in unabashed mimicry. Louie, who had got her cup of tea, heard a
bell-like "_Os_-trich feathers!" and she was about to put a question
to the copper-haired girl when, with a mock reverence and an explosive
"Your _Ma_-jesty!" the child swept backwards into her. She barely
saved her cup of tea. The girl gave a quick turn; her "Clum----" was
changed to a "Sorry!" as she saw a new face, and Louie smiled.

"Your feet were all wrong," Louie said.

The blonde child turned eagerly again.

"Can you do it?" she asked.

The next moment, before Louie could get out "A drawing-room curtsy?
Yes," the child had cried: "Girls! Girls! Here's somebody who knows
how to do it! Do come and show us!"

"Really?" said Louie, smiling, and handing her cup of tea to the
copper-haired girl.

"Yes--come here, Rhoda, and watch (that's my sister--she's to be
presented, you know)."

Louie laughed. "Quickly then--I have to see Miss Chesson----"

And, pushed unceremoniously forward, and still in her feathered hat
and navy blue costume, Louie made her first bow to her fellow-students
at Chesson's in the deep and swanlike genuflexion she had practised
with her cousin, Cynthia Scarisbrick, a couple of years before. Then
she ran out, smiling.

"_How_ ripping!" she heard somebody say as she did so. "I expect she's
been presented."

Louie sought Miss Harriet.

The Principal, a businesslike, damson-complexioned woman of
forty-five, with a deerstalker hat on her close-cropped curly hair,
asked her what course of study she proposed to take. Louie replied (in
other words) that all courses were the same to her. Miss Harriet had
had that kind of student before. She asked a few further questions,
and then put Louie down for the elementary course. She dismissed her
with a marked syllabus and a copy of the Rules.

Louie read the Rules, nodded, as much as to say, "I thought so!" and
then laughed. There was no need to ask who had drawn them up; she
remembered the frigid way in which Chaff had been put into his place
that afternoon. There was a serenity about them that transcended the
ordinary imperative mood. "_Students do not absent themselves from
Morning Prayers or Divine Service without Permission._" "_Students do
not give Orders to the Gardeners or Domestics._" "_Students do not
pass beyond the Bounds of the College (Map appended)._" If on occasion
students did all of these things, that did not detract from the
_largior ether_ in which the Rules were conceived.

Nor did mere evidence to the contrary ever in the least degree abate
Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's persuasion that the young ladies of Chesson's,
being the daughters of gentlefolk, were by that very fact almost to be
trusted to do without Rules at all.

On the following morning Louie, with leggings of doe-skin buttoned to
her knees (see the second of the Captain's recommendations for the
attire that suited her best), and wearing a wide-pocketed jacket not
unlike a man's, began the practical study of Horticulture.


II

She was attached to the "posse" of six girls of which the
copper-haired student, whose name was Richenda Earle, was the head.
This girl, as the holder of the scholarship mentioned a page or two
back, was the single non-fee-paying student in the place. Her father
was a bookseller in Westbourne Grove, and she had kept his books for
him before coming to Chesson's. She had picked up her knowledge of
book-keeping at an obscure and ill-appointed Business School in
Holborn, but, her health being anything but robust, she had taken up
gardening under the impression that it was an out-of-doors pursuit. It
was only this at Chesson's to a strictly limited extent. Whatever
students did or did not learn, the output for the market had to be
maintained, and this necessitated, for days and days together, work in
the twelve long glass-houses, from the humid heat of which the girls
came out limp and listless and relaxed. Richenda Earle suffered from
these depressions more than most of them, and now only remained at the
college because Miss Harriet had held out hopes for her of a place on
the staff. She was easily head of all the classes of which she was a
member, but was hopelessly incapable of making her personality felt.
Add to all this that she was avid of popularity, and that her
self-consciousness took the form of making her more assertive
(without being a bit more effective) than any girl in the college, and
you will see why Louie felt a little sorry for her without taking to
her very much. She for her part had fastened herself on Louie from the
start, and had been the first to put the question that Louie had had
to answer a dozen times before she had been at Chesson's two hours.

"No, I haven't been presented," Louie had said, finding herself
waylaid almost at the door of Miss Harriet's room as she had come out
again. "My cousin has; that's where I learned it. We practised it
together."

"I've seen them go in," Richenda had murmured, a little wistfully, a
little dully; "the carriages and things, you know. I live in London."

Thereupon she had volunteered some of the information stated above, as
if inviting a confidence in return. "I'm glad you're in my posse," she
had concluded, as Louie had turned away without giving any information
whatever about herself.

The remaining members of "Earle's posse" were the two Burnett sisters
("B Major," the girl who was to be presented, and "B Minor," the
sixteen-year-old beauty-to-be), a Scotch girl called Macfarlane, and
one other girl, half French, Beatrice Pigou. There were four other
posses at the college, and each was told off each day to put itself
under the direction of one or other of the four gardeners, to pot,
"prick out," water or whatever the task might be. The gardener at
present in charge of Louie's posse was a sullen young Apollo called
Priddy, whose face and neck and forearms ozone or the Gulf Stream had
turned to the hue of some deep and old and mellow violin; and Burnett
Minor and the younger girls, talking in terms of the life to which
their eyes were yet sealed, discussed Priddy with a freedom perfectly
innocent and entirely appalling.

Louie had not been at Rainham Parva two days before she was wondering
whether after all she wanted to stay. She didn't know really why she
had come. Not one of the three commonest reasons for girls being
there--a stepmother, to be able to earn a little pocket-money, or to
get over a youthful love-affair--quite fitted her case. And then there
were those ridiculous Rules. She supposed that if she stayed she would
be on the same footing as the juniors, and she hardly thought she
could submit to that. Not that the Rules did not seem to justify
themselves; on the contrary, they did. Merely because Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith affirmed that students did not do this or that,
students as a matter of fact either did not do these things, or else
consented to class themselves as transgressors when they did.

But Louie's own attitude in the face of a prohibited thing, inherited
from her mother and now made inveterate by her upbringing, was
invariably that of a wonder what would happen were the prohibition to
be disregarded.

It was just a wonder, nothing more.

Then, on the night of her third day at Chesson's, she made up her mind
to forfeit her fees and leave in the morning. The reason for her
decision was this:

During the vacation certain digging had been allowed by the gardeners
to fall into arrears; and Earle's posse, together with another set of
six girls, had been set to do it. Now digging was the hardest work the
girls were ever called upon to do, and at the beginning of the term at
any rate they were spared it as much as possible. But education or
output required that this digging should be done, and accordingly the
twelve girls had digged for the whole morning, and in the afternoon
had varied the labour by carrying heavy pots from House No. 6 to House
No. 10--a distance of perhaps sixty yards. The next morning twelve
girls (or rather eleven, for Burnett Minor's unset muscles had
suffered but little) were half incapacitated by stiffness, and that
night there was an outcry for hot baths and arnica. Louie, clad in
dressing-gown and slippers and carrying her soap and sponge and towel,
hobbled to the bathrooms, and came, in the box-room, upon an
indignation-meeting.

This box-room was the common meeting-ground for students who awaited
their turns at the baths. It lay over the back courtyard arch, and the
four bathrooms adjoined it, two on either side. It was piled almost to
the ceiling with trunks and boxes and dress-baskets, the white
initials of which glimmered in the shadows cast by a couple of candles
on the floor; but there were isolated boxes enough to make seats for
the seven or eight girls already assembled there. They had slippers on
their naked feet and single garments on their aching bodies; and on
one of Louie's own boxes Burnett Major was peering at the little blue
flame of a spirit-kettle and mixing in a row of cups the paste for
that beverage of revolt--cocoa. Burnett Minor had traitorously turned
the general righteous anger to private account, had "bagged" the
hottest bath, and was now carolling at the top of her lungs in the
right-hand bathroom.

"----then if Earle won't do it I vote we draw lots!" Macfarlane was
exclaiming shrilly as Louie opened the door. "Those lazy louts of
gardeners are supposed to have all the digging done before we come
up----"

They were not--not if Chesson knew it; but "Of course they are!" cried
five voices at once.

"Well, I'm just not going to stand it--there----"

"And I'm not----"

"Nor me----"

"And for two pins I'd tell Priddy so!"

There was a moment's silence, but only because, all having spoken at
once, all had to take breath at once.

"It's abominable----"

"Disgusting----"

"Cela m'embete----"

"Here's Causton--what do _you_ vote, Causton?" they cried, turning to
her.

"What about?" Louie asked.

"Why, everything, of course--this beastly place--and setting us to dig
the first week--and Priddy's beastly cheek----"

Then every tongue was unloosed.

"_And_ a row every time we want an extra blouse washed----"

"_And_ washing two guineas a term extra----"

"_And_ only the vuggles for dinner that aren't good enough for the
market----" ("Vuggles" were vegetables.)

Another pause for breath.

"Let's what-d'-you-call-it--strike----"

Louie laughed as she sat stiffly down by Burnett Major.

"Oh, I'll vote for anything you like; I don't care," she said.

Then they began anew.

"Earle's head of the posse--_she_ ought to do it----"

Richenda Earle's voice broke in in loud complaint.

"How _can_ I? You know I would like a shot if it wasn't for my
scholarship. But I should just be told that if I didn't like it I
could go. Elwell's head of your lot. Elwell ought to go."

"I don't care who goes, but I will _not_ be told to do things by
Priddy."

"Priddy!----"

(Louie smiled again as there came from the bathroom the joyful voice:

"_Early one mo-o-orning--as the su-un was a-rising!_----")

"And those pots hadn't got to be moved--he was only making work----"

"--gros tyran!----"

"--like they kept us three weeks grading and packing tomatoes last
autumn, and called it 'study'----"

"--and the bruised ones for us----"

"--not even fit for ketchup----"

"--Dothegirls Hall _this_ establishment ought to be called!----"

Another momentary pause: then:

"--let's all sign a petition----"

"--no, a what-d'you-call-it--an ultimatum----"

"--just telling them straight----"

"Your bath, Earle----"

From the bathroom had come the gurgle of escaping water. Boiled pink,
turbaned with her towel, smelling of somebody else's scented soap and
radiating unrepentance that Earle's bath must be a tepid one, Burnett
Minor bounced in.

"Friends, Romans, countrymen, do lend me a dry towel, just to finish
with. Oh, Causton, the curtsy, now that I've something loose on!
Crocks! My cocoa, Major, and who said Priddy just now? 'Students do
not fall in love with Priddy.' (I sha'n't hush.) Sugar, Mac, and,
Causton, I wish you'd do my hair your way, just to see how it
looks----"

And, twirling twice in the midst of a corolla of pink cashmere
dressing-gown, she sank to the floor and began to nurse a chilblain on
her heel.

Louie, her hands behind her head, leaned back and watched the scene
with the greatest amusement. A master-rebel herself, she knew that
here was no rebellion. The meeting, like other meetings, was merely
letting off steam, and the girls who "wouldn't stand it" would be
standing it exactly the same on the morrow. Well, on the morrow she
herself would be off. Her boxes were only half unpacked; half-an-hour
would put the other things back again. Already she saw that this
Chesson's was an imposition. In the meantime, the indignation meeting
was very amusing. She felt almost motherly towards these tractable
revolutionaries. Her indulgence became still greater as they spoke out
again.

"Another thing," a girl of Elwell's posse demanded; "why couldn't I go
to Rainham yesterday to have my photograph taken?"

("Break the camera," Burnett Minor murmured to the chilblain.)

"And just because somebody'd bagged my boots and I was five minutes
late the other day----"

"Je m'en fiche pas mal----" Pigou began.

("Parly Angly, voo affectay feele," from Burnett Minor.)

"I should like to see one of the gardeners at home looking at us the
way Priddy does----"

"Or Miss Harriet either for that matter--she's only a sort of
forewoman----"

"--applewoman----"

"--tomatoes----"

"--that's all she is really----"

"--nothing else----"

Louie laughed outright. Another gurgle had come from the bathroom, and
Earle reappeared. Her announcement that the water was now cold added
to the general sense of wrong.

"Not even enough hot water!"

"Scarcely a drop, ever!----"

"Odious!"

"Then will somebody come into my cubicle and rub me--not you, B
Minor."

("Just give a squint out of the window, Elwell.")

("It's all right. Her lights are out. Lovey's too.")

"Well, I _won't_ have a cold bath, to please Lovey or anybody else!"

Nor did Louie want one. She had risen. She moved to the window that
looked out over the courtyard yew--the window from which watch was
kept to see when Miss Harriet and Mrs. Lovenant-Smith retired--and
yawned. In the middle of her yawn she suddenly laughed again.

"Good gracious!" she thought. It was too amusing.

Suddenly Richenda Earle, who also was standing by the window, spoke to
her. Evidently Richenda did not think she had been fairly treated by
the meeting.

"Do _you_ think they ought to ask me to?" she complained.

Louie turned.

"To ask you to what?"

"To complain to Miss Harriet--me, the only Scholarship girl."

Louie shrugged her shoulders disdainfully. "Oh, they won't complain to
Miss Harriet!"

"No--but one doesn't like to refuse things----" Earle said in injured
tones.

Before Louie would have had time to reply to this, had she thought of
replying to it, a diversion occurred. Nobody had heard steps
approaching, but all at once the door opened, and Authority, in the
person, not of Miss Harriet, but of Mrs. Lovenant-Smith herself, stood
looking in. The hubbub ceased as the boiling of a kettle ceases when
cold water is poured in. Several of the conspirators rose to their
feet; Burnett Minor, making no bones about it, bolted behind a box.
Great is even the look of Authority; it was almost a superfluity when
Mrs. Lovenant-Smith asked in measured tones from the doorway: "What is
the meaning of this?"

Already the tails of two dressing-gowns had vanished out of the other
door.

"What is the meaning of this?" Mrs. Lovenant-Smith asked again.

Then she looked round to see on whom to fasten her displeasure.

Louie saw her look, and instantly fathomed its purpose. She and
Richenda Earle stood by the window, as it were the dramatic centre of
some Rembrandtesque composition to which all else was merely
contributory. The Scholarship girl was going to get into a row. She,
Louie, had lived for years among rows; and was leaving anyway on the
morrow.

Before the "Miss Earle" had passed Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's lips Louie
had stepped forward.

"We've been waiting for our baths," she said.

Perhaps already Mrs. Lovenant-Smith would have preferred Richenda
Earle to Louie; there is expediency even in Authority; but the
challenge, if it was that, was a public one. Mrs. Lovenant-Smith
turned to Louie.

"Do you know what time it is?" she asked freezingly.

It pleased Louie to take Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's question _au pied de la
lettre_.

"I'm afraid my watch is in my cubicle. I could tell you in a moment,"
she said.

This the Lady-in-Charge saw fit to ignore. She drew her own watch from
her belt.

"It is ten minutes past eleven," she said. "Students are not out of
bed at ten minutes past eleven. Neither are candles burning. Miss
Earle----"

But again Louie interposed. After all, it was rough on the Scholarship
girl.

"Miss Earle came in only a moment ago to send us to bed," she
affirmed, without a tremor.

"Then," said Mrs. Lovenant-Smith, turning to Louie, and perhaps
feeling herself once more headed off, "you, Miss Causton, as a new
student, are perhaps not yet familiar with the Rules. Be so good as to
come to me at ten o'clock to-morrow morning and I will explain them to
you."

Mrs. Lovenant-Smith did not make the discomfited rebels file out past
her. She herself retired with dignity. Students do not linger in the
box-room when it is made known that they are expected to go to bed at
once.

But no sooner had the door closed on Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's back than
the pent-up general breath escaped again in a fluttering exhalation.
In it were awe, delight, homage.

"Oh, Causton!" somebody breathed. "You _are_ a brick!"

"_Isn't_ she?"

"Wasn't it stunning of her?"

"You'd have caught it, Earle!"

"I saw it in her eye!"

"But I say, Causton, you'll get a wigging!"

"She didn't speak to you, you know!"

"You cut in----"

Louie felt quite confused, so much did they make of so little.

"Good gracious," she said, "what are you all talking about? That's
nothing, especially as I was thinking of leaving in any case
to-morrow."

There was consternation in the box-room. Had Rebellion found its
leader only to lose her again immediately?

"Leaving!"

"Oh, I sha'n't leave till after ten o'clock now, you may be sure,"
Louie laughed.

"But--oh, I _say_!"

The dismayed voices dropped. There was a blank silence. It was only
after half-a-minute that Burnett Minor, who had issued from cover
again, begged: "Don't leave, Causton."

"Oh, I shouldn't leave because of anything like this," said Louie,
enormously amused at the thought. "The place is a fraud--that's why I
should leave."

"Oh, don't leave," another girl begged.

"Well, we'll see what she says to-morrow."

"She can't be _too_ down on you----"

"Not the first time----"

Something that can only be described as a pleasant hardening came into
Louie's grey eyes. Her laugh dropped a note. She looked at the adoring
faces.

"That's just what I mean," she said. "If she _is_----"

"What?----"

"I'll stay."

And that also her stepfather would have described as "just like
Louie."


III

Punctually at ten o'clock on the morrow Louie knocked at the door of
Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's office or drawing-room--it was both--and
entered. Mrs. Lovenant-Smith was writing at an escritoire that was not
big enough to accommodate her elbows, and so supported her braceleted
wrists only. There was something contradictory about her attitude. Its
rectitude as she sat at the inconvenient little desk suggested that
she expected Louie, her turn, pause and inquiring "Well?" that she did
not. Louie's observant eyes had already noticed a curious
inconsistency about the Lady-in-Charge. A great number of things
seemed to lie on the tip of her tongue, ready, apparently against her
own better judgment, to be detached from it by a perfectly-timed
fillip of opposition.

And Louie had only to remember the word or two with which she had
dashed Chaff's affability to be fairly sure that though cocoa and
candles in the box-room at eleven o'clock at night might seem a good
enough reason for the present interview, as like as not another lay
behind it. She stood just within the door.

"Well, Miss Causton?"

"I think you told me to come here at ten o'clock."

"Ah, yes. Please to wait a moment."

Louie listened to the squeaking of her quill and the faint jingling at
her wrists as she continued to write.

When Mrs. Lovenant-Smith turned again it was almost as if she had
thought better of something or other--say of an encounter with this
long-chinned, grey-eyed girl who stood, not dressed for gardening, but
in a long grey morning frock, looking at her from the door.

"I merely wished to impress on you, Miss Causton, that the Rules must
be observed," she said. "I believe there is a copy of them on the
smaller bureau by your right hand there. Take it and be so good as to
study it. That is all I wished to say."

Louie did not believe the last sentence, but no disbelief showed in
her eyes. She inclined her head, but watched Mrs. Lovenant-Smith,
waiting for more. She thought that if she waited more would come. It
did. Mrs. Lovenant-Smith, having just dismissed Louie, rescinded the
decision by speaking again.

"You are older than the others," she said, "and it ought not to be too
much to expect of you that you will set a good example."

Louie, perhaps gratuitously, read a meaning into the words. Perhaps
you guess what it was. Many of the older people of her world still
remembered her mother's first marriage, and Mrs. Lovenant-Smith,
though Louie did not like the look of her, was still undeniably of her
world. With Louie herself the drawing-master theory of her paternity
had long since gone by the board; the girl had not rested until she
had discovered that her father was Buck Causton, pugilist and artists'
model, none other; and if Mrs. Lovenant-Smith had ever chanced to
hear of her as Louise Chaffinger, and identified that person under the
name which (whether from pride, spleen, sensitiveness or what not) she
had since reassumed, there would probably be something very near the
tip of her tongue indeed. And just as Buck had always been a pale
fighter, so Louie's own mixed blood, though it might surge at her
heart, left her cheeks untinged in moments of stress. She still stood,
making no motion to go.

"I don't think I quite follow you," she said slowly. "Why do you say
that something 'ought not to be too much to expect'?"

Mrs. Lovenant-Smith stiffened and drew in again.

"It is not necessary to follow me," she said. "You will find all that
is necessary in the Rules. You may keep that copy; Rule 6 is the one I
wish especially to call your attention to. Would you be so good as to
pass me that bell as you go out--the small brass one on the cabinet
there?"

She half turned to her writing again.

("Good gracious, what next!" thought Louie.)

The bell was a small Dutch figure in a metal farthingale, and Louie
passed it. As she did so she glanced at the hand that took it. Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith's face was wrinkled like a dried apple, and the hand,
though beautifully kept, was wrinkled too, and had, moreover, rather
stumpy nails. Louie's own hands were exquisite. The bell passed from
hand to hand.

Whether or not it was the glance at the hands, suddenly the word too
much dropped from the tip of Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's tongue. She put the
bell down with a little clap.

"The Rules of the college are not called into question," she said. "So
far they have proved quite sufficient for the kind of student the
college was founded for. By the way, why are you not dressed for the
gardens?"

("'Kind of student'--good--gracious!" Louie cried in astonishment to
herself. "Very well, madam----")

She spoke calmly, looking modestly down at her long cashmere skirt,
but taking in her lovely hands (which toyed with the copy of the
Rules) on the way.

"My dress?" she said. "Oh, I wasn't sure whether I should be staying
or not."

Louie knew perfectly well that her leaving would make, at any rate
until her cubicle should be filled again, a difference of something
like sixty pounds a year, with extras, to Chesson's. That is rather a
lot of money to hang upon a mere breach of Rule 6. Perhaps Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith betrayed herself in the quickness with which she took
her up.

"Do you mean you're thinking of leaving?" she asked.

Louie, who had lifted her eyes for a moment, dropped them demurely
again.

"I mean," she replied, "that I didn't know whether _you_ were going to
dismiss _me_ or not. You see, you may not want my--kind of student.
I'd rather not be in any way considered as an exception," she added.

Had Mrs. Lovenant-Smith known Louie better she would have known that
she had now no intention whatever of leaving. As it was, there
probably came into her head the thought that after all Louie was a
Scarisbrick and a niece of Lord Moone. Ladies-in-charge of
horticultural colleges do not fall foul of the Honourable Emily and
Lord Moone. All at once her severity relaxed--but she hated Louie
thenceforward that it must be so. She smiled a little, but the smile
had a twitch in it.

"I don't think we need go quite to that extreme, Miss Causton," she
said. "All the same, I'm afraid the Rules are necessary."

"I dare say," said Louie.

"And so long as that is understood, that is the chief thing. In regard
to candles in particular, in an old place like this there is always
the danger of fire. In fact, I'm not at all sure that a fire drill
ought not to be instituted. May I add that I quite appreciated the
chivalrous way in which you tried to shield Miss Earle last night?
Indeed, I wanted to say that quite as much as the other. I think that
is all. Good-morning, Miss Causton."

"Good-morning," said Louie, stalking out.

As she crossed the Restoration hall, "'Kind of student'--good
gracious!" she exclaimed again. "To talk to me as if I were Burnett
Minor! 'Kind of student!'--I wonder it doesn't occur to her that
somebody might have told me all about Miss Hastings and that gardener
four years ago!--'Kind of student,' indeed!"

Still without changing her clothes, she walked out past the orchards,
up the hill, and sat looking down over the coombes to the sea.

Leave Chesson's, now? Oh no, nothing was farther from her thoughts!
She would stay, and why? Not because she had been treated as a junior,
but because she had been taken, as it were, at her own word. She
herself might be perversely and nonchalantly cynical about her mixed
birth, but she did not intend to allow anybody else--Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith or anybody--to show as much as a flicker of
consciousness of it. "Kind of student"!--Oh no, that amusement was
going to be Louie's own private preserve.

For it had been her cynical amusement. Approximately, the mood took
her once in five or six months, with or without occasion. Her mother
knew its times and seasons, and its passings into abeyance, not into
extinction. She did not call her sensitiveness morbid; quite on the
contrary, she saw to it that it took the form of a pose of gaiety; she
could be pitilessly gay with herself. Meek, harmless Cynthia
Scarisbrick, for example, could have told tales about her gaiety when,
not knowing whether she herself was eligible for presentation or not
(but gathering from the tense silence on the subject that had reigned
at Trant that she was not, or at any rate that her mother did not wish
it), she had practised the ceremonial curtsy with her cousin. It had
been Cynthia, not Louie, who had shed the tears.

But to be agreed with by Mrs. Lovenant-Smith that her origin was open
to question (for the Lady-in-Charge had all but said that)--oh no,
that was really too much!----

Mrs. Lovenant-Smith, who took a seedsman's salary!

She might have known that Mrs. Lovenant-Smith would know all, all
about her----

Then, as she sat, she began to wonder where she had heard the name of
Lovenant-Smith before. She had wondered it when first she had received
her prospectus at Trant. Of course her stepfather knew these other
Lovenant-Smiths, the adjutant's lot, and had probably spoken of them,
but she did not think it was that. For a minute or two she sought in
her memory....

She was ceasing to think when the recollection came of itself. It was
only a trifling one after all. One of the boys with whom she had
romped at Mallard Bois--Roy she had called him then--had been, she now
remembered, a Lovenant-Smith. He would be a connection of the
adjutant's. Of course, she had heard the name at Mallard Bois....

Then Louie bit her lip. If there had been any doubt at all that Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith knew the story of Buck there was none now. The
association with Mallard Bois was quite enough....

Louie was glad she had looked insolently at those stumpy hands....

Beast!

The trees below her tossed restlessly, and far out the grey sea was
whitecapped as if it had been rasped with a file. No boat had put out
for the pollock-fishing or to lift a spiller that morning; only a
pilot, a couple of miles out in the Channel, slowly lifted her nose
for a moment and then hid it again. Louie felt a little cold, and
rose. She made an attractive picture as she did so. Her brown hair was
tossed by the wind, and her long grey skirt cracked behind her and
clipped her limbs almost as if she had worn the garments of a man.

"Beast!" she muttered again.

Then she thought of another beast--this father of hers whose name she
had not needed to take but had taken out of rancour against her mother
and despite against herself. (But not for Mrs. Lovenant-Smith to turn
up her nose at!) He now (she had this from Chaff) kept a public-house
somewhere up the Thames--Lord Moone's cast-off brother-in-law in a
public-house!--and any fitful romantic light that might ever have
shone about him was now extinguished. Of course the Captain had
uttered his usual wistful formula: "Not a bad fellow at all, I should
have said"; but that was rather a criticism on the Captain than on
Buck. Yes. Buck was simply another beast. But though he were a
potman, Mrs. Lovenant-Smith should give him every bit as much
deference as if he had been a brewing peer....

"And I don't care--if it _is_ the pride of the cobbler's dog, I'm
going to keep his name," Louie muttered.

Suddenly she turned and climbed the stile that led back to Chesson's
land. As she did so she realised that she had been out of bounds. She
laughed curtly. Rule 3! Much she cared for their Rules! What about the
Rule: "Miss Hastings does not elope with What's-his-Name the
gardener"?--but that would keep. In the meantime she would change into
her gardening clothes before lunch. She had shown Mrs. Lovenant-Smith
that she had garments of freedom. The next time Louie threatened to
leave she might be able to add to the force of the threat that she
would take half-a-dozen girls with her.

Well, lunch was in half-an-hour; she had just time to change.

But as she descended through the orchards again she came upon Richenda
Earle. The copper-haired girl was washing an espaliered plum-tree, and
as she turned her head Louie saw that she had been crying. She asked
Louie if she was going.

"Leaving here, do you mean? No. What's the matter?"

The girl turned her eyes away.

"Thanks awfully for last night," she grunted. "It was ripping of you.
But you see it hasn't made much difference."

"How, not made much difference?"

Richenda glanced at the tree, and from the tree to the syringe in her
hand and the pail of disinfectant at her feet. "This," she said.
"Anybody can do this job, and I've been sorting out pots over there
all the morning," she indicated the yard behind the trees where the
flower-pots and debris were kept. "And _I_ can't threaten to leave."

"Your scholarship, of course?"

"Yes. And I'm supposed to be working for the medal."

Chesson's wanted a Horticultural Society's medal badly. They had never
had one, nor were likely to get one unless Richenda Earle got it for
them. Louie, who was quickly fathoming the real economy of the place,
looked again at Richenda's red eyes.

"Well, they won't send you away till you've failed," she said.

But Earle made an impatient gesture, and her eyes began to stream
again.

"Oh, what's a girl like you know about it!" she broke out. "Yes, I
know they'll keep me till then, but you don't know anything at all
about it! You would if you'd had my upbringing! You don't know what
the struggle is. You think digging and carrying pots is hard work; you
wouldn't if you'd seen what I've seen! When you go to London it's just
shopping and theatres and suppers and things; but just you try to keep
a small bookseller's accounts for him, when they're hardly worth
keeping, I mean, and collecting his debts when all his money's tied up
in stock and your father's nearly bankrupt--not that he's ever
solvent--you'd know what I meant then!"

Then the unexpected outbreak stopped suddenly.

Louie stood silently staring. She disliked seeing anybody cry.
Richenda's words had little meaning for her; she supposed they
contained a hidden meaning somewhere. Then the copper-haired girl
went on, more quietly but no less bitterly:

"I should get a hundred pounds a year on the staff here," she said,
"that is, if they won't waste me half-days just out of spite, like
they're doing this morning. That's nothing to you. You others are here
just for pocket-money, but we live on your pocket-money. I suppose I
oughtn't to have come here at all. Not among all you. But I begged
father to let me. Father once apologised to me--that was when there
was a distraint out against him, if you know what that is--because he
wasn't rich. Fathers ought all to be rich, he said. There are seven of
us girls at home, and only one married. Oh, I tell you, you don't
know!"

Louie wondered why she preferred Richenda Earle loud and striving for
the popularity she never got to Richenda Earle unburdening herself
thus. She herself went brightly masked, and disliked to see another's
mind naked. Richenda's mind was stripped now. It was distasteful.
Somehow or other Richenda contrived to miss both the balm of
popularity and the solace of private sympathy.

"I'm--I'm awfully sorry," Louie said awkwardly and a little stiffly.

At the tone Richenda drew in instantly.

"It doesn't matter," she said, compressing her lips and beginning to
straighten her hair. "I shall just have to buck up, that's all. But
girls of your class don't know anything about it, so you needn't think
you do. There's the first gong. Come on."

As they passed the dairies a rabble of students raced past the end of
the house on their way to the boot-lockers. Louie and Richenda entered
by the side door. Richenda plunged at once into the scramble for
house-slippers, but Louie, not having put on her garden boots that
day, did not need to change. It was too late now to put on another
dress. She waited by the inner door.

Suddenly she was spied by Burnett Minor. The child rushed towards her,
a book in her hand.

"Are you going, Causton?" she shouted.

There was a loud "Ssssh!" They could be heard from the dining-room.
The girls flocked round Louie, and hoarse, excited whispers broke out:

"Are you going?"

"She's dressed!"

"Are you going?"

"Did you see her?"

"Does Causton say she's going?"

"Ssssh--not all at once!----"

"No, I'm not going," said Louie.

Mouths gaped their very widest to make up for the inaudibility of the
cheers.

"Hooray!"

"Is she going?"

"No, she's not going--hooray!"

Burnett Minor threw her book joyfully into the book-locker. Ordinarily
her reading varied between an adoration of Tennyson and mocking and
dramatic declamations either from the "Pansy Library," or from its
brother-classics, of which the typical burlesque is "The Blood-stained
Putty-knife, or The Plumber's Revenge." But this book was her album.

"I saw you come down dressed, and I did want you to put something in
it if you were going," she whispered gleefully; "but you're not going!
Hoo----"

Her voiceless mouth gaped wider than them all.

That midday Louie walked demurely up to Mrs. Lovenant-Smith at the
head of the table and apologised for not yet having changed. From her
tone Mrs. Lovenant-Smith may or may not have inferred that she had
spent the hours since their interview in contrite meditation. She
inclined her head graciously. But Louie, taking her place for grace
between Burnett Minor and Richenda Earle, was murmuring to herself
once more:

"'Class of student,' indeed!... Good gracious me!..."


IV

Louie quickly became the most popular girl in the college.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her studies she pursued very much as who should say: "I am Louie
Causton--take it or leave it." Neither Miss Harriet nor the gardeners
could ever tell when she was interested in a lesson; if she learned,
she concealed her processes. Before April was out--(the intervening
time may be slipped over; the daily work in the gardens and houses
went on as usual, the usual number of crates and parcels was
despatched from Rainham Magna station, and already the girls were
looking forward to June, which was always a slack month)--before April
was out she could "slip" and "bud" as deftly as any when she chose;
but few made more mistakes than she, and none accepted correction with
her remarkable nonchalance. Afternoon "theory" she had begun to cut
almost entirely. A slate hung in the hall, on which students were
supposed to write down where they might be found when they left the
immediate precincts of the college. One day towards the end of April
there appeared on this slate: "Gone to Rainham; L. Causton." Then she
awaited events with Mrs. Lovenant-Smith.

There were no events.

She sent to Trant for a bicycle.

Truth to tell, as the spring advanced she needed the air. The
glass-houses, with their smell of musk and mould and heated pipes and
cherry-pie all mingled, oppressed her; the long forcing-house, where
for the time being most of the work for the markets went on,
completely took the starch out of her. She felt as if she was being
forced herself. She hated the sight of the twelve houses; they merely
meant so much ventilation, so much shutting-down for the evenings, so
much watering, so much lassitude for the girls, so much money in
Chesson's pocket. She was glad she had sent for the bicycle. Somebody
else might read thermometers and close down and sprinkle floors and
ply the hissing hoses. Louie wanted air.

Yet even the outer air was not sharp enough. It is not an invigorating
air in which the lemon-verbena grows in trees up the cottage walls and
scented geranium flourishes out-of-doors like a common hedge plant. In
the sunken lanes through which she idled on her bicycle the primroses,
twice as big as she had ever seen them, and the cowslips, great
sub-tropical clusters, were already past; and she expected to see the
roses out presently, big as sunflowers. There was something almost
rank in the sweet bursting out of the land. She thanked goodness that
a daisy was a daisy still, modest and unmagnified. She was not used to
hedges of fuchsia. Nature might have been a little more sparing of her
myrtle too. Louie always dropped from her bicycle when, coming out of
one of the canals of still and scented air, she saw, across a burnt
heath-patch or a clump of hardy gorse, a glimpse of the sea. For the
sake of a look at the sea she often walked up the hill behind
Chesson's and sat on the stile she had crossed on the morning after
her interview with Mrs. Lovenant-Smith.

Except by her example, however, she incited nobody else to break the
Rules.

It was curious that she should know herself to be popular, and yet at
the same time should also be secretly aware that she was a little out
of things. All went well enough for the present, but only for the
present. She knew quite well what would happen did she, a year or two
hence, chance to meet any of her present fellow-pupils. She would not,
then, be older than they in quite the same sense that she was now.
They would meet; there would be eager recollections of the old days at
Chesson's; oh, for that matter she could make it all up now!... "Come
where we can have a really good talk! Where's Burnett Major now, and
her sister? And have you heard from Elwell lately? And I wonder what's
become of that red-haired girl--what was her name--Earle--yes, Earle?
And of course you know Macfarlane's going to be married.... Now tell
me all about what you're doing!"... Oh yes, Louie could make all this
up--the bursts, the pauses, the dead stops, and then the falsely
bright, perfunctory talk about Chesson's again. For she and her
fellow-students would not be doing the same things. They would have
taken recognised places, and Louie was not sure that she herself had a
place to take. Her father and mother had seen to that. She remained a
spectator. If she was liked now, it was not because she went one inch
out of her way to be so. She was just as ready to go out of her way to
be disliked if she must go out of it at all.

In the meantime, however, here she was at Chesson's, to all intents
and purposes her own mistress, and made so much of that she had Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith largely at her mercy--for, had she been requested to
leave, the two Burnetts, Elwell and others would now have left with
her. So, doing exactly as she liked, and adored on every hand, Louie
even wondered sometimes whether she had not been wrong in supposing
that restlessness and discontent were bred in the very bones of her.

She was at the very top of her popularity about the time Burnett Major
gave the birthday "cocoa" in her cubicle. (That is to say, Burnett
Major gave the nucleus of the "cocoa"; the rest of the party happened
by a natural process of accretion.) This time the junketing was held
by Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's permission; it had been acceded readily.
"Lovey's not such a bad old sort when you get used to her," B. Major
said. It was in mid-May, on a hot evening, and, though Burnett's
window was flung wide open, showing the dark yew outside, not a breath
stirred, and the flames of the candles were four inches long in the
air. Besides cocoa, Burnett had provided cake and biscuits and candied
fruits and an enormous box of "assorted" chocolates; and Burnett's bed
was like to break down with the weight of girls upon it.

Louie had had Burnett Major especially in her mind when she had
painted her fancy picture of a possible meeting with her
fellow-students a year or two hence. The two sisters were the
daughters of a Gloucestershire M.F.H., and Louie could forgive B.
Major for being a little dazzled by her approaching presentation.
There was nothing unfamiliar to Louie, either, in the rest of the
things she felt herself, at one and the same time, both "in at" and
"out of," for probably Mewley Hall, the Burnetts' home, was not very
different from Trant or Mallard Bois. But Burnett Major's position a
few years hence was a forgone conclusion; she filled it already in
anticipation; and the noisy talk that was in progress as Louie joined
the party threw bright lights on it.

They were discussing the coming vacations. These were Chesson's yearly
dread. They interrupted his supply of free labour, and there were
always fewest girls when he most wanted them. As the vacation
arrangements rested after all chiefly with the parents, he could do
little except express his preference that as many of the girls as
possible should take their holidays in the empty month of June, and
his hope that those who did not do so would defer them until as late
as they could. Otherwise he was, to that extent, no better off than
his trade competitors.

"Here she comes," Burnett Minor was crying as Louie entered the
crowded cubicle. "I want to be here when Causton is. It's all
right for Major--oh, you needn't think we don't know, Major--if you
aren't actually engaged he's always about the place when you're at
home--and I'm going to stalk you both with a camera and then
what-d'you-call-it--blackmail him----"

"Shut up, Minor, or I shall send you out," B. Major ordered.

"Then I shall tell everybody who he is and shout his name through the
keyhole. It's----" She moved her lips, threatening to pronounce the
name there and then.

"Sneak!" said her sister.

B. Minor bridled.

"I _will_ tell them if you call me that again! Causton, have you a
young man? (That means, Avez-voo un jeune homme, Pig?)"

"Not for you to shout his name through keyholes," Louie replied,
smiling.

"No, but do tell us--have you?"

"At my age?" said Louie mockingly, sitting down on the edge of the bed
and reaching for candied fruits.

"Go on--you're trying to wriggle out of it--_have_ you?"

"Hush, little girl--open your mouth----" She popped a fruit into the
mouth that itself resembled an untouched fruit.

Pigou, from the lower deck of the washstand, interposed loudly:

"Elle a vingt-quatr'ans--elle est perdue!"

"Uppe petite chose, avec voter Francay," commented Burnett Minor.

"Cau-ston coiffe deja Sainte Catherine," said the ruthless Pigou: "a
vingt-quatr'ans on est deja--pff!"

"Non elle isn't pff--rude chose! But she'll tell me when we sleep out,
because I'm going to have my mattress next to hers, sha'n't I,
Causton?"

"Mais elle vient d'promettre----"

"--and we shall talk about all those things you always say 'Hush' when
I come in--sha'n't we, Causton?"

"Prrridd-ee!" taunted the French child: and B. Major spoke.

"But I say, Causton, when do you take your vac.--June or September?"

"And where shall you go?" somebody else demanded.

"I'm going to Ireland--father's taken a house," cried a third.

"Nobody cares where you're going! Causton, will you come home with
us?"

"No; come to Ireland with us!"

"Well, can I come home with you? I loved that man who brought you
here!" (Burnett Minor was the young woman who had loved Chaff.)

"It wasn't Lord Moone, was it?" Macfarlane asked.

"Or was it your father?"

"Your cocoa, Causton," said B. Major.

Louie had never been so run after before. She curled up among the
slippered feet at the foot of the bed (there were four girls stretched
upon it), and alternately stroked the hair and tweaked the ears of
Burnett Minor, who had defeated Pigou in the scramble to put her head
into Louie's lap. "I _can_ have the pitch next to yours, can't I?" the
child demanded, her eyes turned up and her face (to Louie) upside
down. "There, you see, Pig, she says I can--so voo juste pouvez
sechey-up, la."

This sleeping out was a summer custom at Chesson's. It began with the
warm weather, sometimes in June, sometimes in July. On account of the
morning and evening carrying of bedding and mattresses, the "pitches"
nearest the house were deemed the most desirable, and weeks ahead
there was bickering about the "bagging" of them. They bickered now,
and then turned to the vacations again.

Louie listened, saying little. For her, vacations in this sense hardly
existed. Vacations lose their value when you study as slackly as Louie
did. It might be amusing to go home with one or other of the girls for
a week or two, but on the other hand she hardly thought she would.
These were the things she was both "in at" and "out of." B. Major was
talking about them now. Soon she would be taking her presentation
lessons; she was coming out; she had an unofficial admirer; yes, Louie
saw quite plainly what B. Major's future would be. What was her own
going to be? She had not the least idea.... No, she did not really
want a vacation. More or fewer, there would be girls at Chesson's
throughout the summer. Chesson's still amused her; she could leave
once for all when it ceased to amuse her. She was learning nothing.
She neither wished to start a lavender farm, as Elwell, the daughter
of Sir James Elwell of the Treasury, did, nor to grow peaches, as did
Macfarlane, nor to add to her pocket-money by selling pot-pourri at
extravagant prices to her friends, which was Burnett Major's
idea--until she should marry. She could hardly sell pot-pourri to her
prize-fighting father. She might (she smiled) sell him hops--she
seemed to remember that beer was made of hops....

And she certainly did not intend to mug at theory for the sake of a
medal, as Earle was doing at this very moment....

The party was still discussing this life which was hers and yet not
hers when Miss Harriet, going her rounds, tapped at the door and
entered.

"Bedtime, young ladies, please," she said. "Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's
compliments, and she hopes you have enjoyed yourselves."

Her tone was that of one who might say: "You see, young ladies, what
liberty you have _within_ the Rules; isn't it much pleasanter all
round?"

The party broke up.

The weeks passed. In June a number of the girls went home, Earle among
them. Permission to sleep out was given, a little earlier than usual
on account of the heavy mildness of the nights; and Louie lay in the
orchard, between Burnett Minor and little Pigou. The convolvulus came
out, great white trumpets in the hedges; the sea over the hill became
of a milky blue; and there floated out to it dense tracts of odours,
lilies, and syringa, jasmine and roses and hay. You wearied of the
smell of meadow-sweet; in the houses you could hardly take breath. The
sun was reflected piercingly from their glass roofs, and the girls
spent the afternoons in deck-chairs under the shadow of the courtyard
yew.

       *       *       *       *       *

The thing that (Louie sometimes told herself afterwards) made all the
difference and yet (as she also sometimes told herself) made no
difference at all, began very trivially. It was just such another
accident as that which, nine or ten years before, had sent her to her
mother with a demand to be told "who the Honourable Mrs. Causton was."

Ordinarily, the girls at Chesson's were a little careless about the
dressing of their hair. You cannot move constantly among banks of
plants, and pick fruit, and net cherry-trees, and be for ever stooping
over beds and frames, and keep your hair fit to be seen. Therefore,
once a month or so, the girls might, if they wished, go in parties of
four or five to a hairdresser's at Rainham, there to be
professionally--whatever the word may be. These parties were made up
more with a view to the enjoyment of the half-holiday than to the
business strictly in hand; and Louie, had she cared, might have been a
member of each detachment that went. On this particular day Louie had
had much ado to free herself from Burnett Minor's affectionate clutch.

"Oh, do come with our lot, Causton!" B. Minor had begged. "Oh, you
are rotten! You know you went with Elwell before, and with Major
before that, and I do want mine properly done like yours, not just
punched up the way we do it!"

"What, like Saint Catherine?" Louie laughed.

"Do come."

But Louie had shaken her off.

"He'll remember how mine's done; I was there a week ago. No, I won't
come. I'm going to do some theory this afternoon."

"Oh, what a fib! You never do theory!"

"Well, I ought to. No, I won't come."

"Then will you lend me your bicycle?"

"Yes, if you like; but the others are walking, aren't they?"

"Well, I'll wobble with them."

And Louie had watched the party set out, Burnett Minor on the bicycle,
"wobbling" and leaving behind her a complicated track in the dust of
the drive.

She did not know why she had said she would do theory that afternoon.
She supposed it was because she felt slack and bored. Nor did she do
very much theory. She went into the classroom, languidly turned over
the pages of an old "Balfour," wondered what it mattered to anybody at
Chesson's (except perhaps to Earle) that "movements had been observed
in the pollen-grains of Cereus Speciosissimus," or that "changes took
place in the stamens by suppression and degenerations of various
kinds." Then she glanced at a preparation on the stage of the
microscope opposite Richenda Earle's empty chair, and yawned. She
looked out into the courtyard. Three or four girls dozed in
deck-chairs under the dark yew. There was an empty chair--but no; a
clatter of washing up was going on in the kitchen under the box-room;
she would go up to her cubicle.

She did so, and, pushing off her slippers, lay down on her bed.

Her window was open as far as it would go, but the yew seemed to shut
out even what little air there was. All that entered was the faint
acrid smell of consuming rubbish; they were slow-burning somewhere at
the back. The sounds of the washing up were fainter now; a pigeon
alighted on her sill. She had been an idiot, she told herself, to fag
herself that morning listening to Hall's demonstration in the
forcing-house. She wished there was a pond about the place, with a
boat or a punt. She would have bagged the boat to sleep in. It would
be jolly to be rocked to sleep in a boat or a punt.

She closed her eyes. The last thing she saw before she did so was the
little black-framed miniature of the fourth Lord Moone, the last but
three, in his tied wig and ensign's uniform. Louie had tacked it up by
her mirror merely because it had been in her room at Trant as long as
she could remember and, if one might judge from the youthful face, he
was less of an opinionated fool than the other Moones--much less so
than Uncle Augustus....

She turned over. Then she slept.

Sleep also was deep, too deep, at Rainham Parva. It weighed on the
girl like a mulch. At five o'clock Louie could hardly drag herself out
of it. She fumbled at her loosened belt and pulled out her watch.
Five! The tea-gong must have gone.

Well, perhaps tea would rouse her.

She felt by the side of the bed for her slippers, rose, touched her
hair as she passed the glass, and went drowsily downstairs.

As Mrs. Lovenant-Smith and Miss Harriet always took tea in their own
or one another's rooms--which, for that matter, the students also were
permitted to do if they chose--the meal was a noisier one than either
lunch or supper. Louie heard one of Burnett Minor's several voices as
she pushed at the door. The child saw Louie's face in the opening and
sprang up.

"Here she is--give it to me--I'm going to read it myself----" she
cried.

Burnett Minor always wanted to read it herself--"it" usually being one
of the sublimer passages from the current number of the "Pansy
Library" or an especially choice one from an office-boys' periodical.
Louie smiled languidly now as the girl snatched a booklet from
Elwell's hand and gave tongue.

"I've punctured your back tyre, Causton, but Mac has some solution and
we'll mend it after tea--and I'm always to do my hair like this,
Harris says--do look at it, isn't it stunning?--and now--aha!"
(somebody had made a grab for her book). "Thought you'd got it, didn't
you, Elwell? Now I'll read it first and then show her the picture, and
that reminds me, Mac, you've never given me my 'Jack Sheppard' back
that I lent you----"

Louie reached for a chair. She yawned again.

"Do give me a cup of tea, somebody. I hope the watering's all done,
for I'm not going to do any. What's the child got now? If it's 'Maria
Martin' or 'Irene Iddesleigh,' I think I know them by heart."

The child herself answered her question. She jumped on a chair and
extended an arm for silence.

"Ready?" she cried. "Now!"

   "'THE LIFE AND BATTLES OF BUCK CAUSTON,'"

she declaimed in her most ringing voice,

   "'_Being the Full Story and Only Authorised Life of this Famous
   Pugilist_'--

("Causton's uncle, don't forget, girls)--

   "'_Revised by Himself and now Published for the First
   Time--including his Historic Encounter with the Great Piker
   Betteridge_'--

("Piker Betteridge--'Piker'--isn't it lovely?)

   "'_Entered at Stationers' Hall and All Rights Reserved_

     "'PRICE ONE PENNY'"

B. Minor drew out every syllable of the linked sweetness, and
concluded;

"And lo and behold--on the cover--Buck himself--Uncle Buck,
Causton--you needn't say he isn't--as large as life and twice as
beautiful--there!"

She held up the booklet in triumph.

But she drew it back again, bubbling with enjoyment. "Wait till I find
_the_ gem--the one about Piker," she cried.

Her fingers fluttered rapidly through the precious pennyworth in
search of the "gem."

Louie's cup of tea had been at her lips, but not a drop spilt as she
put it down again. If her colour changed at all it was only as that
other pale fighter's had done whose story, Price One Penny, the
unconscious Burnett Minor was rapturously searching.

"Here it is!" cried B. Minor, peremptorily extending her hand again.
"Listen, everybody!--

   "'_But the redoubtable Buck refused to allow the wiper to be
   skied. He recked nothing of his bunged optic and the claret that
   flowed from his beezer. Game as a buck-ant he advanced for the
   twenty-eighth round. The Piker, whose bellows were touched_----'"

But Louie had risen and walked to the child. She held out her hand.

"Let me look," she said.

B. Minor gave her a suspicious look, as if she feared she might be
reft of her treasure. "You will give it me back?"

"Oh yes."

Louie took the book.

She supposed she was awake now, but somehow a curious air of unreality
enveiled whatever it was that was happening. She looked at the cover
of the "Life" in her hand. The most execrable of woodcuts could hardly
disguise what she saw. Traditionally posed, nude above the waist, and
clad below only in tights and fighting-shoes--formidably watchful,
lightly poised for the blow--in appearance at any rate he was a man
and superb. But really he had been cruel, faithless, divorced.

As if she had passed merely from one state of half-wakefulness to
another, she did not think of the bomb she was about to drop among the
girls. She only wanted to look, and to look, and to look again at this
man, who was her father.

"Isn't it just Causton's mouth and chin?" she barely heard Burnett
Minor bubbling. "But I can't say she has Uncle Buck's beezer----"

Slowly Louie handed the "Life and Battles" back. At any rate she had
now seen him, if only in a wretched woodcut. She looked quietly about
her.

"That's my father," she said, perhaps a shade distinctly and loudly.

Then she looked about her again.

Burnett Minor jumped down from her chair. Her eyes shone flattery on
Louie. The very audacity of such a lie compelled her admiration.

"O-o-oh--_what_ a whopper!" she cried. Louie turned her eyes to
Burnett Minor.

"You said uncle. You weren't quite right. That's my father," she said
again.

Burnett Minor's life was full of miracles. A miracle more or less made
no difference. Her eyes sparkled. She alone of the girls believed.

"Not really?" she gasped.

Louie nodded.

"Qu'est c'qu'elle dit?" Pigou cried excitedly, somewhere at the back.

"Pooh, she didn't--she only nodded--nodding isn't a lie," a casuist
scoffed.

"Stupid, don't you see she's joking?"

But Burnett Minor was watching Louie--only to be quite sure.

"Honour?" she cried. "Spit your death?"

"Honour."

"How splen-_diferous_! And you never told us!"

But Burnett Major had already looked at her sister. She was shocked
into using her Christian name. "_Genista!_" she reproved her.

"Let me look again," said Louie.

She looked again at the man who had been cruel, faithless, divorced.
Again she handed the "Life" back.

"He keeps a public-house up the river," she said.

At that the tension was suddenly relieved. That, of course, was too
much. They breathed freely again. The derisive clamour broke out.

"Oh, don't you see? They've made it up between them--frauds!"

"Of course they have! Come and finish tea."

"She'll be saying that was the man who brought her down next!"

"Causton, I'll never, never believe another word you say!"

"Come on--the housekeeper will be here in a minute."

"Pig, you've stolen my piece of cake that I was saving!"

"Hurl the bread and butter, Mac."

And the crowd which had gathered about Louie dispersed to the tables
again.

Not until ten minutes later, when she had gone up to her own room
again, did Louie begin to wonder what had impelled her to make her
surprising declaration. But in an instant her ten-years'-old habit of
thought asserted itself again. Why have made it? Rather, why not have
made it? She would have made it sooner had occasion offered. Elwell
and the Burnetts did not drag their fathers in; she had not dragged
her father in either. She had not told them that her mother was Lord
Moone's sister--it was known, but she had not told them; why should
she have paraded the fact that her father was this redoubtable Buck,
from whose beezer the claret had flowed as he had advanced for the
twenty-eighth round? They could have known it any time they had
wanted! Conceal it? Why, had she not all her life been glorying in
that very pride of the cobbler's dog?

And still, deep down in her, she wondered whether it had been even
that sort of pride, and not rather that secret hunger of the heart
that, while she was "in at" everything, she was also "out of"
everything. Had it been that that had caused her to say quietly:
"That's my father"?

Or perhaps it was even something deeper still. Perhaps, in a word, it
had been her blind groping towards that crude and strong and cruel and
joyous life Richenda Earle had said she knew nothing about.

She wondered whether the girls downstairs were talking about her now.

Her eyes fell on the black-framed miniature of the fourth Lord Moone.
Then, as if her brain had received a number of disordered impressions
all heaped one on the top of the other, she sat down on the edge of
her bed, not so much to think as to remember again exactly what had
happened.

Gradually the disorder cleared. Phrases and the tones in which they
had been uttered began to stand forth more distinctly. Presently she
was able to allocate each to its speaker. It was her first attempt to
estimate differences in the future her declaration might have made.

Burnett Minor, of course, she could dismiss summarily. To her it had
been a high lark, that but endeared Louie to her the more. But Burnett
Major? What about her? "_Genista!_" she had exclaimed, shocked at her
young sister's apparent belief in the socially impossible. Yes, it
would be interesting to see what difference, if any, was to be seen in
Burnett Major's attitude now. And Elwell's "_Oh!_" What about that?
And Macfarlane's blank look? And what did Richenda Earle think?

Louie did not know yet.

And what about Mrs. Lovenant-Smith? Undoubtedly Mrs. Lovenant-Smith,
knowing about it herself, would have preferred Louie to keep silence.

The thought of Mrs. Lovenant-Smith, however, always braced Louie. That
curious pleased coldness came into her eyes again. She would see about
Mrs. Lovenant-Smith by-and-by. In the meantime, the last thing she
intended to do was to absent herself from them all. She would go down
to supper.

She took a clean blouse from a drawer, laid it out on her bed, and
then, reaching for a towel, started for the bathroom.

Before she reached the bathroom, however, one of her conjectures was
already answered. Richenda Earle's cubicle was on the same corridor as
hers, four doors lower down, and she met Richenda herself, who had
come back from her vacation a week before, by the embrasure of one of
the latticed courtyard windows. It was almost dark; in the recess the
little reflectored oil lamp had been lighted, and it shone on the
Scholarship girl's copper hair and angular shoulders. Louie stopped.
She did so deliberately. Let Earle allude if she dared.

"You washed?" she said, on a rising note.

"No, not yet. I--I came up for a book," said Richenda.

"You're not studying to-night, are you?"

"Ye-es--oh yes, I must."

"Classification?"

"Ye-es--yes."

"How far have you got now?"

Louie's mood was on her. It was overdue, but it had come now, and she
was challenging Earle. Nevertheless, she was ignorant of what she
really challenged when she challenged Earle. Hard knowledge of the
true weight of Life will tell, and Earle's knowledge of that weight
told now. The girl's head was downhung, so that the nodule of bone at
the back of her neck caught the light sharply. Suddenly she looked up.

"But you are Lord Moone's niece, aren't you?" she said, without
preface.

Since her vacation, this daughter of a struggling Westbourne Grove
bookseller had seemed less assertive than before, and was, somehow,
none the worse for it. Louie didn't know what had made the difference,
but she momentarily dropped her point.

"Yes," she said. "Why?"

"Then----?" Richenda halted.

"Then what? The other that I told them downstairs is just as true, if
that's what you want to know."

"But--but----"

"Well, what?"

Earle evidently mitigated what she had been about to say.

"I only mean that--that you must have thought it queer, my talking as
I did--that morning, you know?"

Louie saw the approach of the first attitude for her garner.

"What morning?" she demanded.

"When they punished me--when I was washing the fruit trees."

"I remember. Well, why should I think anything queer?"

Earle's head dropped again. Again the sharp nodule of bone showed.

"Do you mean," Louie said, "that if my father's what I said, no doubt
I know as much about what you were saying as you do?"

"Oh no!" Earle said, the more quickly that that probably had been what
she had meant.

"Then what do you mean?"

"Only that it's--so odd----"

But suddenly Louie gave her towel a twitch and turned away. She spoke
with her chin over her shoulder.

"I don't love my mother," she said, "but for all that she is Lord
Moone's sister--Augustus Evelyn Francis Scarisbrick, Lord Moone. And
the other's my father. I wouldn't study too hard about it if I were
you. You have your medal to get."

She walked abruptly to the bathroom.

That night, as usual, she sat at supper between Burnett Minor and
Richenda Earle. The ordinarily irrepressible child on her left was
silent; but others, two or three places removed from Louie, leaned
back or forward from time to time to speak to her. She fancied Burnett
Minor had been crying; she was sure of this when, giving the child's
hand a pat under the table, she felt her own hand impulsively caught
and squeezed. Then, in proportion as Burnett Minor cheered up (which
she usually did very quickly), the others ceased to talk across to
Louie. It was as if, whoever did it, some normal level of chatter must
be maintained. Soon supper was as desultorily talkative as it always
was. Louie, glancing at the top table, saw that Mrs. Lovenant-Smith
knew nothing of what had happened at tea-time. She was, however, quite
ready for her the moment she should find out something.


V

One afternoon about three weeks later Louie Causton had occasion to go
into the carpenter's shed. This shed lay between the dairies and the
boiler-house that was the centre of the hot-water-pipe system, and
Priddy had a frame making there. Half this frame, protected by a board
with "Wet Paint" chalked upon it, leaned against the outside wall,
and, with his back to the sunlit doorway, a young man, whom at first
Louie took to be Priddy, was doing something at a bench. Hearing her,
he turned. It was not Priddy. Louie did not know him.

There is in the British Museum a small helmeted head very like the
young man Louie saw. It is on the upper floor, among the Tanagras, in
a case on the left as you walk from the stairs. This young man, of
course, was not helmeted. His face was handsome and slightly vacuous;
his eyes in particular had something of the blankness of the little
terra-cotta head; and his mouth was full and classically curved, and
had the slightest of smudges of dark moustache along the deeply
indented upper lip. A pair of rolling muscular shoulders showed
through his white sweater; his old trousers were tucked into a pair of
wooden-looking boots; and he was filing something. Louie wondered what
business he had there.

He told her. He spoke in a slow voice, as if he had got his
explanation by rote. He was there by Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's permission,
he said.

"We had a smash with the centre-board, you see," he explained.
"Crash--just at tea-time. Izzard wanted to send it to Mazzicombe, but
I told him they'd charge nearly as much as we gave for the beastly
boat. So I'm doing it myself."

Then, as if his presence within the precincts of a horticultural
college for young women was quite explained, he bent over his filing
again. Louie, who had come for a couple of boards that had been put
aside for her, took them and went out. She was twenty yards away when
she heard the young man call slowly after her: "I say--I ought to
carry those for you, you know----"

The boards were for her bed. This she had removed from the orchard.
The new place lay quite beyond the orchard, at the foot of the hill
between Chesson's and the sea. There, for the first time on the
previous night, she had had the best of what breeze there was.

It had been the attitude of her fellow-students during the past
month--or, more fairly, what she had conceived to be their
attitude--that had caused her thus to remove herself.

It might be too much to say that she was still not as popular as ever.
These things are not demonstrable. Popular she had been; now--well, it
depended a little more than it had done. Burnett Minor, of course,
would have eaten from the same plate with her by day and shared her
bed at night had she been permitted--also had she not left for her
vacation a fortnight before; but Burnett Major--Louie was not so sure
about Burnett Major. Her attitude had been more than correct; it had
been so correct that Louie had been put altogether in the wrong. The
words, of course, had never been said, but Louie had imagined Burnett
Major's private opinion to be as follows:--

"But why didn't she tell us sooner? What earthly difference does she
suppose it would have made? Who cares about things like that? I dare
say her father's just as good as anybody else's father; for that
matter, mother's grandfather was only a farmer--mother told us so
herself; but nobody likes being treated as if they were snobs. It
showed a lack of confidence, that's what it showed; and I don't
know--now--I mean no girl, unless she _wasn't_ quite a lady,
would----" Louie could supply that part too.

"I don't care--I _love_ Causton!" she had also imagined B. Minor as
having sobbed, bold and unconvinced. "He didn't sky the wiper when his
beezer was bleeding, anyway!"

Yes: for Burnett Major, presentation and all the rest of it lay ahead.

Matters would probably have stopped at that had Louie herself allowed
them to do so; but that would not have been like Louie. Allow them to
stop there? Good gracious, no! Her cynicism had become bright indeed.
_She_ was not the girl to contaminate the innocent Burnett Minor;
neither--for she was a Scarisbrick when all was said and done--was she
going to be driven willy-nilly into the society of Richenda Earle as
company good enough for her. She could look after herself, thank you.
Coventry is no unpleasant place provided you have the putting of
yourself there, and at any rate her Coventry at the foot of the hill
was cooler at night than the other one. It meant carrying her mattress
and bedding a little farther, but she had a prizefighter's physique to
carry them with, which was more than her nearest neighbour, Elwell,
the daughter of the Treasury mandarin, could say.

It is true that she did sometimes wonder (with Burnett Major, perhaps)
whether she had not inherited also from the prizefighter something
less desirable than his physique--a discontented and ill-conditioned
nature. But that did not mend matters. It merely made her, if it did
anything at all, distrustful of herself. And as this is the story of
Louie, virtues and vices and all, her moods must go down with the
rest.

At any rate, rolled in her blanket at the foot of the hill, she could
feel the night wind on her face, and see the stars, and in her fancy
deride or boast of her parentage to her heart's content.

On the afternoon following that on which she had fetched the boards
from the carpenter's shed she went to the shed again, this time for a
couple of tent-pegs and a piece of cord for the better securing of her
blankets. The vacant young Tanagra was still there. But this time he
was not quite so vacant. He had had leisure to think of quite a number
of words.

"I say," he said, lifting slow and bashful eyes of the colour of blue
porcelain to Louie, "I've been thinking. Haven't I seen you before?"

"Yes. Yesterday," said Louie shortly. He had had the bad luck to catch
her at her brooding. But he did not seem to notice her curtness.

"No, but I mean--before----"

"When?"

"Isn't--isn't your name Chaffinger?" He almost blushed.

"No."

"Oh!"

Then she relented a little.

"I was called Chaffinger for a time. My name's Causton. I suppose
yours is Chesson, or you'd hardly be here?"

"Chesson? Why Chesson? No. Mine's Lovenant-Smith--Roy Lovenant-Smith."

"Oh!" said Louie. "Then you're right. We have met before, at Mallard
Bois."

Roy Lovenant-Smith appeared to be so relieved at being rid of a
perplexity that he didn't much care if they never met again.

"I thought we had," he said mildly. "You were Louie Chaffinger then. I
knew you were."

"But what," Louie asked, "are you doing here?"

He radiated simplicity.

"That centre-board, didn't I tell you? Izzard would make me go halves
in the rotten old thing; just look at her; hardly a shroud on the port
side, and the centre-board was hitched up with a piece of old rope
instead of a chain and down it came the other tea-time. It's the cabin
table as well as the centre-board, you see, and the whole thing shut
up-just like that----"

He set the inner edges of his hands together and then closed his palms
with a slap.

"All the tea--jam and all the lot," he said.

He amused Louie. "That was a pity," she said demurely.

"Wasn't it? But I say, I shall be catching it. I might use the shed,
aunt said, but she told me it was a fixed Rule about men, unless
you're a gardener, of course----"

("An obedient nephew," Louie thought.) "Then I must go at once," she
added.

"Well, I shouldn't like to get you into a row too," said Roy
Lovenant-Smith ingenuously.

"No," Louie agreed, more demurely still. "They have to be strict, you
know."

"Rather!" said Roy Lovenant-Smith heartily.

And Louie left him.

She was hardly out of sight before her laughter broke forth. "'All the
tea--jam and all the lot!'" she repeated softly, and laughed again.
She scarcely remembered this delightful young man. When, as a child of
eleven, she had played leapfrog, he could hardly have been more than
seven, and she felt herself to be far more than four years his senior
now. He was the adjutant's son, she supposed. Well, he would hardly
need Chaff's usual extenuation about his being a bad fellow at all:
Louie would be very much surprised if he had wit enough to be very
bad, or, for the matter of that, very anything else either. Once more
she laughed. At any rate she had to thank him for dispelling her
megrims for the time being. Still laughing softly, she passed through
the orchards, ascended the hill, and sought her favourite place by the
stile at the top.

She had not thought very much about young men. She had observed them
as so many phenomena, obviously superior to the animals, yet not quite
identifiable as beings with inner experiences akin to her own. They
looked at her irregular mouth and elongated chin, said the things
young men did say, and departed again, taking their various moustaches
and their unvarying smell of tobacco to some girl of the kind she knew
they accounted "pretty." They were quite different beings from the
fairy prince of her childhood; and since her childhood's days she had
grown gradually, she did not know how, to a fairly accurate estimate
in retrospect of the "little party" to which Chaff had once taken her,
pigtails and all. Her views of marriage too were coloured by that
mixed parentage that made her, she supposed, not "common" and not "a
lady." She would not marry unless this was clearly understood. What
else there might be in marriage was shadowy, to be considered after
this redoubtable magnanimity was safely out of the way.

With no young man had she ever had "a lark."

She was, however, more in the mood for a lark now--not necessarily
with a young man--than she had ever been in her life before. "Cau-ston
a vingt-quatr'ans--elle coiffe deja Sainte Catherine," the remorseless
Pigou had said: oh, had she? Did she? Moreover, you cannot put
yourself gloomily into Coventry; others must be made to see that you
consider your sequestration the most desirable of conditions. Indeed,
she had said as much to Richenda Earle only the night before.

Richenda was the only one of the girls who slept indoors, and Louie,
carrying her bed-trappings out from the house, had come upon Richenda
by the little green door of the espaliered wall that led to the
orchards. Richenda had made an advance, willing, apparently, to forget
the snub Louie had administered after the "Life and Battles"
revelation, and had offered to carry her pillow for her.

"Why do you go so far?" she had asked, as they had left the orchard
behind.

"Oh, I hate being disturbed," Louie had replied. "I'd go right down to
the shore if it wasn't for the climb up again."

"But suppose you wanted anything during the night?"

"What should I want?"

"Of course, I forgot. You don't have headaches. I have--frightful
ones."

"Then why don't you come out too? There's quite a jolly place here.
I'd help you to carry your things."

"Oh, I've got to read," Richenda had shaken her head.

"You'd be heaps better for it----"

Louie had not much in common with Richenda--save perhaps (she loved
little cuts like this at herself) that both of their fathers were
literary. But she had had that rather brutal snub on her conscience.
That had come out next.

"You do study too hard," she had said, "and--I say, Earle--I'm sorry
for what I said that night--you know--when I snapped at you and said
you'd your medal to get. Will you forget that?"

The next moment she had almost wished she hadn't said it, Earle's
hungry gratitude had shown so.

"It wasn't your fault a bit," the red-haired girl had broken out
impulsively. "It was all mine. I ought to have minded my own business.
But I was so--so----"

"Well, try sleeping up here," Louie had cut her short. "It's jolly."

But Richenda had gone on. "I was stupid," she had murmured.

"I don't know that you were. You see how it is."

"Oh, I was, I was----"

"Well, as I tell you, I don't think much of my mother's lot."

"Ah, _you_ can say so," Richenda had replied, shaking her head. Then,
as Louie had thrown down her mattress, "You don't mean to say you
undress here?" she had asked.

"Well, I don't sleep in my clothes."

"But don't your things get wet?"

"I wrap 'em in my waterproof.... You won't come up, then, and run down
to the shore for a bathe before breakfast?"

"Causton, they'll be dropping on you yet!" Earle had said, almost
frightened.

"Well, without the bathe?"

"Oh, I should die!"

And Richenda had gone back to sleep where she might find remedies for
her headaches within reach of her hand during the night.

Louie sat on the stile. The sea had a soft bloom, and the sky was of
the colour of the whites of a baby's eyes. Bees hummed among the
scabious, and blue and sulphur butterflies hovered over the patches of
wild thyme. A tramp, sullying the air behind her, crept slowly up to
Bristol; a single nodding grass-head near at hand shut her out almost
completely. Mazzicombe, down under the hill, was hidden. Louie watched
it all, thinking of nothing, or, if of anything, of how sweet it was
to relax all her muscles to the point of not stumbling off the stile,
and all her mind save that she might still be just conscious that she
existed and was Louie Causton....

"Hallo," said a slow, imperturbable voice behind her; "here we are
again."

She started a little. Roy Lovenant-Smith was returning with a baulk of
old wood over his shoulder.

"Oh, it's you," she said. She did not know whether she was glad or
annoyed to be interrupted.

"Yes, it's me," he replied placidly.

She was silent for a moment; then: "I thought you hadn't to hang about
here?" she said.

"Well," he put it to her candidly, "how can I get over the stile when
you're sitting on it? How can I, now?"

She laughed. "Well, I must get off on my proper side." She did so.
"There," she said.

He climbed over with great deliberateness, walked a few yards with his
piece of timber, and then turned again.

"No, you can't see her from here," he said. "She's down under the hill
there. I don't think she's worth bothering about, but Izzard says
she'll be quite all right with a new stay or two. I suppose I shall
have to get 'em."

Louie felt a return of her amusement.

"Who's Izzard?" she asked.

"Izzard?" He looked at her as if she ought to know that. "Izzard's the
other chap. Always painting, you know. Painting and mooning about and
leaving me to do all the work. He's away there somewhere now." He
pointed vaguely across the Channel. "I suppose he'll come back when
he's ready. She _is_ an old egg-box!--I say, how's your cousin Eric?
And that girl--what's her name--Cynthia, wasn't it?"

She didn't know, and told him so; she did not tell him that she didn't
care either. He cogitated for a moment, and then said:

"But I say--what do you _do_ at this place? Seems funny to me.... Mind
yourself--somebody wants to get over----"

She had not heard anybody approach. It was Priddy, going down to
Mazzicombe. Louie stood aside from the stile. Priddy climbed over it
and began to descend the hill. Lovenant-Smith looked at Louie in
surprise.

"I say," he said, "that's cool! Don't those fellows take their hats
off to you?"

"No," said Louie. Then she turned her clear grey eyes on him. She had
been fairly caught.

"Don't they? By Jove!... What are you looking at me like that for?"

The rippling laugh with which Louie replied dropped a note. "Guess!"
she said.

"How can I guess?" he asked, with his innocent and statue-like stare.

For answer, Louie glanced to where Priddy's brown bowler hat was
disappearing over the edge of the hill. Roy Lovenant-Smith saw--he
really saw----

"What?" he exclaimed. "You don't mean to say that that chap will----?"

She nodded. He stared.

"What, get you into a row for talking to me?"

"He may not."

"No, but really, joking apart?" he said incredulously.

"Perhaps he won't."

"Oh, come, I say!... Look here, shall I go back with you and explain?"

The innocent! "I don't think I would," said Louie, smothering her
laughter.

"But--hang it all! I say, I _am_ sorry!"

"Oh?"

"I mean sorry I've got you into a row, of course," he amended.

"Oh, I thought you meant sorry you stopped and talked to me."

"Of course not. That is, if it doesn't get you into a row."

"And if it did----?"

"Well, a chap doesn't like getting people into rows. Look here--that
beggar wants talking to!"

Louie dropped her eyes. "I've been in rows before," she said.

Instantly he cheered up. "Oh, I see! You mean it wouldn't be much?"

"Well, your aunt can't exactly skin me." At the recollection of Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith she glanced with satisfaction at her hands.

"Oh, I'll make that all right with her," said Roy Lovenant-Smith
hopefully.

She looked at him. He _was_ an innocent! "You know what that would
mean?" she said.

"What?"

"Well, merely that you wouldn't see me again."

His look too rested on her hands. "Why?" he asked.

She straightened herself. "Oh, never mind about it. I'm going now."

He coloured a little. "But I say--Louie--you don't mind my calling you
Louie, do you? I used to, you know.--I should like to see you again."

"Perhaps you'd better not," she said, with great demureness.

"Oh, rot!" he expostulated. "A fellow can't get a girl into a mess and
then leave her in the lurch!"

"You'd like to see me just once again, to see whether I'd got into a
row or not?"

"That's what I mean."

It wasn't what Louie had meant him to mean, but "Well, once, if you
like," she conceded.

"All right. What about here, at this time to-morrow?"

"I'll see if I can get away from my studies."

"Right. And if I see that chap in Mazzicombe, may I say anything to
him?"

"Please don't."

"Not about not taking his hat off?"

"Oh, they don't trouble about that sort of thing here."

"Well, they jolly well ought. All right, I won't. Good-bye----"

"Good-bye."

He took his board and followed Priddy; she turned back to the college.
She laughed again. At any rate, a lark with a pleasant image was
better than a hole-in-corner, Miss Hastings affair with a gardener.
She would _not_ "coiffe Sainte Catherine."

She duly got her wigging. She was put "on her honour" by Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith not to see the young man again who had betrayed the
confidence put in him. This struck her as quite richly arrogant. To be
put "on your honour" by somebody before whom you stand mute as a fish,
and to have it assumed that you accept the bond, was the _largior
ether_ indeed. Louie did not even feel called upon to say that she
declined to consider herself bound. Mrs. Lovenant-Smith might take her
"off her honour" again. She met Roy scarcely three hours later. The
interview he himself had had with his aunt in the meantime affected
the situation but little; his centre-board was now patched up, and the
withdrawing of the privilege of the carpenter's shed made no
difference.

They met again on the afternoon following that, and again on the one
after that. Louie found herself hoping that Izzard, whoever he was,
would not return from "over there" just yet. Let somebody else attend
to the hair-combing of the Saint.

       *       *       *       *       *

A score of different things contributed to her enjoyment of that
affair of atmosphere--her "lark." First, the initiative was hers--for
her empty-eyed statue accepted everything with as much candour as if
he had been born into a virgin world on the eighth day of its
creation. Next, the mere disregarding of Mrs. Lovenant-Smith was a
pleasure she felt it incumbent upon herself not to forgo. Next, there
was the instinctive courage with which she translated her sulks into
carelessness and gaiety. Next--but allow what you will for the rest:
pique, vanity, her derivation, her upbringing. When, the third time
she met Roy by the stile, the half-French girl, Pigou, came upon them,
and instantly flew to spread the news among such girls as still
remained at Chesson's, Louie's Coventry was the coveted thing she had
all along intended it should be.

For she was more than merely popular now; she was romantic, apart, a
being to be looked up to with something like awe. Meet a young man!
She felt herself to be the channel by which every girl in the place
might have access to her own dreams. They gave her longing glances,
that mutely implored her to tell them all, all about it; she talked
about everything else, but not about that, and hearts and mouths
watered. They offered to do things for her--to carry her mattress, to
do her Sunday watering, even to clean her bicycle; and Louie let
them--but told them nothing. Nay, she even drew Richenda Earle to
herself. Richenda actually carried her mattress to the foot of the
hill one night and slept out. The two mattresses were placed not six
feet apart, and, as the birds settled on the boughs and the stars
came out, Richenda set herself wistfully to pump Louie.

Then it appeared why Richenda had seemed changed since her vacation.
Speaking in a low voice, she too admitted that there was
now--Somebody. Weston, his name was, Louie learned, and he was some
sort of a commercial schoolmaster at the same place in Holborn where
Richenda herself had studied. So instead of Richenda pumping Louie,
Louie pumped Richenda. What was her Mr. Weston like? Well (Richenda
said), some might think him an oddity--the Secretary Bird, his
nickname was--but he was, oh, a soul so sensitive, so gentle! Was
there any prospect of their marrying soon? Richenda sighed; it would
be a long time; if she got her post at Chesson's he might apply for a
country schoolmastership somewhere near, and then she would get a
bicycle; or if he got a "rise" in London she might relinquish her
appointment--when she got it. But in any case it could hardly be for
years. Louie asked flatly what Weston got, and was told one hundred
pounds a year. She looked up in surprise. Her own dress allowance was
treble that amount.

"And you'd get a hundred here too?" she asked.

"If I get the place--which means if I get my medal," said Richenda.

Then, Louie thought, that would be two hundred between
them--two-thirds of her dress allowance.

"But--but----," she said, "I thought people got paid more than that!"

"I told you you didn't know," said Richenda softly.

"But--but--why, my aunt paid Miss Skrine one hundred and fifty pounds,
just to go through her engagements, opening bazaars and charities and
so on--just to write down on a slate what she had to do each day!"

"Your aunt's Lady Moone," came from Richenda's couch.

"I _know_ she got one hundred and fifty pounds, _and_ lived with them.
One hundred pounds seems absurd."

"That's what father said when he apologised to me."

"But surely, all--all the people one sees aren't paid at that rate!
Why, some cooks get a thousand--I've heard that for a fact----"

"Some don't," came from the other pillow.

"Well, some do, and if you strike an average, or whatever it's
called----"

But Richenda interrupted, softly and wearily:

"Oh, you don't, don't, don't know."

Louie asked further questions. She frowned, puzzled, at the answers.
Of course Richenda herself wasn't a very effective sort of girl; if
anybody had to be downtrodden it would very likely be she; but the
things she was telling her now (Richenda had begun to talk again,
resignedly rather than bitterly) were preposterous. There must be
something wrong with Richenda, probably with her Weston too; she did
not look quite right; she was very different from the rosy housemaids
at Trant, for example. One hundred pounds a year!... She had forgotten
all about Roy. When, presently, Richenda came as near to putting a
question about him as she dared, she forgot about him again. One
hundred pounds a year!... She lay on her back, her knees up, her hands
behind her head, her sleeves fallen from her wonderful arms, the brows
above the grey eyes knitted. She was sure that _she_ could do better
than that! She even went so far as to say so. Richenda showed no
resentment.

"You've got Lord Moone behind you," she said.

"I've got a prizefighter and a public-house behind me," Louie replied.

"Yes--I know you think you know----"

Louie lay awake, still pondering it all, long after Richenda had
fallen into an uneasy sleep.

On the following afternoon she met Roy by the stile again. She was
restless, unsettled, she knew not what. She spoke almost sharply to
him.

"I'm not going to stand here with you," she said; "that's twice I've
been seen. Come down the hill."

Roy no longer urged the Rules. They walked together a hundred yards
down the hill, and sat down under a gorse-bush. He made her move quite
behind it, and even then tucked her skirt a little farther out of the
gaze of a possible passer-by.

"Now we're all right," he said. "How's Lovey this morning?"

"I don't know. I haven't seen her."

"Well, don't bite a fellow's head off, Louie."

"Then don't bother me to-day.--No, I don't want my hand held."

"What's the matter with you?"

"If you don't leave me alone I shall go. I didn't sleep till nearly
daylight."

"I didn't sleep for quite an hour, either," he said sympathetically.
"I say, isn't it funny, Louie, when you come to think of it, that till
a week ago I hadn't thought of you for years?"

"Oh, I wasn't lying awake thinking of you," she said bluntly.

"I was of you." He put out his hand again.

His approach only made her impatient. "Oh, don't!" she snapped.
"Really I shall get up and go if you worry me."

He was, as he would have put it, "keen": keen enough to begin to sulk.
She let him sulk, and watched the sea, always of a milky bloom, and
the sky, still of the hue of an infant's eyeball. After some minutes
she turned to him again.

"What _do_ people get paid?" she asked abruptly.

"What people?" He spoke over his shoulder.

"Oh, people--you know what I mean!"

"We get dashed little, I know that." (He was going into the army.)
"What sort of people? Servants and those?"

"And those--yes."

Roy expounded.

"Jolly good pay, _I_ call it; lot of lazy beggars! Why, the fellow
down there wanted to charge me two pounds for patching up that
centre-board, that I did in about a day. I shouldn't mind getting two
pounds a day!... Why?"

"I want to know."

"Some of your gardeners been grizzling to you?"

"No."

"A wonder--rotten grousing lot! They ought to have uniforms to buy,
and mess-bills and clubs and things; they'd know all about it then!
Two pounds for filing a piece of iron and putting a patch on a piece
of wood!--I think it will hold all right," he continued naively; "we
shall make a deuce of a lot of leeway if it doesn't. We're
flat-bottomed, you see, with only bilge-keels, and that reminds me;
Izzard's coming back on Wednesday; I'd a note from him this morning.
But he won't be in the way, dear, if you'll only be friends----"

She could not help laughing. After all, Richenda's "grousing" was a
little spoiling her fun. She turned to him again.

"I haven't seen her yet," she said. "Let's go down to her now."

He chuckled mildly. "You do play the dickens with the Rules, Louie."

"Bother the Rules!"

"Well, you don't want to go just this minute; it's jolly here----"

This time she did not withdraw her hand.

But he was very slow, she thought, in kissing her. He had never kissed
her yet. What was the good of being caught at--nothing?

Well, statues (she reflected), especially young ones, are slow----

Even as she was thinking it he did that very thing. Perhaps it was to
summon up resolution to do so that he had lain awake the previous
night. He kissed her cheek.

The result was curious. It was the law of her physique that most
moments of perturbation only turned her paler; but at this particular
form of perturbation she turned suddenly pink.

In a few moments she was as before. The first sign that she was Louie
again was that she forbade him to repeat the offence. He sulked again.

"All right," he said resentfully; "then we may as well go and see the
yacht."

"I don't want to see the yacht."

"Well, you needn't be stuffy about it----"

Statues _were_ distractingly slow!

Then she looked at him with a faintly mocking smile.

"Aren't you going to say you're sorry?" she challenged him (but she
had for a moment a faint return of the unhabitual colour for all
that).

He seemed to suspect that he was being mocked; nevertheless it was
with a rather tremulous boldness that he answered "No."

"Oh!"

"You see," he explained, "you did let me hold your hand."

She caught her breath. Good gracious! Why, he would be saying
presently that she had asked him to kiss her! "You see, you did let me
hold your hand!" What next?

"You know you did," he argued simply.

Even so it is written, "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings----"

Suddenly she laughed. O admirable innocence, that alone can defeat
guile! After all, it was too unpardonable not to be pardoned. She
turned her face away again.

"You _are_ stupid!" she murmured, her face, even her neck, pink once
more.

At that quite a new gleam seemed to irradiate his good-looking clay.

"I say," he said slowly, as he struggled with the newness of the idea,
"you mean--do you mean?--about my not kissing you--properly?"

Oh, the heaviness! But he should kiss her "properly," as he called it,
now!

"Oh," she said briskly, "it's too late now. You can't very well after
that, can you?"

But he beamed. "Of course I can!"

"No, Roy!"

"I will----"

This was outrageous. She made as if to rise.

"No, Roy--no--you know very well you don't think I'm pretty----"

"Well, you aren't ugly," said he.

(Great heavens! She "wasn't ugly"!)

"Very well, Mr. Statue," she thought, compressing those irregular lips
whose degree of prettiness he estimated so nicely. "I'm going to be
pretty in a very few minutes, and you're going to tell me so."

"No, Roy," she said aloud; "just let's sit and talk--sensibly--I don't
know what made you behave like this all of a sudden----"

And there was none to say "Provoking hussy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later they rose. It was too late to go to the yacht now. They
walked together back to the stile. Their shoulders overlapped. The
kisses came easily now.

"Then we'll go aboard her to-morrow?" he said.

"Very well."

"'Once aboard the lugger'--ha, ha--but of course she's a cutter, not a
lugger. That's just a saying, 'Once aboard the lugger.'"

"Really?"

"Yes, hadn't you heard it? 'Once aboard the lugger and the girl is
mine,' it is. And I say, you'd better put some old clothes on if I'm
to show you how the centre-board works."

"All right."

"What about Lovey?" he asked once more.

"Oh, we write down on a slate where we're going."

He held her a little away. "I--_say_!... You wouldn't tell her where,
would you?"

"Why not?"

"What--cheek!"

"She put me 'on my honour'--impudence!" quoth Louie.

"But I say--what frightful cheek!"

"Good-bye----"

"Just a minute----"

"Well----"

Then, "'Bye----"

"Good-bye----"

He called her name after her. "Louie!"

"What?"

"Good-bye----"

"Good-bye, boy----" She waved her hand.

Anyway, she thought with satisfaction, she had made him
say--swear--that she was pretty.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next afternoon, as good as her word, Louie wrote on the
hall-slate: "Gone to Mazzicombe: L. Causton." Then she walked,
whistling, out of the house and up the hill.


VI

This time she fully expected to catch it, and did catch it. No time
was lost. A note from Mrs. Lovenant-Smith just before supper ordered
her to report herself immediately after that meal. At a quarter past
nine she presented herself.

The French window stood wide open, but night was fast falling over
the front lawn, and a clipped peacock of box showed against a
brownish-green sky. Mrs. Lovenant-Smith stood by the window. It moved
as she turned, and there swung slowly across the pane the reflection
of the tall, yellow-shaded standard-lamp in one corner. Miss Harriet
Chesson had followed Louie in. In her hand was a piece of
paper--Louie's "conduct-report."

The beginning of the encounter was no skirmish; its end was positive
slaughter. This is no place for a report of it, round by round; it
must be summarised, even as the "Life and Battles" summarises the
combat between Buck and the terrible Piker. Louie "led," so to speak,
by asking whether she might sit down, giving as her reason that she
had had a long walk that afternoon; permission was only refused her
after she had put her hand on the back of a wheatear chair and said
again: "I think you said Yes?" She then placed the chair for Miss
Harriet to sit on, as near as possible to that of Mrs. Lovenant-Smith.
She herself stood in the middle of the room.

Miss Harriet, evidently wishing she was somewhere else, read aloud the
conduct-report. It was longish and detailed. It also, as Louie well
knew, did not contain one of the real points at issue. She looked from
one to the other of the two women. The Lady-in-Charge wore a
discreetly-necked evening frock, with a fichu secured by a mourning
brooch; and her fingers kept touching this brooch, and also kept
leaving it again, as if Louie's eyes had been capable of a physical
plucking of them away. She had had Miss Harriet in, Louie knew, for
moral support. The principal's dress, too, was a give-and-take between
her gardening costume and conventional evening attire. Her indictment
read, she seemed more than ever anxious to depart. Louie, for her
part, was rather glad that she had been called in. Buck had always
fought better for the eyes upon him.

Mrs. Lovenant-Smith began correctly; her first trace of acerbity
showed only when Louie, having listened to her arraignment with
downcast eyes, lifted them for a moment to make a modest and quite
immaterial correction.

"Have the goodness to cease this exaggerated deference, Miss Causton.
It doesn't deceive me. It's only a form of veiled insolence."

Louie heard her indictment out in silence.

First blood was drawn when Louie mentioned the name of Roy
Lovenant-Smith. She called him, with aggravating naturalness, "Roy."
Mrs. Lovenant-Smith rose nearly an inch in height.

"'Roy!'" she echoed. "'Roy,' indeed!"

"I quite expected Priddy would tell you that first time. Of course he
would. The gardeners here don't like outsiders intruding," said Louie.

The point told. There was no need to mention the name of Miss
Hastings. Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's face deepened its ochre.

"Go on, Miss Causton," she said; while Miss Harriet timidly
interposed: "I think that's all you wanted me for?"

Louie went on. "And anyway, you gave your nephew permission to come on
the premises, which seems to me quite as much against the Rules as
anything there." She pointed to the charge-sheet.

"Pray go on, Miss Causton," said Mrs. Lovenant-Smith, swallowing her
wrath. Piker Betteridge, counting the moral advantage to be more than
the pain endured, had formerly been wont to thrust out his undefended
jaw in order to prove its invulnerability to attack; Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith was doing something of the same kind now.

"Pray go on----" she said.

"And of course that's all bunkum," said Louie, warming, and pointing
once more to the paper in Miss Harriet's hand. "That isn't in the
least what you mean. What you really hate is my having told the girls
what you've had in your mind ever since I came--I mean about my
father."

"Pray go on!" The jaw was thrust out once more.

("Perhaps I'd better go?" Miss Harriet still fidgeted. Seedsmen's
daughters are not at their ease at these Olympian conflicts.)

"All right, I will go on," said Louie, warming still more. "You would
have preferred me to hold my tongue about it, and if you're thinking
of asking me to resign I should like to say now that probably at least
half-a-dozen others will go with me."

Here, however, Mrs. Lovenant-Smith scored a point.

"That may have been true a little while ago," she said, "but--go on."
And Louie remembered certain little incidents and unbendings that had
caused it to be indulgently rumoured that "Lovey wasn't such a bad old
sort once you got to know her." Louie conceded the point.

"Anyway, that's what she does mean," she said, turning to Miss
Harriet--"that she didn't want me to tell them that my father was a
prizefighter and kept a public-house!"

"Address yourself to me, if you please," ordered Mrs. Lovenant-Smith.

"Certainly! You've been set against me from the first, for that very
reason; and as for your nephew, I've known him for years and years,
and you've no business at all to have him here, and it would sound
rather well, wouldn't it, if the tale got about that you allowed----"

But at this Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's hardly held composure gave way with
a snap. Well-born but necessitous Ladies-in-Charge of horticultural
colleges do not submit to being told their duty by the daughters of
pugilists. She stamped on the floor.

"Silence!" she cried, shaking. "I was a fool ever to have had
you here! You make discipline impossible. You corrupt your
fellow-students--you make a boast of your unfortunate parentage--you
show no respect for the Rules--you think yourself at liberty to come
and go as you please--you carry on a vulgar intrigue----"

"--not with a gardener----"

("Oh, I _really_ must go my rounds!" murmured Miss Harriet; but she
lingered; the spectacle of Olympians forgetting themselves does not
occur every day.)

"--disgracing yourself among younger and more innocent girls----"

"--with a Lovenant-Smith, anyway----"

Again the stamp. "I forbid you to mention his name!"

"Roy----"

"Leave the room!"

("Please, please!" besought Miss Harriet.)

"You will pack your boxes at once!"

"I shall consult Lord Moone's lawyer first. You accepted my fees--your
college is an imposition from beginning to end, and I'll see that's
known. That will be another scandal----"

"Ah!" choked Mrs. Lovenant-Smith, perhaps with some hazy recollection
of the law of slander in her head. "You hear that, Miss Chesson? You
hear that? You heard those words?"

"No, I didn't quite catch--ladies--please!"

"If you didn't catch it, I said the whole place was a shameless
fraud," said Louie calmly.

"Very good. Ring the bell, Miss Chesson!"

But the servant appeared only in time to see Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's
complete collapse. She sank, shaking, into a chair, and gazed
unseeingly into a pigeon-hole of her desk, as if she might find some
help against this devilish girl there. As she clung (as it were) to
the ropes, Louie let her have it (so to speak) on the beezer.

"You oughtn't to be here at all, really, you know," she said. "You
ought to be in one of those places--you know--in the Queen's gift, at
Kensington or Hampton Court, with the dowagers and maids-of-honour. If
you like I'll ask my uncle whether he can't do anything."

And without waiting for an answer she swept out, not by the door, but
by the French window. The reflection of the yellow-shaded
standard-lamp swung again as she did so.

She entered the courtyard by the side door, passed under the dark yew
and the arch beneath the box-room, and made her way through the
orchard. She had reached her pitch at the foot of the hill before she
remembered that she had forgotten her mattress and blankets. She
returned in search of them. Twenty minutes later she was in bed, her
knees up, her hands clasped behind her head.

She was white with triumph. That woman! Well, Louie thought she had
held her own. She had had the last word, at all events, and an
optic-bunging one too. Now should she leave, or stay? It was entirely
a question of balance between her desire to see the last of the place
and her resolve to go at nobody's pleasure but her own. It might be
that she would have to stay another week in order to avoid the
suspicion that she was turning tail. The fraud of a place!

She lay, pale and victorious, thinking the matter over.

One thing was certain; she would not return to Trant. She supposed she
was vindictive by nature, but that would merely mean at the most a
week's gradually increasing strain on her temper and then another
series of embroilings with her mother. A philosophic elf somewhere
deep within her--it was hardly affection--bade her spare her mother
what she had not spared Mrs. Lovenant-Smith. Why seek a known trouble
at Trant? If she must take trouble with her wherever she went, she
might as well take it to a fresh place.

Before she was aware they had done so, her thoughts had flown to the
vouched-for but incredible things Richenda Earle had said about life
and London.

Lord Moone had a house, and Captain Chaffinger chambers, in London,
and she knew both. For the rest, her knowledge of the place was pretty
much what Richenda had guessed it to be--shops, restaurants, theatres.
Of her five visits two had been spent at Lord Moone's, two at
Cynthia's friends, the Kayes, and one at an hotel--this not counting
the night on which, having run away from the convent, she had occupied
Chaff's room and had wondered at his large pincushion, his pictures,
and ribboned haircurlers that he doubtless kept in memory of his
departed youth.

Her father, too, lived in London, or thereby----

She fell to wondering about her father.

There was a full but late-rising moon that night; it had not yet
cleared the tree-tops of the eastern end of the orchard below. She
watched its silver through the topmost boughs. Already it filled the
heavens with a mist of light, dimming the stars; the glister on near
leaves was brighter than the Plough over her head. Scents of the
distant gardens stole undispersed through the night; that of the
night-flowering tobacco-plant was for some minutes almost sicklily
oppressive; and behind her she heard the scurrying of the rabbits at
play.

It was odd that she thought of her father rather than of Roy. Somehow
only Roy's actual presence had the power to colour those now pale
cheeks of hers. Certainly it had done so that afternoon. For an hour,
aboard the yacht, the rose-peonies in the garden had been paler than
she. But her father had her thoughts now, and the sum of them was that
she would have given much to be able to think of him as not cruel, not
faithless, not a man who had had to be thrust back into the ditch
whence he had come. She might have sought him out then.

For she was going to London; that was settled. She had her allowance,
more by a half than the income Richenda and her Mr. Weston would
gladly have married on, and not one penny more of it would she waste
at Chesson's. The next day or two would almost certainly provide her
with a "good exit." Then nobody would be able to say she had slunk
out.

Oh, if her father had but not been a brute!

The moon cleared the trees, and another too-sweet tract of the
night-flowering tobacco enveloped her. A bird or two stirred. Some
time before she had thought she had heard the sound of a curlew's
whistle, low and not very near, but she had disregarded it. Now it
came again. All the effect it had was to turn her thoughts, tardily
and almost unnoticed by herself, to Roy.

She knew little about yachts; yachting was no pastime of Lord Moone's;
but even her vaunting mood relaxed to a momentary smile as she
remembered the yacht down under the hill there. Those two boys must be
crazy to risk their lives like that. They had rounded Land's End in
her, and in quite good faith evidently expected the miracle to be
repeated. The only wonder was that the centre-board had gone before
the rest of the crazy fabric. "I told you to put some old clothes on,"
Roy had apologised for his vessel, "--and I say--I don't think I'd sit
on the table if I were you--I'm not _quite_ sure about it, you
see--may have to send it to Mazzicombe after all--come on the locker."
So they had sat on the locker----

She had felt safer when, half-an-hour later, she had clambered down
into the little dinghy again. It would be Davy Jones's locker for
Master Roy and his friend Mr. Izzard unless some fatherly fisherman
took them and their boat in hand.

Then came the thoughts of her unknown father again.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Ee-oooo-eee!_"

She sat up. The whistle came from the stile up the hill. And suddenly
she knew it was no curlew. It was Roy.

She listened.

"_Ee-oooo-eee!_"

It was Roy.

She knew he would not seek her farther than the stile. Had there not
been other sleepers just below the orchard, it would still have been
the extreme of his boldness that he had got so far. But--she
remembered how from the first she had been the prime mover in their
entirely wanton flirtation--was it necessarily the extreme of hers?

Then, as the devil would have it, something brought Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith into her head again.

That woman!

All the blood left her cheeks and thronged to her heart again.

Roy would certainly not pass the stile----

She hesitated for a moment longer, and then suddenly got up from her
bed.

Her clothes were wrapped in her waterproof; she took the waterproof
and put it on. She thrust her feet into a pair of slippers. The
waterproof was not so long as the garment beneath it; the moon was now
well above the trees; it showed the hurrying white about her heels as
she walked quickly up the hill. She drew the under-garment up a
little. The waterproof was almost the colour of the scorched grass.
The small shadow that preceded her was now the thing most plainly to
be seen.

Over the stile she saw the shoulder of his white sweater. Again her
caution awoke.

"You might have put a coat on," she said, a little out of breath. "You
can be seen half-a-mile away on a night like this."

"I thought you were never going to hear me!" he said.

"Oh! You seem to have been sure I'd come if I did."

"Well, you have come, haven't you?" he answered. "I say, isn't your
hair different?"

"Well, it isn't done for a call, if that's what you mean; I always do
it like that at night, stupid. But I'm not going to stand here with
you as white as a cottage wall."

Thereupon he paid her the only compliment he ever did pay her--and
that was unintentional.

"It isn't any whiter than your feet, anyway," he said.

"Well, I'm not going to stop a minute."

"Oh, dash it all!" he protested. She did think him cool!

"Good gracious, how long do you think I _am_ going to stay?"

"Hardly worth coming for, I call it," he grumbled.

"_Thank_ you!"

"For you, I mean, of course--as if you didn't know I'd walk miles--how
you take a fellow up!"

"Well, two minutes."

Two minutes can be a very short time; five minutes had passed when,
making a movement to free herself, she said: "Let me go now, Roy--I
think we're both as mad as we can be."

"There isn't anybody about," he muttered.

More minutes passed; then:

"Do you really think my feet are white?" she whispered. A slipper had
come off.

Then, close against his breast, she made an inconsequential, halting
little appeal. "Oh, Roy--don't go in that dreadful boat again! You'll
be drowned--I know you will----"

"Should you care?" he whispered.

"Silly boy!"

"No, but should you care?"...

"Roy, let me go!" she ordered suddenly. The minutes were passing
fatally quickly.

"No--no----"

"Oh--yes----"

"I won't let you go."

"Roy, let me go, I say!"

But it was not a command now. It was a supplication--perhaps not even
that.

       *       *       *       *       *

She did not love him; in her heart she knew she did not love him. He
loved her--years afterwards; only years afterwards. The thought of her
left him--but it returned to him, never to leave him again. The moon
made the crest of the hill like day, but the shadows of the
gorse-bushes lay dark on the short grass and stunted bents and the
patches of wild thyme. The moon southed, then rode less high. In the
short night a lamb called; and then the birds, reaching the shallows
of their sleep, gave a drowsy twittering and went to sleep again. It
was the false dawn. The stars grew a little brighter as a deeper
darkness possessed the earth; then in the darkness a cock crowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

They met again on the next night. On the night after that they met
once more.

Only after that did she sit down, alone in the box-room, in the
twilight, to think.

Her boxes were packed and strapped, and the cart was coming for them
from Rainham Magna in the morning.

She wished Burnett Minor had been there. She would have liked to say
good-bye to the child. There was nobody else it would break her heart
to leave.

Yet Roy was still down there under the hill. The centre-board had gone
wrong again. She was to see him at the stile, in the morning, before
leaving. It seemed, somehow, superfluous.

But she did meet him. His face was set, and he had forgotten to
shave.

"Don't look like that; it wasn't your fault," she said composedly.

"It was--it was----" he muttered, hands clenched.

"Rubbish!" She gave a short laugh. "You've nothing at all to blame
yourself for."

"Oh, I have--I have."

Then he turned to her. "Louie, you've got to promise me one thing----"

But she stopped him. She knew what he was going to say.

"That's quite out of the question," she said.

"But look here!" He used the words he had used the second time they
had met. "A fellow can't get a girl into a mess and then leave her in
the lurch. You must marry me, Louie, if--if----"

At that she had found a touch of her old irony.

"Not unless, of course?"

"Oh yes--yes."

But she turned away. "No. Good-bye."

"Won't you even kiss me?"

"No."

But there was a gentleness in her refusal such as he had never had
from her before. Kisses came hardly now.




PART II

SUTHERLAND PLACE


I

Richenda Earle could have told Louie Causton that an allowance of
three hundred pounds a year, paid in quarterly instalments, only
permits of a sunny little bedroom and a charming sitting-room in
Lancaster Gate on certain terms, of which terms a dipping sooner or
later into reserves of capital is certainly one. It is true that Louie
still had capital of which she knew nothing. She did not yet, for
example, count her wardrobe as capital, nor reflect that if its
present standard was to be maintained money must be set apart for the
purpose of maintaining it. She did not yet count her time as capital,
nor write off the days she classed as days of "looking about her" as
so many obligations against the time when looking about her would no
longer serve her turn. She did not count her health as capital, nor
her wild, resilient spirits, nor her "placeableness" at a glance among
those whose possession of some capital may be assumed. All she
reckoned as capital was the hundred odd pounds she had placed in a
small but sound bank of her stepfather's recommendation, and (she had
vaguely heard of such things) such additional credit as the Captain's
name might command. But perhaps it is enough to say that she had this
conception of the potency of the Captain's name.

Nevertheless, her second week's bill at Lancaster Gate was enough to
cause her to send for her landlady, and to ask that person whether she
had not a single room anywhere empty that might combine the prettiness
of her present quarters with the convenience of having all her
belongings within a single door. She was conscious of reasonableness,
almost of magnanimity, when she remarked that she didn't mind going up
another flight of stairs. The landlady had such a room, but pointed
out its lack of cupboard-space and the number of Louie's dresses.
That, Louie replied, did not matter; she intended to sell a number of
the older dresses; and her things were carried upstairs.

Her idea in selling the older dresses was that thereby she might add
another thirty pounds or so to her balance; the half-dozen she thought
she could spare had cost thrice that amount. The wardrobe dealer who
waited upon her offered her five pounds for them. Louie thanked her,
told her that she had thoughts of going into a business so lucrative
herself, and bade her good-afternoon.

She had come to London at the beginning of September; before that
month was out she had decided to leave Lancaster Gate. For some reason
or other her quarter's allowance had not arrived, and she wrote to
Chaff about it. Chaff promised to look to the matter. She wrote also
to Richenda Earle, stating the kind of lodging she required, and
asking whether Richenda knew of such an one. To this last letter she
had a reply by return of post. Richenda proposed the house of her
married sister, which was in Sutherland Place, Bayswater. Without
prejudice to her choice, Louie took a walk along Sutherland Place, and
received an impression of a quiet street with milk-carts drawn up by
the kerb and virginia creeper covering the houses with crimson. As she
passed the door Richenda had specified, the door opened, and a squarer
and older Richenda came out with a string bag in her hand. That, Louie
thought, would be Mrs. Leggat, the wife of the estate-agent's clerk.

A week later Louie moved into Mrs. Leggat's first
floor-front-bed-sitting-room. That night she counted her money. The
result of her calculations caused her to jump up, as if she had
thoughts of seeking some occupation or other that very night. Her
quarter's allowance had still not come. Then Mr. Leggat, a
lumpy-headed man with rabbit teeth and a Duke of Wellington nose, came
in to fix a gas-burner for her, and she fell into talk with him. He
wiped his hands ceaselessly on an old rag as he talked. He told her it
was a pity that Rich had not stuck to her book-keeping; he himself
would have been head clerk by this time had he had her thorough
practical grounding instead of having had to knock about the world and
fend for himself; and he asked her what sort of a villa-building-site
Rainham Parva would, in her opinion, make. He added that it was nice
to have "the rooms" (he used the plural) let to somebody they knew
something about, and then, having omitted to shake hands with her on
coming in, did so before going out, and evidently accounted their
introduction complete. He came back presently for a pair of pincers he
had forgotten, left her a Carter Paterson card for her window in case
she should have need of one, said that one of these Sundays they must
all go round to the Earles in Westbourne Grove to tea, made a pun on
the words Earle and Lord, and went out again. An hour later Louie
heard him tiptoeing discreetly past her door on his way upstairs to
bed.

Louie was resolved, however, to put a stop to the "Earle and Lord"
business once for all. She was a Causton, not a Scarisbrick, in
Sutherland Place.

She felt herself to be already on the verge of a new life that
was--let us say amusing--precisely in proportion as it was different
from any life she had ever known. She must be--if the word may
pass--amused; she told herself so, clinching the argument by adding
that it was far better to laugh than to cry. She had promised Richenda
that she would call and see her Mr. Weston at his Business School in
Holborn; and this might be--well, amusing. She went without loss of
time. She took the Oxford Street bus one morning and alighted at the
door of the School.

She mounted three floors of narrow, old-fashioned stairs, asked a
fair, perky boy, who somehow managed to make a good suit of clothes
look cheap, where she should find Mr. Weston, and presently found
herself introducing herself to a thin and melancholy-looking man with
a sparse and colourless beard, a pair of silver-rimmed spectacles, and
a gentle and hopeless voice. This was "the Secretary Bird," then. He
shook hands slackly with her, placed a chair for her in one of the
bays of a sort of =E= that was lined with books of reference, and
she listened to his soft, dispirited voice and to the clicking of
typewriters in an adjoining room. He thanked her for "all her
kindnesses" to Richenda, whatever these might have been, and presently
a skimpy little woman in green plaid, with eyes that peered
quizzically behind spectacles and "destined spinster" written all over
her, tiptoed for a moment at the end of the bay of books, uncertain
whether to approach. Then the fair, perky boy who made good clothes
look cheap also came up. Mr. Weston said: "Excuse me--yes, Miss
Windus?" Louie saw that she was interrupting the morning's work. She
rose.

"I daresay we shall see one another again," she said. "Good-bye."

And, outside on the Holborn pavement again, she said to herself with
decision: "Thanks--but no Business Schools for me!--Poor Richenda!"

Three weeks later she became a student at that very school.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no puzzle about it. Some things come no less unexpectedly
that they are more than reasonably to be expected. To put this as
briefly as it can be put, she had merely discovered that an affair of
atmosphere had become an affair of fact. That was all--nothing more,
nothing less. But that was no reason why she should not be amused.

The natural thing for young women in such circumstances to do is to
seek their mothers. If Louie did this natural thing a little
unnaturally--well, she did it unnaturally, that was all. The row,
scene, or whatever it was going to be, had better be got over; then
she could proceed to amuse herself. She had wired that she was coming;
the Captain had met her at Trant station; but she had had nothing to
say to the Captain.

The Captain, however, had had something to say to her. At first his
mumbling into his moustache had not penetrated to her intelligence;
she had only heard broken repetitions of "Dear old Mops--only for a
week or two--knew you weren't without--meant to write, but dashed
awkward thing to explain by letter, and was coming up in a week in any
case--if she stuck fast he'd see what could be done----"

"Eh?" Louie had said at last. "What's that, Chaff?"

Chaff had repeated his mumblings. At the end of them she had gathered
that the needy Captain had borrowed the quarter's allowance that had
been entrusted to him for despatch. Louie had merely given a little
preoccupied laugh and patted his hand.

"All right, old boy; don't worry," she had said.

A sample or two of her conversation with her mother must answer for
the rest. For quite twenty minutes the Honourable Emily's head had
been buried in the sofa-cushions, and the Trant coal-and-blanket
charitable account had lain where it had fallen from her hand--across
her cheek.

"That's all," Louie had ended with hard composure.

"Oh--oh----" the mother had moaned.

"And as I say, I won't marry him."

"Oh--you must--you must!"

"Why? Because Uncle Augustus will say I must?"

"Oh--you must!"

"I'll go and see Uncle Augustus."

"Oh, you mustn't--you mustn't!"

Then, in an interlude, the reasons why everything must at all costs be
kept from Lord Moone had been brokenly explained. In another interlude
a few minutes later Louie had invented a fictitious name.

"That conveys nothing to me," Mrs. Chaffinger had moaned. "What is
he?"

Louie had invented a station in life to fit the name. Her mother's
face had disappeared behind the coal-and-blanket account again.

"And this--this!--is your study of horticulture!" she had half
faintingly wailed.

"Yes. Yours was art, wasn't it?"

Then Mrs. Chaffinger's querulous despair had shown a weak, vindictive
gleam. Both pronouns had been a little emphasised as she had retorted:

"I married your father!"

It was only a flicker. Her head had gone into the cushions again.

"That didn't last very long," the devilish girl had commented.

"I married your father, I say--for your sake," had come from the
cushions.

"That's one of the differences. There are others. If you're thinking
of wiring to Uncle Augustus I'll wait; if you're not, I'll go."

Lord Moone had been wired for. He had wired back: "Impossible"; but a
second wire had brought him over post-haste the next morning. The
situation had been explained to him; the peer had walked away for a
few moments; Louie had thought she had heard something about "our
damnable women"; then, coming back, Lord Moone had abruptly convened a
Committee of Ways and Means. Words like "Impossible ... once in a
lifetime quite enough ... secrecy ... the Continent for a few months
... institution," had been used; and at one other alternative Louie's
eyes had become hard and chill as ice.

"Thank you," she had come harshly in. "As you say, all these things
may be possible. I decline them all."

Then Lord Moone, whose habit of ordering masses of men probably misled
him into thinking that the ordering of one young woman who says "I
won't" was a comparatively simple matter, had made his pronouncement.

"Very well," he had said. "Then as head of the family I order that
your allowance shall be stopped till you come to your senses. You hear
that, Emily?"

"You mean you'll starve me out?" Louie had said, with dancing eyes.
Like her father, she came up to time as long as she could stand.

"I mean what I've said."

"Then ring the bell, please--and don't light that cigar till I've
gone. I shall be ill if you do."

And Lord Moone himself had ordered the carriage in which she had
turned her back on Trant.

Burnett Minor, when Mrs. Lovenant-Smith had surprised the rebellion in
the box-room, had not made herself more inconspicuous than had Captain
Chaffinger during this scene. Indeed, probably considering that Lord
Moone, his sister and Louie herself formed a quorum, he had presently
been discovered to be not there. But it seemed to be the Captain's lot
to receive and despatch Louie in her comings and goings, and before
the carriage had reached the lodge he had stopped it and climbed in.
Ordinarily, the whites of the Captain's eyes had yellowish marblings;
the yellow had now deepened to the hue of cayenne. He had blown his
nose repeatedly and violently, and Louie, glancing covertly at him,
had suddenly had a pang. All at once he had shown his age. Somehow
Louie resented his doing so. People and things you have never taken
quite seriously have no right to come near the tragic. It was as if
some puppet strutting within a proscenium should suddenly bleed.

"Mops," he had said by-and-by, blowing his nose again, "that was a lie
you told them, wasn't it?"

Louie had tried to shut her eyes to Chaff's bleeding. Her hand had
sought his.

"The name I told them? Of course it was, you clever old Chaff, to see
that."

"You don't tell me that, do you, Mops?"

"You?! No, poor old boy, it isn't worth while telling lies to you."

"I'm glad of that, Mops----"

So, for his private comfort, she had invented for Chaff quite a new
lie, name, station in life and all.

Then: "Oh, Mops, Mops, Mops!----" he had murmured sorrowfully.

Little parties were one thing, but his Mops quite another.

But her anger had stirred again. She had remembered her uncle's
proposals.

"Did you hear what he said--Moone? No; you'd gone out. Listen----"

He had tugged unhappily at his moustache as she had told him, bringing
out the words with vehemence and hate.

"Well, but, Mops----" he had demurred wistfully.

"What, are you going to tell me _you_ think so too?"

"All right, Mops, all right, all right, old girl----"

"Much I care for him and his family name! He could bully mother into
marrying people, but he can't bully me.... Sorry, Chaff, that was
clumsy; we're pals at any rate. Uncle Gus and his Scarisbricks!"

Her exclamations of contempt had occupied the rest of the time to the
station. Chaff had put her into her carriage.

"You'll let me know where you are and what you're doing, won't you,
dear?" he had pleaded. "I can't let you go like this!"

"I hardly know where I shall be myself yet. Very likely I shall go to
a Business School; I shall have to do something, and that's all I know
anything about. Anyway, the bank will find me--no, you poor old thing,
of course I don't mean the money! Of course I'll ask you for that
when I want it. I've quite a lot yet. Good-bye, old thing."

"Good-bye, dear."

And this time he had not warned her not to run away with a student of
book-keeping.

       *       *       *       *       *

She went to the Business School partly (_bien entendu_) for amusement,
and partly because there would be very little sense in sitting all day
long in Mrs. Leggat's first-floor bed-sitter in Sutherland Place,
Bayswater. Perhaps, too, Lord Moone helped to drive her there. Her
very skin crept when she remembered the lengths to which he would have
gone--he, the corner-stone of orthodoxy when such subjects came up for
(very) full-dress debate--to save that precious thing, the family name
of the Scarisbricks. Louie had had vanities of person, scores of them;
but she had also the sense of the holiness of the body, and she had
had enough of Trants and Mallard Boises and their masters for a time.
The Business School would be as amusing as anywhere else; indeed, she
knew of nowhere else. Here she was at last in a London that was not
the London of shops and dinners and theatres and drives in the Park.
She would have the fun--always the fun--of it. She would go with the
Leggats to see Richenda's sisters and that father of hers who had
apologised to her for having brought her into the world. She would
learn these unfamiliar accents that met her ear, breathe this
invigorating if dusty air. She would know what life meant to that
skimpy woman in the green plaid, would inspect that new specimen, the
jaunty boy who made his good clothes look like an ordinary
"reach-me-down." And she knew, without knowing how she knew, that
before long she would be seeing her father. Sit in Sutherland Place?
Oh no, that wasn't amusing. Besides, she would presently have her
living to earn. She had thought, when Richenda had told her those
dismal tales, that there must be something wrong with Richenda and
that she herself would be able to do better. Well, she would very soon
know.


II

At Chesson's she had taken her proper place among her fellow-students
at once; it was not her fault if here, at the Business School, she did
not at first so much make friends as watch a number of amusing
phenomena. She watched them with wonder; all was so very, very
different. The building itself seemed once to have been some sort of a
dwelling-house, for there were cabbagey wall-papers of a bygone
fashion on the walls, broken ends of bell-wire stuck out from the
mantel-sides and the cornices, and the gas-brackets were old and
ornate and grimy. Louie was conscious of something like a shock the
first time she approached one of the third-floor bay windows and,
looking across the street, saw in the windows opposite men packing
things in brown paper, waitresses carrying trays, and gas-jets burning
in the dark interiors beyond. They seemed so near. The width of
Holborn lay between, but they seemed to crowd on her much more closely
than the yew at Rainham Parva had ever crowded on the inner windows of
the courtyard. The yew, moreover, was thinned at intervals, but there
was no cutting and lopping the forward-thrusting, amusing humanity
across the way. They seemed to be caged there expressly for her
observation. Well, she was there to observe--to observe, and, of
course, to be amused.

Her new companions, too, were unlike anybody she had ever known; they
no more resembled them than the sweet heavy airs of Chesson's
resembled these diverting smells of dust and damp and bad ventilation
and the whiff of the Holborn pavement below. Their accents (amusing,
however) struck her sharply; their faces--alert, sophisticated, highly
entertaining but without candour--no less sharply. They too, like the
buildings across the way, seemed to ignore intervening space and to
press intrusively forward to look at her. She was glad that the first
thing she had done had been to stop Mr. Weston's mouth on the subject
of the Scarisbricks and Lord Moone; half the drollery of her
experience would have gone had these people known who she really was.
And the things these slovenly voices said had no candour. They struck
her as a series of (merry) "scorings-off," a succession of (cheery)
"chippings" of one another. If their reticences seemed all in the
wrong places, and hand in hand with their defensiveness went an eager
volubility about the things Louie would have kept to herself, why, so
much the more laughable the whole joke.

She had been only just in time in extorting her promise from Mr.
Weston. She was sure of this from his manner of speaking to herself.
It was extremely, syllabically distinct. To words that he had been
pronouncing correctly and without thought all his life he gave (as if
he must find something superior for her, and knowing better all the
time) pronunciations marvellously new. He found new words, too; must
look 'em up, Louie thought, in the dictionary. Richenda, who had begun
by being his sweetheart, became his "intended," and once even his
"inamorata." But he was to be trusted. Louie saw that. If he gave
away her identity at all it would be only by the portentousness of his
secrecy. As a matter of fact he never did so.

It was the skimpy woman in the green plaid, Miss Windus, who answered
most of Louie's questions about her new companions. She too was a
delightful novelty to Louie. As if to make her own position quite
clear at the outset, she had confided to Louie at once that she
herself was "partly independent." Seeing Louie's slightly puzzled
look, she had gone on to explain that by this she meant that she
enjoyed an income of perhaps a pound a week "on her own." With this
title to consideration thoroughly understood, she went ahead. When
Louie asked a question about the high-heeled little Cockney Jewess,
Miss Levey, Miss Windus answered it in terms of her own pound a week.
"Miss Levey?" she said. Oh, she'd nothing; she lived at home and had
her fees paid for her, of course, and wouldn't stick fast, being a
Jewess, not she; but Kitty didn't suppose Miriam Levey had one
shilling to rub against another; not, that was, "on her own." Louie,
finding other questions answered from this same standpoint, took her
cue and framed her questions accordingly. Had the other female student
(there were only four women), Miss Soames, anything? Well, Kitty
didn't know; she fancied her aunt must have a tidy bit coming in; they
lived together in a boarding-house in Woburn Place, and as the aunt
did nothing all day perhaps she too was partly independent, or even
wholly so. Had Mr. Merridew, the swaggering boy who cheapened his
clothes so curiously, a tidy bit coming in? Here Kitty evidently had a
tale to tell. Had Archie Merridew a bit coming in, indeed! Why, his
father was Mr. Merridew of Merridew and Fry's, the fancy stationers
with branches everywhere, so Louie could judge for herself whether
that meant a bit or not! Archie a bit? Why, Mr. Merridew Senior had
retired, and lived at a big place near Guildford, with a tennis-lawn,
if you please. Archie Merridew a bit!--Then what about Mr. Mackie?
(Louie might have been estimating people by what money they had all
her life.)--Mr. Mackie? No, Kitty shouldn't think Mr. Mackie had very
much, but he had a splendid "permanency" offered him when he had
passed his examinations, as an auctioneer's clerk, four pounds a week
to start with--to start with, mind you--and a "rise" every year. Yes;
Mr. Mackie was all right, and, oh dear! _wasn't_ Mr. Mackie funny?

Louie thought this Mr. Mackie more than funny; in her inexperience of
the type she could never believe he was quite true. For Mr. Mackie
sang songs, imitated music-hall artistes, could "gag" for a whole day
on end, and never forget for a moment the immense success he was. He
fascinated Louie. "Ladies and bipeds in trousers!" he would begin,
with rapid gestures and still more rapid speech, "before the applause
I am waiting for has had time to subside--good word, subside--(thank
you, Cuthbert, you can take the bouquet round to the stage-door)--as I
was saying when Fitzclarence interrupted me, ladies and tripeheads in
blouses, whoa, backpedal, never mind--as I was saying, I will now
endeavour to give you my celebrated imitation of Roderigo the
gasfitter at one o'clock on a Saturday with the thirty bob in his
pocket and Hildegarde Ann his wife licking the paint of the lamp-post
at the corner to squench her thirst--_heu_, her thirst!... Chord on,
please, titillate the catgut, Professor, and take firm hold of his
hand, girls----"

Then, while the eyes of Lord Moone's niece would grow bigger and
bigger, would follow the performance.

"_Isn't_ he funny!" Kitty would giggle, faint with laughing; "oh, give
us some more, Mr. Mackie!"

And Kitty, like Saint Paul, died daily at yet another trick of Mr.
Mackie's--the putting of his handkerchief to his nose, and the drawing
of it slowly downwards to the accompaniment of a piercing whistle.

But Louie was only moderately amused by young Merridew. Mr. Mackie had
his own perfection; but vulgarity _with_ a tennis-lawn! "Good
gracious, no," said Louie.

She had entered the School as a day student; but within a week she had
put her name down for the evening classes also. Even then she had the
evenings of Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and the whole of Sunday
quite unamusingly on her hands. She did not want time on her hands. As
much Mr. Mackie as you pleased, but no time on her hands. So she
joined the classes that met on the evenings of Mondays, Wednesdays and
Fridays.

On her very first evening she saw a student whom she had not seen
before.

She had taken a text-book on Elementary Book-keeping from one of the
shelves of the =E= of books in which she had had her first talk
with Mr. Weston (who, by the way, had said that he would like to see
her for a few minutes before she left that evening), and finding a
chair within the recess, had sat down where she was to read it. She
had not looked up when somebody had passed the mouth of her little
compartment and entered the next one. She had heard a book taken down
from a shelf behind her, and, after some minutes, put back again; and
had she not chanced to straighten her back at that moment she would
probably not have seen the man repass. She had no time to notice more
than that he was very big and not very well dressed. She went on with
her reading, wondering, in the intervals of her slack attention to her
book, what Mr. Weston wanted with her.

She saw the big man again at the close of the class. This time he was
standing at the head of the stairs, waiting for young Merridew. He
really was immensely big, so big that a too prolonged first look at
him seemed unpleasantly like impertinent curiosity. Indeed, he seemed
already to feel her eyes upon him, for he moved as if to look back at
her in turn; but young Merridew came up at that moment and they went
out together. The big man's head and shoulders were to be seen beyond
the handrail for quite an appreciable moment of time after young
Merridew's had disappeared. But she had been wrong in thinking that he
wore a shabby suit. His suit might be shabby also, but it could not be
seen. He wore, and had apparently worn in class also, a tawny old
ulster of yellow and black check. In spite of its age it seemed
somehow a better garment than did the more expensive clothes of his
companion. He did not, however, strike her as very amusing.

She turned away to seek the Secretary Bird--Mr. Weston.

For the moment Mr. Weston was engaged. He was standing near the
lecture-room blackboard, talking to the girl who lived with her partly
independent aunt at the boarding-house in Woburn Place. Louie had
already remarked the likeness of this girl, who might have been twenty
but looked younger, to Polly Ross, the pretty daughter of the tipsy
veterinary surgeon at Trant. Polly too had sported that running of
pale blue ribbon beneath the openwork of what Kitty Windus called her
"pneumonia blouse," and the clumps of dark hair on her nape too was
like Polly's, and she had Polly's dark and sidelong glance, and highly
conscious air of unconsciousness when that glance had attracted what
it had probably been meant to attract, attention to herself. She had a
copy of the Pansy Library in her hand, and Louie smiled as she
remembered Burnett Minor and her spoutings. She waited until Weston
should be at liberty.

As she waited, Kitty Windus, wearing an Inverness cape and a
boat-shaped hat, came up. Miss Windus lived in a street off Tottenham
Court Road, and already once or twice Louie had walked with her as far
as the Oxford corner. She was waiting for the Polly Ross girl now,
whose direction was the same. She asked Louie whether she intended to
walk or to "hop on a bus." She always spoke in these rather sprightly
terms, just as she always stiffened the line of her back a little the
moment a man, any man, entered the room; and she referred, brightly
and hopefully, to proposals of marriage as "chances." Louie was
already learning when she might expect any given one of Kitty's
innumerable _cliches_, and had several times (humorously) given them
back to Kitty again with complete success. As they waited for the
Polly Ross girl (whose name was Evie Soames) Louie asked Kitty who the
big man who had gone out with Mr. Merridew was.

"Oh, the Mandrill!" said Kitty, laughing even before Louie had got out
the word "big." "That's Mr. Jeffries. Isn't he a caution? But he only
comes in the evenings."

She meant that Mr. Jeffries had not a pound a week on his own.
Students who only came in the evenings were of a slightly inferior
order to those who came during the day.

"I suppose he had his brown paper parcel with him?" Kitty said, with
more mirth in her peering little eyes.

Louie remembered that Mr. Jeffries had carried a brown paper parcel.
Kitty twittered.

"Bet you can't guess what was in it--that is, if you haven't heard
it?"

She said "it" as if it had been a riddle or some sort of a joke. Louie
admitted that she could not guess what had been in Mr. Jeffries'
parcel.

"Good old brown paper parcel!" Kitty chuckled. "You'll get to know it
by-and-by! You see," she explained, "he goes to Archie's for a bath.
Isn't it killing?"

"I--I don't quite see what you mean," said Louie. She honestly did
not.

"Why, for a bath--you know, a common or garden bath, with hot water. I
peeped into it once (the parcel, I mean; for shame, you dreadful
girl!) and it had a clean shirt and a pair of socks in it. I suppose
he wraps those he takes off up when he's done."

Louie's eyes had opened very wide indeed. A man to have to ask another
man for a bath! Well, that was something learned about London! A
bath--a thing so necessary that its existence was assumed--how
extremely amusing! She knew that entertaining word, "poor," but what
was this other, this new and side-splitting word that meant that a man
had to ask another man for a bath? She had never heard of anything
so--so--there was no adjective that quite fitted the humour of it.

The next moment she had wasted an irony on Kitty.

"Hasn't he--a tidy bit?" she asked.

But it took far more than this to get through Kitty's hide. She gave
another little laugh and drew her gloves more smoothly over her thin
hands.

"Him? The Mandrill? (I always call him the Mandrill, my dear.) Not a
penny to bless himself with; look at him!"

"Nor a permanency?" Louie asked.

"What, with those clothes? I ask you, now: it isn't a cold night
to-night, is it? Well, why does he keep that heavy old coat on all the
evening? Enough said, my dear. He works somewhere in the City, I
believe--'something in the City'--sounds most prosperous, doesn't it?
And Archie's awful kind to him, I think, but of course he is
frightfully clever, and does help Archie with his work sometimes, so
Archie gives him a bath (I don't mean what you mean, I mean lets him
have one). Here's Evie. Are you coming along?"

But Louie, besides being tickled, smarted a little too. To have to beg
for a bath--and then to have the gift made a matter of common
knowledge and a joke!--

Well, if these people were different, differences, after all, were
what she was here to see.

She turned to Mr. Weston.

What Mr. Weston wanted to say to her she could not guess; but he had
hardly spoken twenty words before she was smiling at herself for not
guessing. The examinations were to be held just before Christmas, and
unless Louie could be ready for her Elementary by that time she would
have a good many months to wait before she could enter for the
examination again. What Mr. Weston had to propose was, in a word, that
he should coach her privately.

She knew what that meant. It meant that he would come to Sutherland
Place on Sundays and talk about Richenda.

Well, even talk about Richenda would make shorter that _dies non_.

"It really would be a great furtherance of your aims, Miss Causton,"
Weston said wistfully.

Louie smiled at the periphrasis, and then considered.

"It might be the best thing to do," she said; "but of course I should
accept it only on one condition."

"May I venture to inquire what that condition is?" Weston inquired
deferentially.

"That you let me pay you for it," said Louie promptly.

But Weston put up a peremptory hand. "Oh no--no, no, no--I should be
ashamed after all your kindnesses----"

Louie laughed again. "Good gracious, what kindnesses?"

"Ah, you once shielded an individual very dear to me and took the
blame upon yourself, Miss Causton----" His tone was reverential, his
eyes did her homage. Louie had forgotten all about the box-room
rebellion and Mrs. Lovenant-Smith. She laughed once more.

"Well, just as you like. But no pay, no coaching, that's all."

Weston sighed. No doubt his acquiescence cost him a pang. If he took
money for giving lessons, lessons he must give, and the talk about
Richenda must go.

"Do you dwell on the point with insistence?" he asked.

"Very much."

"I am far from denying that it would be of some assistance in the
furnishing of our future nest, if I may use the expression----"

"Of course it would. So that's agreed?"

"So be it," said Weston.

Louie half expected him to add: "Amen."

She was in the habit of dispensing money a little largely, and for the
present she could quite well afford to do this. For Chaff had done
more than pay his debt. That very day she had had a letter from him,
forwarded by the bank. He had paid one hundred pounds into her
account, asking her to regard the extra twenty-five pounds as interest
on his unceremonious borrowing. But she did not for a moment believe
his cheerful tale that "things were all right again now"; poor old
boy, ten to one he had borrowed pretty ruinously elsewhere in order to
pay her. At all events, Weston should not give up his Sundays for
nothing, and she might, after all, allow him an outpouring about
Richenda and the future nest once in a while. It was only half-a-crown
a week.

But as she left Weston she was thinking of something else that
half-a-crown a week had power to buy. Half-a-crown a week would have
bought this big shabby student a bath almost every day.

To have to carry a change of underclothing in a brown paper parcel to
another man's place----

And to have that parcel peeped into----

How damnable--no, how funny, she meant!

In the light of her knowledge of this extraordinary economy Mr.
Jeffries had to practise she felt--she didn't know why--almost shy in
his presence the next time she saw him. She felt that she possessed
something of his--namely, this knowledge--which she ought not to have
possessed. She wondered whether he knew how he had been given away.
Something about him almost suggested that he might.

Perhaps it was his mouth. It looked, except when he deliberately
opened it, as if it might very well not have opened during the whole
of the twenty-eight or twenty-nine years Louie guessed him to have had
a mouth at all. The rest of his face, which would have been too large
for any man less huge, was an unrelenting slab. It was in the mouth if
anywhere that sensitiveness must be looked for. Certainly there was none
in the eyes. These Louie found (it was on a Wednesday night that she
noticed these things; she had seen him first on a Monday) remarkable.
They were the eyes of a lion--clear amber, sherry-coloured. They were
made more than ever to resemble the eyes of a lion by that tawny
ulster he never removed, and she remembered Kitty's sinister and
mirthful suggestion. Did his keeping on of that ulster mean something
hardly less stark and laughable than the circumstance of the bath
itself? (Louie felt that she was learning.) Then she noticed his
hands. She always noticed hands. He stopped in passing to pick up a
pen for her. The hand that returned it was not only a magnificent
engine of sinew and bone and muscle, powerful and heroic; it was also
(this was not so funny) exquisitely kept. Her own hand, pale and
slender as the leaf of a willow by contrast with his, was not in its
different way more perfect. He might cadge for a bath, but his hands
he could look after himself for nothing. And that was true of his hair
also. It was tawny, close-cut, and took the light as cleanly as a new
silk-hat; hair-brushing was evidently cheap also. The man did what he
could. She would have liked to hear his voice, but he handed her the
pen in silence and passed on.

"Well, he looks forbidding," was her comment on him as the great
church-door of his back disappeared into the typewriting-room, "and
he has got too big a face and a rather frightening jaw; but he does
shave it properly, and I don't see where the 'Mandrill' comes
in--wretched little creature with her pound a week! And he is like a
lion, with those eyes and that ulster----"

And merely because he seemed to be a person to be scored off and given
meanly away, she was already prepared, had she been challenged, to vow
that he was handsome--in his heavy and unhumorous way. As a matter of
fact, if Roy Lovenant-Smith resembled the little terra-cotta head in
the Tanagra Gallery of the Museum, this Mr. Jeffries suggested
something from the Assyrian Gallery downstairs--something in black
basalt, that might carry the doorway of a temple on its head. In any
case, with the ulster, the eyes, and the silky tawny hair, he was as
like a lion as needs be.

When she had seen him twice only she took it upon herself to snub
young Merridew on his behalf.

She and Kitty were leaving the School at four o'clock on the Thursday
afternoon when the son of the fancy stationer joined them, and, taking
it quite for granted that his tidy bit and his tennis-lawn made him as
desirable to Louie as they evidently exalted him in Kitty's eyes,
walked westwards along Holborn with them. He wore a new red waistcoat
with brass buttons, and perhaps it was in order to live up to his
splendour that he made Louie an offer which she curtly declined. They
were passing a confectioner's shop; perhaps he noticed--for he seemed
a sharp enough little bounder--Louie's glance at the window; he turned
to her.

"Like some chocs?" he said.

Had Louie not already detested him, this would have been quite
enough. Priddy would have had less appalling manners. As it happened,
she would have liked some chocolates; lately she had craved for
chocolates as much as she had hated the smell of tobacco; but she
wanted no chocolates of this young man's buying.

"No, thank you," she replied; and presently she contrived to put Kitty
(the straight-backed Kitty whom a man accompanied) between Mr.
Merridew and herself.

She had the outside berth of the pavement, and she was wondering
whether she would not cross the road and hop on a bus, leaving Kitty
and the heir to the tennis-lawn together, when something Kitty said
detained her. It was something about Mr. Jeffries. Hitherto Louie had
hardly been listening.

"--oh, Jeff!" Merridew was saying. "He'll have to go till we come
back. Anyway I shall save half-a-cake of soap."

"There's such a lot _of_ him," Kitty giggled. "How big's your bath?"

"Well, he's an awfully useful coach for the Method exam., I will say
that for him; so we'll call it a fair swap. You know Evie's aunt,
don't you?"

"No."

"Thought you did. Good old Aunt Angela! (She always gets ratty when I
call her that.) I didn't know she was an old friend of the pater's
till we saw 'em at the Zoo that Sunday. So that's why they're coming."

"Oh, perhaps, perhaps not," said Kitty archly. "Perhaps it isn't the
aunt they want to see----"

A passer-by elbowed Louie off the pavement; all she caught of what
followed was Kitty's laugh.

"So that accounts for the new blouse! You never think of asking _me_
down to Guildford, Archie!" she said reproachfully.

"You must get a chaperon," Archie replied gallantly; "can't be did
without, Kitt-oh. The mater don't allow running after yours truly."

Then of another light passage Louie heard only the concluding laugh.

"Well, what of it?" Archie was saying knowingly; and Louie heard
something else about apron-strings. "Pale blue baby ribbon ones, eh
what?" Archie added, with a grin.

"Archie!" Kitty reproved him.

"Oh, come off it!" replied the fancy stationer's son. "As if a fellow
hadn't eyes! If you girls _will_ wear pneumonia blouses----"

"Archie, you're dreadful!" said Kitty, deliciously shocked.

"Well, it's a tannersworth at the Holborn Public Baths for Jeff next
week-end----"

Here Louie interposed. Even amusement can be too rich. "Good-bye," she
said, "there's my bus."

She heard Kitty call after her something about the penny stage, but by
that time she was half-way across the road.

Brass-buttoned little beast!

She got on her bus.

But a quarter of a mile farther on she descended from it again. She
wanted to buy chocolates for herself. She bought them, walked to the
Marble Arch, and there turned into the Park. She ate the chocolates as
she walked.

Little animal! He appeared to keep the whole School posted about Mr.
Jeffries' personal habits. He could not go down to his home for the
week-end, taking the Polly Ross girl and her aunt with him
apparently, but Mr. Jeffries and half-a-cake of soap must be dragged
in. And that pathetic, pathetic care the man took of his hair and
hands! For all that, as she strode along, crunching her chocolates,
she became almost angry with him too. Was soap so frightfully dear,
and was there no water anywhere but at Mr. Merridew's rooms? She could
not understand a man who had any sensitiveness at all suffering his
mind to be turned over and inspected and thumb-marked by these people
in this way.

Still, she must not forget that these things were diverting.

There was no class that night: Louie forced herself to apply herself
to her book-keeping until half-past nine, and then went to bed. That,
as has been said, was on a Thursday. On the following evening, feeling
indisposed to work, she moved about the School, amusing herself to her
heart's content. She was getting adept in the sport of it. She bandied
back to Kitty Windus, with whom she found herself in talk,
half-a-score of her own expressions: "Beg yours," "Granted," "As the
poet says," and the like; and she all but openly stalked Mr. Mackie
for the sake of the pearls that rippled from his lips. If Mr. Mackie
had offered to take her for a walk or to a shilling hop at the Holborn
Town Hall on the next blank evening, Lord Moone's niece, who must
allow no chance of amusement to slip her, would have let him. Indeed,
she was in two minds whether or not to go to this last place of
entertainment alone.

It was not for another week that her amusement at the School in
general and at Mr. Jeffries in particular became almost painfully
ecstatic.


III

On that Friday afternoon she did not go home as usual to Sutherland
Place to tea. She went instead to the tea-shop across the street the
waitresses of which seemed to crowd upon her as if the width of
Holborn did not exist. As she sat down at her little marble table she
glanced involuntarily across to the windows of the Business School and
for a moment dropped the mask to herself. "Dingy place!" she thought;
"well, we're a dingy crew inside it." Then, after a long, long walk
down Chancery Lane and along the Embankment almost as far as the
ship-breakers' yard at Millbank, she returned to evening class.

It was the evening before the day when Polly Ross--she begged her
pardon, Miss Evie Soames--was to go with her aunt to the house with
the tennis-lawn at Guildford. Young Merridew was not at the School
that evening; indeed, he had only been once in the evening all the
week, and then, Louie had thought (dropping the mask for another
moment) he had better have stopped away. In a word, she had not been
sure that he had been entirely sober. But perhaps in that she had been
wrong. It didn't matter. She set a wide difference between the
gaieties of the sons of fancy stationers with a tidy bit coming in and
such diversions as that to which her stepfather had once taken her,
pigtail and all. Besides, if people didn't drink liquor she supposed
her father would not be able to sell it.

On two occasions already during the past week that mask of her
amusement had not so much fallen off as been twitched off before she
herself had been aware. Very remarkably, both times the big leonine
student, Mr. Jeffries, had been the twitcher. In both cases the actual
incident had been the same--a glance, nothing more. But those two
glances had set Louie very curiously indeed waiting to see whether a
third surprise of the same funny kind would follow them.

The glances had been given by Mr. Jeffries, and they had been directed
towards the Soames girl. There had seemed to Louie to be an
extraordinary unfitness about them. Had the red-waistcoated boy stolen
those glances Louie would have thought no more about it; he and Polly
Ross were pretty much a pair; but they had surprised her coming from
the other. Louie had been sure that on the first occasion Mr. Jeffries
had fancied himself to be unobserved, for he had looked stealthily
round about him, had waited for a moment, and then, moving his eyes
only, had given that long, slow, daring, masterful look. This had been
on the previous Monday evening, in the general room. A few minutes
later Mr. Jeffries had gathered up his papers and had stridden past
Evie Soames as if he had been unaware of her existence.

Even had something very similar not occurred again on the Wednesday
evening, Louie would hardly have forgotten that look; but it had been
repeated. But this time, finding Louie's eyes on him, he had seemed to
guard himself, to busy himself quite fussily with his papers, and a
little to overdo his sudden affectation of indifference. Louie
admitted that it would be at her own risk that she put any
interpretation that was not amusing on these trifles; but about the
glances, their surreptitiousness and the man's deliberate attempt at
concealment, there had been no doubt whatever. Polly herself, Louie
had to admit, had been quite unconscious of either look. To all
appearances, she had been thinking of nothing but of the new
novelette in the Pansy Library, or else wondering whether the new
pair of shoes she was to go down to Guildford in would come home in
time.

On that Friday evening Louie again found herself a little less
inclined for amusement than she knew to be good for her. She supposed
she ought to work, for if book-keeping and typewriting and so forth
were to be her living they might just as well be taken seriously; but
she preferred to work where gossip was going on. So she began the
evening in one of the days in the =E= of reference books, where
Miss Windus and the thick-lipped Miss Levey were sitting on the short
library-ladder, whispering and tittering. Louie opened one of the
windows, for she found the place airless, and then idled towards her
two fellow-students.

She had gathered that Miss Levey did not like her. Miriam Levey was
far less stupid than Kitty Windus, and it was not safe to hand her
_cliches_ back to her. Indeed, she had given Louie a far too
intelligent look when Louie had gratified this hunger for humour of
hers at the unconscious Kitty's expense; and Louie had told herself
that it might be as well to be a little more careful. They looked up
as Louie joined them, but did not exclude her from their talk.

"I _vill_ find out who she is!" Miss Levey was saying--her W's did
sometimes become V's. "I shall plague him till I do!"

"He won't tell you, my dear--not if he wouldn't tell Archie."

"But did Archie actually say 'engaged'?"

"Well, a person's either engaged or not, I suppose."

"Oh no, my dear, not by long chalks! Vy, you might as well say that
Archie and Evie are either engaged or not!"

"Well, they aren't--yet."

"'Yet'--there you are!"

"Well, I'll bet they aren't, even after this week-end. Why, they're no
age! _I_ don't believe in getting yourself engaged and done for before
you've had a good look round!" Kitty tossed her head.

"Vill you bet they aren't engaged in three months?" said Miriam Levey.

No, Kitty wouldn't bet that. She returned to the original subject,
whatever that had been.

"It's all very well to say you'll find out, Miriam, but--how?"

Miss Levey tittered, and then suddenly said: "Ssss--I'll show you now!
Just you watch me----"

She slipped noiselessly round to the cords of the window Louie had
opened a few moments before.

No doubt her sharp eyes had seen Mr. Jeffries approach. She gave him a
helpless look, and he took the cords from her fumbling hands and
closed the window for her. It was the more cleverly done that she
detained Mr. Jeffries and managed to get closed the window which Louie
wanted open at one and the same time. She turned her prominent brown
eyes in gratitude to Mr. Jeffries.

"Oh, thank you so much! You see, I've got rather a cold, and I'm going
to a dance and don't vant to make it any vorse," she explained. "You
don't dance, do you, Mr. Jeffries?"

But Mr. Jeffries merely replied "No," and turned away at once. Miss
Levey turned to Kitty again.

"He needn't think he's put me off!" she said. "I _vill_ find out! I
shall offer him some tickets now, for self and lady. And I bet if she
dances I'll make him buy them!"

Kitty tossed her head. "_I_ should expect the gentleman _I_ was
engaged to to take _me_ to dances," she said.

"But Archie didn't say 'engaged.' Just after somebody, I should
say--and don't I just vish her joy!"

"It's evidently nobody at the School," mused Kitty Windus. "Archie was
almost certain about that."

"Vell, it isn't _me_, if you're thinking of suspecting me!" said Miss
Levey merrily. "_I_ vouldn't touch him with the end of a long pole."

"Chance is a fine thing, my dear," remarked Miss Windus.

"Opportunity's another." (This reply, Louie had noted, was _de
rigueur_.)

"I expect she types or something at his place in the City."

"She might be in an A.B.C. shop--no, a Lockhart's."

"Or a barmaid," Kitty hinted.

"Or his vashervoman."

"Oh, I expect he washes his own shirts."

"Perhaps he'll vash her blouses, too, whoever she is."

They both laughed.

Louie, her mask once more a little out of place, turned suddenly away.

Little as she had been inclined to work, she was now, somehow or
other, not much more inclined for amusement. She wandered into the
shorthand dictation class, but in a few minutes came out again. Then
she walked into the lecture-room, where some example or other had been
left chalked up on the big blackboard from the last lesson. Thence she
went into the typewriting-room, and back to the lecture-room again.
Finally she got from the "library"--the little back room where the
files and presses and gelatine copiers and a few books were kept--a
number of old examination papers, and, finding a chair near the
folding door that divided the lecture-room from the general-room, sat
down and began to turn them over.

But she thought more of the conversation she had just overheard than
she did of the examination papers. It had meant, as far as she had
been able to make it out, that Mr. Jeffries had told young Merridew
that he was engaged, or hoped to be engaged, to somebody outside the
school altogether. That sounded--odd. Of course if Mr. Jeffries said
so, Mr. Jeffries ought to know; but it is a difficult matter to
disbelieve your own eyes. She supposed she had no choice but to
disbelieve them, but--but--there _were_ those two glances he had given
at the Polly Ross girl--whom, by the way, she must learn to call by
her proper name, Miss Evie Soames.

Louie was perfectly certain that she had not been mistaken in the
nature of those two glances. Her reason for certitude was quite
unassailable. She had known what they meant for the simple reason that
she had never received such looks from a man herself.

Suddenly she dropped this mask of fevered amusement entirely. As she
had once sat on the stile between Rainham Parva and the sea, so Louie
now sat by the folding door--relaxed, thinking of nothing, or, if of
anything, certainly neither of her late resolute pose nor yet of
study. Her mind was what she had determined it should not be if she
could help it--an empty chamber for unknown devils to enter.

Students passed and repassed. Weston had been through several times,
and twice Evie Soames had come and gone again. This so-much-talked-of
Mr. Jeffries went into the library for a book and walked past with it
again. He still wore that concealing ulster; the Soames girl had on a
brown tailor-made and a cap of knitted white wool. Louie was hardly
conscious that she noticed these things. She still sat, all slack and
unbraced, with the examination papers on her knee.

All at once she came to herself. Why she should do so at that
particular moment she did not know, but, doing so, she found herself
completely awake again. To all intents and purposes she had come out
of one of those naps which, lasting perhaps only a minute, have all
the effect of a refreshing sleep. She could reassume her mask now.
Evie Soames was talking to Weston by the blackboard; opposite her, a
pale student called Richardson was copying down an exercise from a
sheet on the wall; and she supposed Mr. Jeffries would be bringing his
book back presently. Louie was as alive to her surroundings now as she
had been oblivious to them a few moments before.

A minute later Mr. Jeffries, returning with his book, passed into the
library. A few seconds later still Evie Soames had left Mr. Weston and
had followed him.

"Now," thought Louie, "for a little more amusement."

The library had only one communicating door; its other door led only
to a small room called the old ledger-room, a dusty cubby-hole, seldom
entered, that had no outlet save the small pivoted window, high up,
that gave on the head of the stairs. Mr. Jeffries and Miss Soames
would have to come out by the same way they had entered, and Louie
rather wanted to see them come out. It was no business of hers, but
she had remembered those two glances and the conversation between
Kitty Windus and Miriam Levey, and she had a perfect right to sit by
the folding door and to use her eyes if she wished. She was now almost
preternaturally awake. No jot of the jest, whatever it was, should
escape her.

Evie came out first, after four or five minutes; but Louie was not
interested in Evie. She was merely a dull tale: Louie wanted to see
him.

Then, a moment later, he came.

But no amusement came with him. Instead, Louie knew not what sudden
private ache stirred deep at her own heart. It was not a question of
those two furtive, possessive glances now. Unmistakable enough those
had been; you do not mistake the kind of glance for which you yourself
have hungered when you see it given to another; but not only had Louie
never seen--she had never, not even in her own rapt dreamings as a
half-grown girl in her teens, thought it possible that a man's look at
a woman could change his face as this man's face was changed now. It
was irradiated, transfigured. He took no pains now to hide it. He
could see clear down the room before him--could see (or so he
evidently thought) any who saw him----

And since he did not see Louie by the folding door, Louie knew that in
his former passings and repassings he could not have seen her either.

He disappeared. The Soames girl was waiting by the door, evidently for
him. No doubt he was going to see her home. Probably she would have
preferred the other, the little cad with the red waistcoat, but she
had the lion----

He returned, with his hat on, and they left together.

But what had brought that sudden ache into Louie's breast? Mr.
Jeffries was nothing to her. If his face shone, Louie's heart need not
therefore ache. What ailed her?

Unmasked, as alive to things within herself now as she had just been
to things outside herself, she sat, deeply wondering.

Against the wall at her left hand there stood a tall stationery
cupboard. It had glazed doors, and the pale student called Richardson,
coming up a moment ago to put his exercise-book back into its place,
had left one of the doors open. The door moved on its hinges back into
its place. With its motion there swung slowly into Louie's view the
reflection of the grimy chandelier with its three naked gas-jets.

Was it this that reminded her of the night when she had swept out of
Mrs. Lovenant-Smith's French window with the yellow-shaded standard
lamp mirrored in its pane?

It had been on that night----

Suddenly her eyes closed, as if closed eyes could have shut out a
mental picture. Her lips trembled--voicelessly they shaped a name.

It was the name of Roy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hitherto she had hardly known what her feelings towards Roy really
were. It had been in order to avoid asking herself that question,
among others, that she had amused herself with Kitty Windus and
welcomed the buffooneries of Mr. Mackie. But it presented itself to
her startlingly now. Her own complete ignorance had just revealed a
shining thing to her, the beautiful thing that had transformed Mr.
Jeffries' face; now--handy-dandy--that very transformation threw her
brutally back on her ignorance again.

She had thought she had sounded a mystery; had she, after all, _not_
sounded any mystery, and was she to pay in labour and pain for
nothing?

Her thoughts had flown back; they remained where they had flown. Good
gracious! What an escapade! Without mercy for herself she examined it.
What had really happened? Anything worth what it was about to cost?

The radiant look of another man at another woman answered her: No.

She had courted him--what a conquest! She had made him say she was
pretty--what a victory! She had schemed, planned, ensured her
kisses--what a triumph!... Why, she now asked herself for the first
time, had she wanted to triumph? Why had she not seen sooner that what
she had really wanted had been to be triumphed over? Triumph?--It came
to her with a strange newness that women didn't triumph by triumphing.
That man with the back like the church door, for example, who had just
gone out with that pretty snippet----

Instantly, and with extraordinary resilience, her mind established a
contrast.

No woman would have to cajole this shabby, lion-eyed man into
admiration of her beauty. Rather she would have to save herself from
his onslaught--and then, in her very flying, she would triumph. Louie
had found a fool invincible; but this other, when he loved, would go
down with the vehemence of his own assault. When Louie had refused to
kiss Roy at their parting she had not known exactly why she had done
so: she had obeyed an instinct; a chapter had been closed, and had
had to be marked as definitely closed; her heart had known no rancour
against him. But now!--she might just as well have kissed him. Now, in
this strange place, two strange people--or rather one, for the girl
mattered nothing--had in a moment, and infinitely, enlarged her sense
of what, at any rate to a man, love might mean. In the light of that
enlargement any kiss she could have given to Roy would have meant
nothing--nothing, nothing. Poor Roy, whom she had had to woo! This
other would do his own wooing. Why, he was doing it now----

Then a startling recollection caused Louie to sit suddenly upright.
This lion, who had given those looks at that girl--this shabby giant,
whose face she had just seen enheavened out of all knowledge--had told
young Merridew, who had told Kitty Windus and Miriam Levey, that his
heart was set on somebody outside this poky little Business School
altogether!

Involuntarily Louie drew a long breath of amazement.

He had told them that!

Then Louie became matter-of-fact. There was one thing and one thing
only to be said. If Mr. Jeffries had told him that, Mr. Jeffries
had--lied.

She turned it over again--she found no flaw in it.

Yes, if he had said that, he had lied.

Louie pondered. The result of her pondering was that she said slowly
to herself: "Ah--this is going to be more than amusing--unless I'm
mistaken it might even become dramatic."

Up to the moment of this astonishing discovery--for Louie knew that
she had made a discovery--Mr. Jeffries had been to her a phenomenon,
different from Mr. Mackie and Kitty Windus, but not to be observed
very differently; now in a twink she placed him in quite another
category. Or, if she still lacked a category in which to place him,
she certainly removed him for ever from the other. He had called
suddenly on her profounder attention, and, as if he had struck upon a
rock, the waters of it gushed forth. Apparently to others he was a
butt, a jest, a pathetic figure; he was not that to Louie Causton now.
They had said, Kitty and the Jewess, that Evie Soames and the
red-waistcoated boy, off to Guildford together to-morrow, would before
long be engaged to be married; but Mr. Jeffries, the third person in
the commonest of dramas, and Mr. Jeffries, the introducer into that
drama of a preposterous, impossible fourth actor, whose name Miriam
Levey was resolved to know, were not one and the same man. Louie sat
astounded again at his lie. It struck her as really in its way
stupendous. Others thought he was below his fellows in this shabby
little hutch of a Business School; not so Louie now! She saw those
clear yellow eyes again. Ruses and machinations lived in them. A butt,
with his brown-paper parcel? A pathetic figure, with his cadged baths?
No--good gracious, no! The faces of butts and pathetic figures were
rather less capable of irradiation. This man's kind made great
somethings--great men, great saints, great lovers--if it came to the
worst great criminals. Had she, Louie, been that jaunty young man in
the red waistcoat, she would have chosen for a rival and enemy anybody
she had ever seen rather than this needy, gigantic Mr. Jeffries, who
made this barefaced attempt to throw dust into people's eyes by means
of apocryphal women he was "after" elsewhere.

And he helped this youngster he must hate with his studies--cadged on
his probably-to-be-successful rival for a bath.

He was masked too, then.

Yes, at this dingy School in Holborn Louie had found something even
more interesting than amusement.


IV


Sec._a_

Louie had not yet allowed herself much time for fear of what was to
happen to herself physically; she had amused herself too heartily. She
bought chocolates and hated the smell of tobacco; and so far that was
all. What hung over her was as inevitable as Death, and for that
reason was, like Death, to be kept at arm's-length as long as
possible.

But she had already seen enough of Richenda's sister to be aware that
in all probability her stay in Sutherland Place would not be a long
one. Mrs. Leggat was formally kind, to Lord Moone's niece rather than
to herself; but for the rest an armed neutrality seemed to exist
between the two women. The Leggats were childless, and for that reason
the less likely to be charitable. Louie had, in fact, found the social
layer that is bounded on the one hand by the wickedness of pugilists
and on the other by the scapes of young gentlemen about to enter the
army. Within these limits Virtue reigned--not always harshly, always
consciously. Not the wives of the Caesars (it seemed to Louie) were
above suspicion, but the Mrs. Leggats; not the saints, who confessed
that they were tempted, but the Westons, who did not know of
temptation's existence. It was as if some unseen, august Mrs.
Lovenant-Smith had decreed that landladies and teachers in business
schools did not do these things. And they did not.

Louie went to the house of Richenda's father, the bookseller--once.
She had no wish to go again. As Richenda had described him there had
been something tragic about him; to Louie he had appeared merely as a
grey-bearded, rheumatic, complaining old man, a picture of pathos
without dignity. And those six other Richendas, of various ages,
struck her as horribly superfluous. She wanted Life's colour, not its
greyness; she greatly preferred the garnish, incredible Mackie.

The weeks passed. Weston came regularly on Sunday mornings, and on
Sunday afternoons she took long walks. On the nights when there was no
class she rode on buses, along Oxford Street, down Regent Street to
the Circus, and back by Park Lane to the Marble Arch and Notting Hill
Gate again; or sometimes she went Paddington way, up the Harrow Road
and out and back through Kilburn. She began to know something of the
streets of London. Her health was far better in London than it had
been at Rainham Parva. It was perfect. She still feared nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Christmas Examinations drew within sight, and hand in hand with
the preparation for them another and a more lightsome preoccupation
engaged the School. This was the Christmas Social with which the last
term of the year always closed. An Executive had been formed; on it
Louie's name appeared; and it met frequently at the close of afternoon
school. One of the younger students was sent across to the teashop
over the way for scones and cake; a kettle was set on the
general-room fire; and the social was discussed over tea.

Mr. Mackie was the life and soul of these meetings. He was especially
strong on the subject of whether evening-dress was to be obligatory,
permissible or debarred. He declared himself at one of the earlier
meetings as out and out for fancy dress, but was outvoted.

"See me as a Woodbine, girls, beg pardon, miss-cue, a Columbine, I
mean, nearly cold with the kilt, kilt with the cold, I should say,
sixpence in the box for the opera-glasses, Gerald, but don't ogle me
while mother's in the wings, wishing she was twenty-one again--good
old mother--

     "'Here's to the happiest hours of my life,
     Spent in the arms of another man's wife--
                               My Mo-the-rr!'"

(The shake on the long note produced by a rapid play of Mr. Mackie's
fingers on Mr. Mackie's Adam's apple.) "Thought I'd have to backpedal,
didn't you, Miss Causton? Nay, fear not, fair damsel, the intentions
of Ferdinando are honourable, as long as you watch him, pip-pip,
phee-ooo!" (The shrill whistle behind the handkerchief closed the
strophe.)

But this was rushing matters. Kitty Windus spoke, no doubt on behalf
of the students who hadn't a pound a week on their own.

"Fancy dress would keep a good many away," she said. "I should love
it, but it really is an expense, you know."

"Weston can buy a penny bottle of gum and come as a foreign stamp."

"Do be serious, Mr. Mackie, now! We want the social to be for
everybody here----"

"_And_ their friends," Miss Levey interpolated, with a look of private
understanding at Kitty Windus. There was a short interlude between the
two women.

"You _won't_ find out, Miriam!"

"I _vill_!"

"Did you offer him tickets for the Holborn?"

"Yes; but he vouldn't buy them."

"Doesn't Mrs. J. as-is-to-be dance?"

"I don't know. He vouldn't buy the tickets."

"I'll bet you another half-crown you don't get him there, let alone
her!"

"Done vith you, Kitty Vindus!" cried Miss Levey excitedly.

Here Mr. Mackie interposed. "Who's that? Jeffries? He can come in his
ulster as Boaz--_heu_, how Ruthless! (Beshrew me, but have I not a
pretty wit?)"

"He's got that new brown suit to come in--or did he get it
second-hand, Archie?" asked Kitty.

"New," quoth Archie authoritatively. "Allworthy's, in Cheapside. Two
ten."

"I nearly died when he turned up without that old ulster!"

"Vasn't it screaming?" simpered Miss Levey. "No, don't, Archie!"
(Young Merridew was pulling out the frill of her jabot.)

"Do tell us exactly what he said when you congratulated him on his
engagement, Evie!" said Kitty Windus, turning to Evie Soames.

The girl coloured a little. In common fairness Louie had to acquit her
of full participation in the joke of Mr. Jeffries and his unknown
_fiancee_. Louie had learned that it had been in order to congratulate
Mr. Jeffries on this supposed engagement that she had followed Mr.
Jeffries into the library on that Friday evening before her departure
for the week-end to Guildford. She thought little more of her on that
account. In being too ready with apologies and congratulations Evie
Soames merely showed the vulgarity of the rest of the place.

"No, do let's get on with business," Kitty Windus broke in. "I vote
for ordinary dress."

"Yes, ordinary dress," came the chorus.

"Vith vite gloves, of course," said Miss Levey.

"Of course."

"Vot do you say, Miss Causton?"

"White gloves, of course," said Louie, with her demurest look. "And
flowers in their buttonholes."

"Some gentlemen don't like to vear flowers," said Miriam Levey
suspiciously.

"Aha, doesn't he?" from Mr. Mackie. "_I_ saw you at the Holborn, Miss
Levey--naughty, naughty----"

"Oh, I don't mean very big ones," said Louie, sipping her tea.

And the discussion went on, and meeting followed meeting; but the
examination was to take place before the social.

The only fear Louie had for her Elementary was whether it would be
worth very much when she had got it. She supposed that as an earnest
preparation for the struggle of life this place was not quite such a
fraud as Chesson's, but that struggle could hardly be as fierce as
Richenda Earle had said if this Elementary took her very far. Indeed
she had wondered more than once lately, especially since she had
ceased to amuse herself quite so desperately, whether it was likely
that typewriting and book-keeping were to be her destiny after all.
She supposed they were, but she couldn't quite realise it. But she was
fully prepared, and hoped Mr. Jeffries was as sure of his Honours
paper as she was of her simple Pass.

For she had gathered that success in the coming examination was of
importance to Mr. Jeffries. She did not know the nature of his
studies; later she surmised that those had been only loosely linked to
the ordinary school curriculum, and that while for his Certificate's
sake he must acquire all that text-books could tell him, his real
broodings had been over matters that are antecedent to text-books.
That was probably the difference between him and Mr. Weston. Mr.
Weston was said to be clever, but his cleverness ended at the point
where real inquiry began. More than this Louie did not know. You
cannot, after all, ask the pioneer what he goes forth for to see. He
goes forth to see whatever there may be to be seen.

The weeks that had intervened since that evening when Louie had seen
that wonderful radiance of his face had done nothing to alter her
conviction that if there was a dark horse in that Holborn stable at
all the name of that horse was Mr. Jeffries.

As it happened, Mr. Jeffries was almost the first person she
encountered when, on the Friday morning of the examination, she
entered the School at half-past ten. He wore the new brown suit that
had been remarked on at the meetings of the Executive of the social,
and he was looking with curiosity about him. They had made quite
extensive preparations for the examination. The whole place had been
divided into compartments with hired yellow-painted screens, and
screens also barricaded the =E= of reference-books near the bay
window of the general-room. New pens and new blotting-paper lay on
the desks, and the little porcelain inkwells had been newly filled.
Then it occurred to Louie that it was more than likely that Mr.
Jeffries had never been in the place in the daytime before. He must
have got the day off from that "somewhere in the City" that Kitty
Windus had said sounded so prosperous. His tawny hair was as flat and
silky as ever, and his chin as cleanly shaved. He passed her with a
curt bow and continued his inspection of the place. The candidates
stood talking in groups, waiting for eleven o'clock.

"Have you discovered your--er--appointed place, Miss Causton?" said
Weston, coming up to Louie. "Good, good! I must now take my departure.
Members of the Staff are not permitted to remain on the premises
during the hours devoted to the examination. I wish you--er--good
luck."

He seemed to change his mind about saying "a happy issue from all your
afflictions."

By eleven o'clock Louie was seated in her little screen-enclosed
compartment. A sort of hired mourner read a formal caution to the
candidates. She noticed that it lacked the _largior ether_ of the
third person indicative, being, indeed, in the second person
imperative; and then she drew her paper to her.

Quiet fell on the examination-rooms.

She found her papers no more difficult than she had anticipated. On
one point only, a matter of indenting in actual practice, was she a
little in doubt, and a minute in the old ledger-room at lunch-time
would tell her whether her answer had been right or wrong. She read
over again what she had written; it seemed, with the possible
exception of that single point, all right; and she tilted her chair,
put her hands behind her head, and leaned back. The candidates had
been warned that they must bring lunch with them. It was half-an-hour
from lunch-time yet.

Her place was by the folding door of the general-room. From it she
could see nothing save the stationery cupboard on her left, and,
beyond it, the next screen-enclosed compartment. She was wondering who
was in it when a foot moved beneath the yellow screen. It was the foot
of Mr. Jeffries. Louie hoped that he was getting on well, and then
dismissed him from her thoughts. She began to wonder about the
practical usefulness of the examination again.

Doubtless it was well enough in its way, but less than ever could she
persuade herself that this kind of thing was to be her destiny. There
were too many other likelihoods--not to speak of the one certainly so
huge that she had sometimes been actually in danger of leaving it out
of the account altogether. Idly she counted them. First, there was the
certainty.... Next, she would probably be leaving Sutherland Place
soon, to go--where? She did not know. At the price of submission to
Uncle Augustus she could go back home; or Chaff would have her looked
after; but both these courses were rather out of the question. They
were out of the question because lately something else had been more
and more in her thoughts--her unknown father. That father might, for
all she knew, be the bugbear her mother had always made him out to be;
but on the other hand he might not. She knew her mother, and the more
she thought of it the more she gave her father the benefit of an
increasing number of doubts. Until she should have seen him it was now
no more than fair that she should do so. Moreover, she could see him
at any time without his being any the wiser of the--inspection. Chaff
knew where he was; Chaff, who was always fetching or taking her
somewhere, would take her there also. She was resolved to go sooner or
later, and later might be--who knew?--too late.

For at last she had admitted a dread.

In any case, her destiny was quite as likely to be determined by a
visit to that public-house up the Thames as by writing, in this stuffy
Holborn third floor, answers to ridiculous questions about _pro forma_
invoices and bills of lading.

She was still turning these things over in her mind when the bell rang
for the close of the first part of the examination.

She ate her lunch in the company of Kitty Windus and Miss Levey, and
then the three women passed out on to the staircase and sat down
half-way down the stairs. But the men had flocked to the staircase for
their noxious smoking, and Louie re-entered the general-room again.
Then she remembered the doubtful point in her paper and walked to the
library. She passed through it into the old ledger-room. Any old
ledger would settle the point on which she was not quite sure.

The room was almost dark, but Louie knew where the musty old books
were. She put out her hand to the nearest of them. But suddenly she
withdrew her hand. The high window that gave on the head of the stairs
afforded no more than a glimmer of light, but Louie thought she had
seen something move. She peered into the twilight, "Is anybody there?"
she said, but she had no answer.

But the room was occupied. The next moment she had seen and fled.

Her irregular lips were pursed as she came out into the light again.
There was a confusion, too, in her eyes, probably as much as there had
been in the eyes of the two she had come upon in there. They must have
seen her come in, and have realised that their only chance of escaping
detection lay in keeping perfectly still.

Polly Ross, cheek to cheek with that horrid little bounder!

There was no question now of whom the girl preferred.

Louie, wondering what right she had to do so, felt nevertheless a
little sick.

But the next moment her fastidiousness had vanished. The door that led
to the stairs had opened; Mr. Mackie's voice sounded loud for a moment
on the landing; and then Mr. Jeffries lurched in, stumbled, and almost
ran to his compartment between the yellow screens.

How he too knew what was going on in the old ledger-room, Louie could
not guess; but she knew that he did know.

She walked slowly to her own place and sat down.

A few minutes later the bell for the second half of the examination
rang, and a new paper was put before Louie. But she neither glanced at
it nor yet heard the voice of the hired mourner repeating his caution.
She sat with her chin in her hands, looking straight before her. She
was wondering what was taking place behind the yellow screen beyond
the stationery cupboard. Amusement was hardly the word for that.

For she had seen Mr. Jeffries' face as he had stumbled in. She
sought words for the expression that had been upon it.
Lost--despairing--devilish----

There was not much doubt about who _he_ was in love with either.

Devilish, despairing, lost----

"Poor--soul!" she thought compassionately....

She wondered why she should be so unaccountably nervous. She was
nervous. She even jumped a little when somebody on the other side of
the folding door allowed a pen to fall to the floor. She could see the
feet beneath the lower edge of the screen in front of her; they did
not move; the examination quietness had fallen on the place again, and
the very quietness grew on her. Strong drama, if not tragedy outright,
was being enacted behind those half-inch yellow boards beyond the
stationery cupboard, but the quietness continued. It was such a
quietness as she had read of in tales when, somebody's ears being
sharpened for an expected scream, their eyes had not at first noticed
the little dark rivulet of blood trickling slowly across the floor.
Involuntarily her eyes went to the yellow screen.

But rubbish; this was morbid.

Morbid or not, however, her lips almost shaped the words, slowly and
deliberately: that boy with the red waistcoat would do well to be
careful. He would do especially well to be careful if, after this,
after the glare on the other's face, he should still have help offered
him with his studies or be asked for a bath. For something would
happen then. Eggshells such as he did not come into collision with
bronze without something happening. And if anything not easily to be
accounted for did happen to that odious little whippersnapper, nothing
would ever persuade Louie that she did not know a likely quarter in
which to look for the reason.

Blind, devilish despair!

And all for an empty-headed little thing who could have been found in
her dozens behind twenty shop counters not a quarter of a mile away!
What on earth, what on, or under, or above the earth, could this
brooding, clever, gigantic, laughed-at creature want with such a doll?
Why could he not leave her in her proper place--cheek by cheek with
the little bounder of her choice in that smelly, unlighted old
ledger-room? The man must be blind, or a fool.

Then a sort of lethargy took Louie. Suddenly she cared for nothing.
Let the fancy-stationer's cub take his risks; let the other eat his
heart out if he would; it was no business of hers. Nor was that absurd
table of questions before her any business of hers. Kitty Windus might
answer that sort of thing; Mackie might answer it; but the
Scarisbricks were not Kittys, with her "part-independency," not
Mackies, to stuff their heads and ink their fingers like this for
their "permanencies." She did not know now why she had ever come to
the place, and she wanted no more of it. What she was going to do she
did not know. She did know, however, that she was not going to answer
that silly paper.

So, by-and-by, she allowed the paper to be collected again, as blank
as when it had been placed before her.

She came upon the perverse Mr. Jeffries once more before she left. He
almost ran her down bodily as they met in the doorway of the
typewriting-room. But this time she did not look at his face. With a
swift intaking of her breath she fell back to save herself. She did
not hear whether he apologised or not; in one moment, without
premeditation, her whole being had become constrained to a new,
protective, instinctive attitude.

Slowly and thoughtfully she left the School.

She alone of the students was unsurprised to hear, four or five days
later, that Mr. Jeffries, who had passed with distinction in the first
part of his paper, had, like herself, failed in the second part.


Sec._b_

For the examination the rooms had been cut up with screens; for the
breaking-up social they were cleared of everything that could be
stowed away into dark corners. Never was such a hoisting and calling
as those with which the hired piano was got up the three flights of
stairs. Most of it came from Mr. Mackie, turned for the nonce into a
shabash-wallah.

"Mind her funnybone--all together--up with her! Oh, pursue me,
wenches, I've got my muscle up, first time since the second housemaid
ran away with the dustman! Don't tickle her parson's nose, Archi-bald,
or she'll sneeze when I sing, key in the usual place--and mind the
stair above the top, it isn't there. This way--excuse my
shirt-sleeves, Miss Windus, I'm in mourning."

And so the piano was trundled to its place in the corner by the big
blackboard.

Mr. Mackie was of service, too, in the French-chalking of the floor,
for the men hauled him about by the arms and legs on a piece of
sacking in order to give it its final polish for dancing. Half the
students, male and female, helped to wind the blackened old brackets
and chandeliers with red and green tissue paper, to set evergreens on
the tops of the cupboards, and to affix the trophies of little
Christmas tree flags on the cabbagey old walls; and Louie helped with
the refreshments. Three women had been got in, one to make coffee and
the others to preside in the cloakrooms, and Miss Levey had won
half-a-crown from Kitty Windus.

For Mr. Jeffries was coming to the party after all. More, it had been
Louie herself who had asked him, though it had been Miss Levey's
cunning that had made her do so. On no grounds at all save that it
appeared to annoy, the Jewess had once or twice twitted Louie that Mr.
Jeffries favoured _her_ and, when Mr. Jeffries had declined her own
invitation, had nudged Louie. "_You_ ask him, and see whether he
doesn't come!" the nudge had meant. Louie entered into no contest with
Miss Levey. She had turned at once to Mr. Jeffries and repeated the
invitation. He had accepted it.

Louie doubted her own wisdom in going to that social at all. Even when
she had reached Sutherland Place and spread out her frocks on her bed
she still doubted. But suddenly she gave a short laugh. Of course she
was going! It was her first "social," and it might be her last; she
was going, and she was going to wear the oyster-grey satin that, ever
since she had had it, had always seemed to "live" so on her shoulders.

She declined Mrs. Leggat's help in getting into it; if Mrs. Leggat
would be so good as to get her a hansom instead----Mrs. Leggat went
out. The oyster-grey was one of the oldest of her frocks; Louie knew
every stitch of it; and she smiled as she thought that for that very
reason she would have chosen it had she deliberately intended to make
a conquest. She surveyed herself in it in the tilted glass. Yes, she
thought she would do.

"It's your last time on, poor old rag," she muttered.

She heard the pulling up of the hansom; she put on a light shawl and
descended; and Mrs. Leggat lingered in the doorway as she drove off.

They had set candles on the floors of the landings of the Holborn
stairs, but they guttered in the draughts, and showed little but the
feet of those who ascended. Louie followed a pair of orange
silk-stockinged ankles and a trammel of orange petticoats (she didn't
know whose) up the stairs, and entered the general-room. The library
had been converted into a ladies' cloakroom, with the old ledger-room
as an annexe; and in this last room Evie Soames, with an elaborate
running of pink ribbons beneath the openwork of her cream net blouse,
was putting on her slippers. She only showed Louie the top of her dark
head; in this and other ways she had displayed reserve since the lunch
interval of the examination day. A woman with a pair of very chapped
hands and a very clean apron took Louie's shawl; and Louie, first
glancing at her hair over the powdered shoulders of the person in
orange, went into the double room that had been prepared for dancing.

Students and their friends had turned up in their best bibs and
tuckers. Most of the men wore swallow-tailed coats; one of the
exceptions was Mr. Jeffries in his brown jacket-suit. He was talking
to Miss Levey, or rather Miss Levey was gasping to him; she had just
given him, or rather hung upon his wrist, one of the violet-written
cards, printed from the gelatine-copier, which served as programmes.
Weston wore a tightly fitting old frock-coat, which Mr. Mackie
humorously likened to the overcoat of sausage that had spent the night
in the coal-hole. Archie Merridew had a white waistcoat. All the men
stroked the wrinkles out of their white gloves without ceasing. The
women, to the reflective eye, had lost little by the foregoing of
out-and-out evening-dress. There was an "I could an' if I would" about
their long sleeves and high necks. Kitty Windus, in her blue foulard,
with a cutlet-frill about her thin neck, graciously consented to the
level of those who had not a pound a week on their own; Miriam Levey,
in a maroon pinafore-frock with broad braces over her shoulders,
instantly put every simple blouse in the room at its ease. One frock
only flouted the modest agreement to which the executive had come;
this was the orange satin one which Louie had followed upstairs. It
partially clothed a friend of Mr. Mackie's. Louie heard the words in
which Mr. Mackie introduced young Merridew to its wearer.

"Mr. Merridew, Miss Dulcie Levine, Miss Levine, Mr. Merridew, two of
the best, seasonable weather for the time of the year, ain't it, what?
Permit me, Dulcibella, a bit of fluff" (here Mr. Mackie cast aside the
bit of fluff, if there was one, which he had taken from Miss Dulcie's
shoulder, and represented the noise of its falling by a loud stamp on
the floor). "Ought to be dancing soon; what time is it by your clocks,
Dulcie? _I_ saw them as you got out of the Black Maria, the cab, I
mean--_heu_, desist, Mr. Mackie, you wag!" (Mr. Mackie smacked his own
wrist in reproof of himself.) "Why am I not in me usual spirits, gin
cold, to-night, Dulcinea? 'Tis thy fatal beauty has undone me; what
ho, a needle and threat, O fairest of thy socks, sex I should say....
Ay, she dances, Archibald, but not with thee, base varlet; she dances
at the Theatre hight Alcazar, nigh unto ye Square called Leicester."

Louie heard Kitty Windus whisper to Evie Soames that Mr. Mackie was
going to be splendid to-night; but her approval did not extend to Mr.
Mackie's friend, who was already too splendid. Kitty's head was held
so high when Miss Levine passed that she appeared to be looking at her
with her nostrils. With her eyes she saw only the orange creature's
back. This was a rather handsome =V=, and that did not improve
matters. Kitty whispered behind her fan about "some people." Miss
Dulcie used Kitty as a quizzing-glass for the inspection of whoever
happened to be behind her.

Mr. Jeffries stood with his back against the thrown-back folding door.
He did not dance, but he had not at all the air of a wet blanket; on
the contrary, his face wore a quite lively smile. He was smiling at
the red and green tissue paper that enswathed the central chandelier.
Louie saw Evie Soames pass him; his eyes rested on her for a moment,
but only as they rested on everybody else, and then went back to the
red and green tissue paper of the chandelier again. He had accepted
the inevitable, then. Indeed, had he not done so, Louie could hardly
imagine that he would have been there. Well, it was the most sensible
thing he could do. Louie would go and speak to him presently.

Louie made a tour of the rooms. The =E= of reference-books had
been turned into a place for sitting out, and in the typewriting-room
the lids of two or three desks had been wedged up to form card-tables.
Into the room beyond, which was the smoking-room, she did not
penetrate. Already a fiddle was tuning up, but Louie had told young
Merridew, who had magnanimously asked her for her card, that she did
not intend to dance. None the less he had taken her card and scrawled
something on it. She had tossed the piece of violet-written pasteboard
into a corner.

At nine o'clock there was a tapping on the top of the piano, and the
music began. Mr. Mackie and the lady in orange glided out over the
French-chalked floor. Two minutes later the room was full of waltzing
couples.

Louie had sat down on the opposite side of the room to Mr. Jeffries.
Through momentarily clear spaces she saw him from time to time. He did
not move from his station by the folding door, where, among the
hoppers and caperers who sped past him, he seemed to have something of
the stability of a monument in some centre of apparently aimless
traffic. Still, he seemed to be enjoying himself, and Louie intended
to go across to him when the waltz was over.

A word she overheard, however, caused her to change her mind and to
rise to her feet at once. Mr. Mackie, passing with his orange partner,
had repeated his jape about the Ruthless Boaz.

Without more ado Louie threaded her way through the dancers and stood
before Mr. Jeffries.

"Won't you try to dance?" she said.

As he turned the amber eyes on her she had the feeling that she slid
all at once into the field of some piece of apparatus with an
object-glass. She was the object. For a moment he forgot his smile; he
looked attentively at her; and then the smile returned. He answered in
an easy, deep voice, the accent of which was neither Cockney nor yet
quite of the mode of the men Louie knew.

"Oh, I--I don't dance," he said.

"Won't you let me teach you?"

His eyes were still on hers. He seemed to give the simple question
weighty consideration. Then his eyes dropped to his hands.

"Hallo," he said, as if to himself. His programme was where Miss Levey
had put it, dangling from his wrist as if from a hook. Apparently he
had not noticed it before. Then, looking at Louie again, he said: "I
mean, my gloves--I've no gloves."

"Gloves!" she said quietly. "Come."

She took the absurd programme from his wrist, threw it away, and put
her gloved hand into his naked one.

She drew Mr. Jeffries into the current.

Louie had danced with ignoramuses before, but never with a man quite
so awkward as this. She did her best to steer him, but before they had
gone half-way round the room they had collided with Evie Soames,
leaning back in the crook of young Merridew's arm--with Kitty Windus,
tiptoe and leaning forward over her partner--with Mr. Mackie, who had
lighted a cigarette and was singing the refrain of the dance as he
passed. Then Mr. Jeffries begged her, out of consideration for
herself, to stop. But she had no desire to stop. She wondered why,
bumped and trampled so, she should want to go on, but she gave that
riddle up. He did not cease to apologise for his ungainliness.

But the riddle of why she did not wish to stop refused to be given up.
It renewed itself with each of his apologies. Stumbling ludicrously,
she knew that she still wished to go on. What she did not know at
that time of her life was that she had secrets that hitherto she had
kept even from herself.

Then, all in a moment, the strange thing happened. She felt that
colour, that stress and anger never brought there, rise slow and warm
into her cheeks. Her glance had merely rested for a moment on that
hand of hers that lay slender as a willow leaf in his, but the riddle
was a puzzle no longer. Abashed, she _had_ surprised a secret.

She had caught herself wishing--half wishing--she did not quite know
what--that she too had taken off her glove.

Her colour lasted for half-a-minute; then, perhaps because of the
colour, her voice became matter-of-fact. She glanced up at him.

"I'm sorry you failed in your examination," she said.

Louie was tall, but his head was clear and away above hers. He looked
down, earnest, anxious, smiling, all three.

"It doesn't matter," he said. "Why should it?" he added.

Louie had thought that it had mattered a great deal, but she was still
a little bewildered. Even out of the answer to the riddle another
seemed to have sprung already. She laughed a little.

"Oh--only that one doesn't like to be beaten," she said.

This too he seemed to give profound yet (if such a thing may be)
absentminded attention.

"Is anybody ever beaten?" he asked slowly. "I mean, unless they
deserve to be?"

Archie and Evie Soames had just overtaken them again, laughing
together, as, hand in hand, they took a running glide towards the
door. His remark came oddly from a doubly beaten man. What then did he
call a beating?... She looked covertly at the two hands again.

"But--mayn't circumstances be too strong for you?"

This again he considered. "Circumstances are strong," he admitted.
"But then, if one's a fool, so are a good many other people. There's
always that chance, you see."

He spoke as gently as if he had been speaking to a child, but Louie
suddenly found herself wondering whether he had accepted the
inevitable after all. This hardly sounded like it. She spoke quietly.

"Nobody thinks you're a fool just because you failed--at least I
don't."

"Failed?" he repeated, as if puzzled.... "Oh, you mean the
examination! Of course I ought never to have gone in for it. (Oh dear,
another bump--I'm afraid you find me hopeless.)"

"Not have gone in for it? Why?"

The lion's eyes looked at her in surprise.

"Why? Why, because I failed." He seemed to consider it an entirely
conclusive answer.

"But you'll surely try again?" said Louie.

"Eh? 'Try,' did you say?... Oh, the men who have to try are no good.
For that matter it's always the duffers who try the hardest. I admit
they pull it off, but then things are arranged so that the duffers can
pull them off--have to be, I suppose. But the men who aren't
duffers----"

He stopped suddenly.

"What?" she said.

But once more she had the feeling that she had only just swum into
the field of his vision. It was singularly disconcerting. His smile,
which had disappeared, appeared again. He seemed to remember that he
was at a dance.

"I suppose you're coming back after Christmas?" he said.

It was not very likely, but she said: "Very likely. You were saying,
about the men who aren't duffers----"

Again he got her focus. "Was I? Well, there aren't so many of them
that we need bother about them. So you are coming back?"

Louie found him extraordinary, unclassifiable. She could not say that
his answers were not ready; they were instant to the point; but
somehow they weren't answers. Of course, they _were_ answers if you
liked, but they seemed in some way to be private communings as well.
She wondered whether he was in the habit of talking much to himself;
he spoke rather as if he was--as if, his consciousness of her presence
notwithstanding, he considered himself to be as good as alone now.

Louie had heard the expression "second self"--well, this, "second
self" or not, was certainly a curious accord. And then he allowed that
deliberate, altogether discordant smile (that might just as well have
been hooked round his ears like a false beard) to come between, and
asked her if she was coming back after Christmas!

Then--this came suddenly--she knew for a certainty what hitherto had
hung in doubt--that she would not be coming back after Christmas. She
must sit down. Of course, it was to have been expected. She had been
unwise to dance.

She spoke faintly. "Please take me to a seat."

Quite automatically he did so. He led her to the =E= of
reference-books. The waltz closed. So did Louie's eyes.

"Please leave me alone for a few minutes," she murmured.

He bowed, and retired as automatically as he had come.

In a few minutes she felt better, but she still sat in the little
book-lined recess. Her eyes remained closed, but not now altogether
from faintness. She heard Mr. Mackie's voice, apparently a long way
off, shouting, "Come on--let's get the ice broken!" and partners were
being chosen for the Shop-Girl Lancers. More minutes passed. Louie,
her eyes still closed, had begun once more to think of that secret she
had surprised within herself.

She doubted herself profoundly now. For all she now knew her nature
might contain other such secrets as this that had sent the warm blood
into her cheeks at a touch--nay, at the thought of a touch. She might
have, so to speak, a basic, unsuspected layer of them, needing only to
be stirred to provide surprise after surprise. Those surprises might
make all she had hitherto known--all--seem stupid and flat and
commonplace. If so, why must the discovery come now? Secrets from
herself--now? Impossible!

But, as if limned on her closed lids, she saw the two hands again, her
own like a lanceolate leaf, lying within that great masculine engine
of his.

And all at once she felt unutterably lonely.

It was some time before she opened her eyes again. By that time Mr.
Mackie had succeeded in breaking the ice. The floor shook to the
fourth figure of the Shop-Girl Lancers, and Louie saw, beyond the
reference-books, the Alcazar beauty swung clear off the ground, a
goldfish whirling almost horizontally past. Miss Levey's skirts
followed, their owner crying, "Help, help!"... "_For it ain't the
proper way to treat a la-ady!_" Mr. Mackie's jubilant voice sang--and
when the figure ended there were shouts and clapping of hands and
uproarious cries of "Again, again!"

By-and-by Louie rose. She walked up the room again. At the piano Mr.
Mackie, who was to sing, was now confidentially humming the air of his
song into the hired pianist's ear. Mr. Jeffries, once more looking as
if he needed a niche and a plinth, was standing in his original place,
by the folding door. Miss Levine and Archie Merridew were half hidden
behind the piano; and Kitty Windus, radiant, was openly flirting with
the pale student called Richardson. Evie Soames had just spoken to Mr.
Jeffries; she was sulking at Archie's desertion of her. Then Mr.
Weston announced, solemnly and distinctly, that Mr. Mackie was about
to add to the enjoyment of all present by singing a song entitled
"That Gorgonzola Cheese." Applause greeted the announcement, and Mr.
Mackie, who had slipped behind the piano for a moment and returned
with his coat on the wrong side out, began.

Louie found herself once more by the side of Mr. Jeffries.

"I should like some coffee," she said.

The coffee was in an adjoining room. For the first time since she had
been at the School Louie did not want to hear Mr. Mackie.

But the hint was lost on Mr. Jeffries.

"Eh? Certainly," he said, and went away in search of the coffee.

     "'Oh--that--Gorgonzola Cheese!'"

Mr. Mackie sang,

     "'It must have been unhealthy, I suppose,
     For the old Tom Cat fell dead upon the mat
     When the niff got up his nose!'"

Kitty was laughing almost hysterically.

     "'Talk about the flavour of the crackling of the pork!
     I guess it wasn't half so strong
     As the delicate effluvia that filled our house
     When the Gorgonzola Cheese went wrong!'"

Mr. Jeffries had returned with Louie's coffee, but Louie barely
touched it. Great stupid fellow!

Then he turned to her with some merely banal remark, and Louie, giving
it all the answer it deserved, turned and left him.

That unspeakable loneliness had come upon her again.

Louie made no further attempt to talk to Mr. Jeffries. She watched
another dance, heard Mr. Weston recite "The Raven," and then went to
the cloakroom for her shawl. There she came upon Kitty Windus, who had
found it necessary to do up her hair again.

"You surely aren't going?" Kitty exclaimed. She herself was a-tremble
with flirtation and happiness. "Why, you're as bad as Mr. Jeffries!
Though I will admit that even _he_ came out of his shell for once. I
shall begin to think Miriam's right soon!" She gave Louie an arch
look.

Louie's opinion was that Mr. Jeffries had never been more completely
concealed in his shell than he had been that even, but "Oh, has he
gone?" she said indifferently.

"Yes, a few minutes ago. Isn't everything going splendidly! Why, Mr.
Mackie's a host in himself!"

"Quite," said Louie, passing her shawl over her head.

"I suppose we shall see you in the morning?" said Kitty. "Everybody's
coming to help to clear away."

"Very well," said Louie.

And as the piano broke into the prelude to the waltz cotillion she
left.

But she did not leave that dingy Holborn third floor, never to enter
it again, without a grateful word to Mr. Mackie. She came upon him on
a landing. His trousers were French-chalked almost to the knees with
the vigour of his dancing, and for his next song he had put on a false
nose with blue whiskers attached to it. He was making sure that the
adornment did not interfere with his whistle.

"Good-bye, Mr. Mackie," said Louie, holding out her hand.

Mr. Mackie stopped the whistle. "What, you toddling, Miss Causton?" he
said. "Why, we ain't properly warmed up yet!"

"I must go. And"--she smiled almost fondly at him--"I should like to
thank you."

Mr. Mackie was quite conscious of desert. "Not at all," he said. "You
mean the 'Gorgonzola Cheese,' I suppose? Went all right, didn't it?
Never known that song fail yet: it always gets 'em----"

"Oh, for more than that. If you're ever thinking of setting up a cure
I daresay I could find you a few patients. You're wonderful.
Good-bye."

"Say olive oil, but not good-bye--and Merry Christmas," said Mr.
Mackie.

But Louie knew that it was good-bye.




PART III

MORTLAKE ROAD


I

On a sunny morning in mid-January Louie Causton went to see, but not
necessarily to be seen by, her father. Captain Cecil Chaffinger
accompanied her. As they walked across Richmond Park they talked.

"You're sure the walk isn't too much for you, Mops?" said the Captain
solicitously.

She pressed his arm. "No, I'm ever so much better for it."

"We could get a cart or something at the Star and Garter, you know."

"I'd much rather walk, Chaff. We can take the train back."

"All right, little Mops."

They walked for a few minutes in silence; then--

"That woman wasn't--wasn't a beast, was she?" Chaff asked.

"Mrs. Leggat?"

"If that's her name. I mean, there was no row?"

"Not the least in the world."

The Captain tugged at his moustache. "H'm! Not like you. Ever leave
anywhere without a row before, Mops?"

Louie laughed a little. "Now you mention it, I don't think I ever
did," she admitted. "But there wasn't a word said. She knew, and I
knew she knew. So I cleared out. That was all. She made me some
beef-tea before I left."

Again they walked in silence.

The daintiest of hoar-frosts lay over the Park; on Putney Heath they
had passed skaters. The keen wind had reddened the Captain's nose, and
Louie could not help smiling as he took out his handkerchief for the
twentieth time. She had remembered Mr. Mackie.

"Ought to have a silk one a day like this," Chaff grunted, blowing
hard. "Makes you perfectly raw.... I say, dear old Mops----"

"What, old boy?"

"Anything _I_ could have done, you know----"

She squeezed his arm again. "I shall be giving you plenty to do
presently. And you say he's not a bad sort."

"Oh----" said the Captain doubtfully.

"Well, you'll take me in, and then wait outside till I've seen for
myself."

But at that Chaff rebelled. "Hanged if I do--dash it all, it's a
public-house! You'll find me in the parlour or whatever it is."

"How old is he?"

"Let me see: he'll be fifty. Yes, he'll be fifty. Your mother's
fifty-four."

"You'll remember your promise, Chaff?"

"About where you are? Oh, I'll be mum as the grave. Don't you forget
yours."

"No. You shall come and see me."

The Captain sighed. His Mops was a strange being. That fool Moone had
taken the wrong way with her, but a better way might have been found
than this. Well, Chaff would have a word or two with Mr. Buck Causton
himself.

They continued their walk.

When Louie had first resolved that she would seek her father, nothing
had seemed more natural. In prospect, the thing had been simplicity
itself. But it was, somehow, less simple now. Indeed, its difficulties
had increased with every step she took. What about Buck? Must he
necessarily make her so very welcome? Suppose, when she made her
announcement, he should shake hands, ask how her mother was, offer her
tea (or whatever publicans did offer ladies), say he had been very
glad to see her, and let her go again? How, in the face of that, could
she say: "I am your daughter; I really don't know why I have come; I
have stayed away a good long time, but here I am, needing friends; why
I need friends I will explain to your wife." Was it not likely that
Buck had had more than enough of her family?

Had Chaff, as they descended to Kingston, once more urged that she was
on a wild-goose chase, as likely as not she would have turned back at
the first word.

They reached Buck's public-house--The Molyneux Arms, near the corner
of Kingston Bridge.

"Well," said Chaff, stopping, "what do we do now, Mops?"

"We go in, I suppose," said Louie. Without pausing, she moved towards the
largest door (there was "Public Bar" written upon it) of an establishment
that, if it lacked the garishness of a modern drinking-palace, was yet
not quite the red-curtained, lattice-windowed, Christmas-number
hostelry of Louie's imaginings. But Chaff, with a "No, not there,"
drew her round the corner to a quieter door, where small bay-trees
stood in green tubs. The step had a brightly polished brass sill and a
thick rubber mat perforated with the name "Molyneux Arms." Beyond the
little vestibule were double doors with cut-glass panels and a
diagonal brass bar on each and a piston for automatic closing at the
top.

"Perhaps you'd better wait here," said Chaff.

"All right," said Louie, now heartily wishing she had not left her new
abode in Mortlake Road, Putney.

With a soft sigh of the piston, the brass-barred doors closed behind
Chaff.

This entrance lay in a short blind alley off the main street, the end
of which seemed to be closed by a stableyard. Somebody over a brick
wall was walking a horse over cobbles, and a man's voice muttered,
"Come up." There was a light clashing of harness, and the same voice
began a soft but strong singing, hoisting itself to the higher notes
as if the interpolated aspirates had been so many stirrups:

     "No re-(_h_)est--but the gra-(_h_)ave
     For the pi-(_h_)ilgrim of Love!----"

Then a back door opened, and a woman's voice was heard.

"A gentleman to see you, James."

The song ceased. "A what, Susan?" said the man's voice. "Remember----"

"A gentleman--in a top hat," said the second voice.

"You know that travellers sometimes have top hats, Susan," cautioned
the first voice.

"I'm sure it's a gentleman, James----"

"Very well, let us hope you're not mistaken and that you were hooked
up behind. Ask the gentleman to wait a minute."

The voices ceased.

Instinctively Louie had walked to a half-open coach door and had
looked through. She saw a bright little picture. A horse was being
put into a gay yellow trap, and the man who was buckling the harness
had begun to sing again:

     "Oryn--thia, my Beloved!----"

All that Louie could see of him was a pair of glossy black boots and a
pair of grey check trousers cut close about the knee. The harness
twinkled; the horse's coat shone in the sun like Mr. Jeffries' hair;
and somebody within the stable was running water into a bucket. Then
the man came round the horse, and she saw him--cropped silver hair,
long dewlapped chin, and a back and shoulders that might have served
Henson's turn yet. And as Louie watched, with no more emotion than if
the scene had been one on a coloured bioscope, he sang again:

     "Oryn--thia, my Beloved!----"

Then, as she watched, it came over her for the first time that she had
planned and was performing a suspect thing. She had no right to
inspect this man and then to know him or not to know him, as she
chose. He had no less right to inspect her. She, not he, stood to
gain; cards on the table, then; either she must go away at once,
taking Chaff with her, or else take her courage in both hands without
further spying.

Which was, perhaps, as much as to say that she had already seen and
was willing to risk it.

She passed through the half-open door into the yard.

Yet even as she advanced she had a final cowardice. By a man at any
rate, anything would be forgiven her, and she really had had a long
walk.... There was a bench by the stable door.... But she pulled
herself together. No, not that. She was not faint, only very, very
pale. She continued to advance.

Then Buck looked up, and their eyes met.

They say of a newly born infant that your first impression of facial
resemblance is that to which the child, grown a man, will return. So
perhaps it was for one moment with father and daughter. But, if so, it
passed instantly. Buck made an upward, deferential gesture of his
fore-finger.

"Sha'n't be three minutes, m'm," he said. "Now, Judson, the lady's
here! He's just ready, m'm. A beautiful day!"

Then something in Louie's look seemed to strike him.

"It _is_ for Mrs. Allonby's, m'm, isn't it? For one-fifteen;
one-fifteen Allonby, Richards, seven to-night. You needn't have come;
he'll be there sharp."

Louie was looking steadily at her father. "You've made a mistake," she
said.

"What? Hi, Judson! What's this?"

"I came--I came--with the gentleman who's just asked for you. Don't
you--don't you----" she faltered and stopped.

"But aren't you from Mrs. Allonby's?"

Louie was conscious that she was becoming pitifully flurried. She
could not believe now that she had ever thought this would be an easy
thing to do. And she would have to do it all herself; he had a
handsome, slightly pompous face, but it was not the face of a man who
apprehends things by intuition. She tried again.

"You are Mr. Causton, aren't you?"

"Beg pardon, m'm? You see, one ear----" The Piker had burst the drum
of one of Buck's ears. He inclined his head. "What did you say, m'm?"

Suddenly Louie put one hand on the shaft of the trap and sank half
sitting on the step. The trap dipped. Her pallor was now extreme.

"The gentleman who wishes to see you----" she began again.

"Yes, m'm?"

"I--I came with him----"

"Yes, m'm--aren't you well, m'm?"

"Don't you know me?"

"If it isn't Mrs. Allonby's, one-fifteen----" said Buck.

"His name--the gentleman's name----"

Then, as the horse lifted a foot, she slipped a little on the step.
She might not have fallen, but his old and instinctive muscular
discipline counted for something. Buck had made a remarkably swift
movement, and his arm now supported her. Suddenly she surrendered her
weight to him.

"Here, m'm," said the astonished Buck, "come and set down on the
bench."

Louie turned up entreating eyes. "You can't guess?"

"If it's Richards, seven----"

"The gentleman's name--I came with--is Chaffinger----"

"You said----?"

"Chaffinger."

She was too close to him to notice that he too had suddenly become
white. He still held her, but slowly half a cubic foot of air came
from his chest. Probably with a purely mechanical movement he set her
on her feet. His hand was at his sound ear.

"Will you say it again, m'm?" he said huskily.

Louie did so.

"Cap-Captain Chaffinger, m'm?"

"Oh," Louie choked, "don't call me 'm'm'!"

"You did say Captain Chaffinger?"

Then, leaning limply against the shaft, Louie began to speak low and
rapidly.

"Send me away if you like--perhaps I was stupid to come--but I
wanted--I wanted--I couldn't bear it any longer--I'm all
alone--father! I'm Louie--Louie----"

Only Buck's Maker knows whether even then he fully understood. His
grey eyes were stupidly on her grey eyes. Her voice, as she continued
to mutter broken phrases, possibly lost itself in his deaf ear; but
some other sense informed him that she was telling him that she was
his daughter--his daughter----

And then at one of her phrases, he seemed to come sluggishly to life.
He repeated the phrase after her.

"Putney, m'm? Did you say Putney?" he said.

"Yes, I live there----"

"You live in Putney? Whereabouts in Putney?"

"Mortlake Road."

Buck made another sluggish effort. A quarter of a century and more
before he had said to the Honourable Emily: "_The_ Bible, Miss?" Now
he said to his daughter:

"_The_ Mortlake Road?"

"I suppose so."

"You live there?"

"Yes."

Now Mallard Bois and Trant were more than geographically remote from
Buck. They had the immeasurable remoteness of the Scarisbricks. But
Putney was near. To keep himself in spring and condition, he
frequently walked over to Putney. Putney was a place you could walk
to, and it had streets and houses and a green Tillings' bus. And they
rowed the boat race there. Therefore, while it outraged all Order that
a Scarisbrick should live there, that fact nevertheless brought his
daughter into the same world with himself. For the first time he
looked seeingly at her, and as he looked, there vanished, more quickly
than a finger is snapped, whatever images of her had beguiled his
fancy through the years.

This, then, was she, standing against the shaft with head back, lips
parted, brows entreatingly drawn, her whole pose an appeal.

"Father," she was saying, smiling crookedly through those rare things,
her tears----

Judson came out of the stable. Buck gave him a curt order, and the
trap moved away. Its departure left Louie standing by the little bench
outside the stable door. Buck had taken a step towards her. He was
murmuring something quite ridiculous--something about "strictly for
the gentry." Perhaps he remembered that had his little girl been a
little boy he would have given her instruction for nothing at the
Sparring Academy in Bruton Street.

All in a moment he passed his arm about Louie. Scarisbrick or not, she
was going to be a Causton and his for once--just for once. In an hour
he might be calling her "m'm" again, but just for once--his face was
beautiful.

"That little girl," he said foolishly, holding her with as gentle a
fear as if she had been still in her cradle.

Louie's answer was to faint suddenly on his breast.

       *       *       *       *       *

But of the Molyneux Arms in a moment. A word about Mortlake Road
first.

Two houses had been thrown into one to form the establishment at which
Louie had now resided for a week. Officially it was a nursing home;
actually it accepted declared invalids and quite well but unrobust
lodgers alike. Miss Cora Mayville "ran" it; her cousin, Miss Dot
Mayville, was "sister," and from four to eight uniformed nurses came
and went continually. None of them had theories, moral, social, or of
any other description; to them things were as they were. Nurse Meekins
made Louie's bed as who should say, "Helpers of people in trouble do
not go beyond their proper business"; Nurse Chalmers brought her
letters or called her to dinner in the narrowminded spirit of one who
leaves the systematics of charity to others. All were reprehensibly
incurious and shockingly affectionate, and so far was Louie's case
from being peculiar that, in the eyes of the law at any rate, Miss Dot
Mayville was herself twice a parent. Twice (when, from reasons Lord
Moone could have explained, the real parents had refused to do so) she
had signed the birth-certificates of undesired infants. This
irregularity the registrar for the district held perpetually over her
head. She laughed, and held other things over his head in return. They
were engaged to be married.

It was to this retreat that Buck drove Louie back that January
evening, cutting "Richards, seven" without compunction. Poor Chaff had
been sent off soon after lunch; there was somebody else to fetch and
despatch his Mops now. Buck lifted Louie from the trap and rang the
bell of one of the two brass-plated doors. A German youth dressed as a
waiter appeared, and Buck bade him hold the horse. Then he went with
Louie up to her room. He took off her hat and coat for her; he seemed
unable to leave her. He had learned how it was with her.

He had hardly turned a hair at the news. He accepted it as part of the
Scheme of Things. To him also indiscretions were of two
kinds--indiscretions, and the indiscretions of the Scarisbricks. Only
a wistful look had crossed his face; he had hoped Louie's somebody was
a gentleman otherwise than in the top-hat sense of the word; and Louie
had reassured him about that. For the rest, it was not for Buck to
inquire into the private affairs of these great ones. He would as soon
have allowed the young German who held the horse to inquire into his
own.

"That little girl," he said once more, holding her away from him at
the side of her bed.

"And you won't call me 'm'm,' daddy?" Louie laughed.

Buck gave it thought; it was not so simple as it looked. "And you
really took daddy's name?" he asked. He had asked it twenty times
already.

"Of course."

"And told all those young ladies?" (Louie had related the incident of
Burnett Minor and the "Life and Battles.") "All about daddy and the
Piker?"

"Of course!"

Buck found it too wonderful. He enfolded his little girl again.

"But you must go now," Louie said by-an-by.

"But I can come in the morning?"

"Yes. And, daddy----"

"Little girl?"

"You'll be good to poor old Chaff? He's fond of me too."

Buck promised that he would. Had there been none other, the tantrums
of the Honourable Emily were no doubt bond enough between them.

The next morning Buck had to be told that eight o'clock was too early
for a visit, and so, on the next morning again, he did not turn up
until eleven. After that eleven became his accustomed hour. Wet or
fine was the same to him, and he cancelled all afternoon orders for
the trap; his little girl must have the trap at her disposal for a
daily drive. And because his fidelity to the Social Order and their
own professional tolerances amounted in Louie's case to pretty much
the same thing, the nurses one and all fell in love with Buck.

And here, once for all, or at any rate for a long time, a cogent
matter may be dismissed, even as those pagan nurses dismissed it. It
is Louie's conviction of moral guilt as apart from her persuasion of
the practical inconveniences of it. Louie Causton would have been poor
stuff for the hot gospeller to practise upon. There were things she
would have had undone, and that not merely because the consequences
pressed upon her; as they could not be undone, she had begun the tune
and intended to fiddle it out. What she saw fit to hide her historian
hides also. Louie seized what happiness she could, and it served. She
was sorrier for Chaff than she was for herself. She would have been
less happy had she taken Uncle Augustus's way out.

And whether the days were happy or not, at any rate they were
peacefully alike. Breakfast with the nurses, a morning or afternoon
drive with Buck or a walk along the river bank or on Putney Heath,
tea (if they drove) perhaps at Kingston, supper with the nurses again,
and bed--that was the tale of them. She kept her promise to Chaff;
several times he came to see her. Twice he met Buck. At these meetings
the shade of the Honourable Emily almost visibly presided.... Chaff
tried to talk of "Lives and Battles," Buck of the same--it was not for
him to choose topics before his betters. And once, but once only, Buck
brought Mrs. Buck, formerly Susan Emmidge, the chemist's servant at
Mallard Bois. He hooked her up behind himself before they left
Kingston, and Louie did her the same service at the end of the visit.
For the rest, if Louie wanted to see her father's second wife she had
to go to the Molyneux Arms to do so.


II

As the singer of "The Pilgrim of Love" Buck was known far and abroad
up the Thames. It will be believed that he contrived to get an
infinite personal pathos into the song; he also made of it, by means
of those gratuitous aspirates, an affective athletic exercise in
breathing.

     "No re-(_h_)est--but the gra-(_h_)ave
     For the Pi-(_h_)ilgrim of Love!----"

As he closed his eyes at each soaring, the effect was as if he
inwardly looked back on that remarkable pilgrimage of his own. Bidden
to marry, he had married; bidden to unmarry and to marry again, he had
done so; and at a word from Louie he would have taken up the
pilgrimage once more.

But while Buck exalted the Scarisbricks high above himself, so also
he exalted himself high above all beneath him. He ruled the Molyneux
Arms with a rod of iron. Only mediately and through him would the two
barmaids have dared to address Louie; and his wife's position was
altogether anomalous. It was only because Louie would have it so that
she sat down to tea with them; and, what with her hooks and eyes and
Buck's perpetual admonitions, there was little rest but the grave for
her either. Buck subscribed to the _Almanack de Gotha_ and _Modern
Society_; these were always to hand; but _The Licensed Victuallers'
Gazette_, which he took in the way of business, was kept out of
Louie's way. Mr. Mackie he would have torn from limb to limb. Far more
royalist than the king was Buck; Radicalism was chaos, which word he
pronounced "tchayoss." Of pugilism, save to Chaff, he never spoke.
"God bless the Squire and his relations."

And (Louie thought) God bless this simple-hearted father of hers also.
Buck in the ring had been a better man than Uncle Augustus in the
House of Lords, and Henson would not have looked twice at Chaff.
Granted he was pompous; with a little more pompousness her mother
would have come more creditably out of that old affair. So much for
the Scarisbricks. Already, in January, Louie loved her father; by
March his daily visit was a necessity of her life. She had been right;
her destiny was quite as likely to be bound up with Buck and his
beer-pumps as with anything in that dingy old Business School.

Of the Business School she still thought a good deal, however. She
could not forget the interesting little drama of which she had seen,
as it were, the first act. Somehow, time and distance had simplified
some of its details without diminishing her interest in it, and, as
she walked along the Putney towpath by day, or lay awake in her
white-painted room at night, she wondered that this should be so. By
the brutal logic of events, Rainham Parva should have been nearer to
her than Holborn; but Rainham Parva seemed now disproportionately
remote. Why?

Had the conclusion which persisted in presenting itself not been
impossible, perhaps she would not have faced it so frankly. It was
impossible--manifestly absurd--that Mr. Jeffries should have any hold
on her imagination. Therefore she allowed herself to consider it. No
doubt the fancies which filled her head would pass and be forgotten.

Give them a month, then--two months.

She gave them that, and more. They did not pass. But that, no doubt,
was due to the curious interrupted story. She felt as if she was
reading an interesting serial tale, for the next instalment of which
she was suddenly required to wait another month. She wanted to know
what was going to happen among the fair, perky boy, the girl who
resembled Polly Ross, the lionlike Mr. Jeffries, and that apocryphal
fourth actor in the piece. When she had learned that she would close
the book. In the meantime she occupied herself, as serial readers do,
with guessing.

The spring was advancing towards May when there happened something
that suddenly precipitated her guessings. Buck still came daily, but
she walked more in the back garden of the nursing home now and less on
the heath and on the towpath, and drove, when she did drive, more
slowly. Sometimes on her drives a nurse accompanied her. Her doctor
found her health excellent.

The thing that happened began with Richenda Earle. Some weeks before,
Louie had had a letter from Richenda forwarded from Sutherland Place,
which she had neglected to answer; and Richenda had apparently written
again, this time to her sister. Louie now gathered that Mrs. Leggat
had kept the reason for her disappearance from Mr. Weston, but not
from Richenda. By way of Richenda and Mr. Weston it had now reached
the Business School. A hastily scrawled letter from Kitty Windus
informed Louie of this. Kitty wanted to come and see her.

Well, there was no reason why Kitty should not come. Louie wrote and
told her so.

She came on a Saturday afternoon. It was not urgently necessary that
Louie should have received her in bed, but the recollection of the
spinster's peering eyes held some obscure prompting. Moreover, to
receive Kitty in bed would be an intimation that the call must not be
a long one, and she had arranged its duration with Miss Dot Mayville.

"Miss Windus," Miss Dot announced, and Kitty entered.

She had brought Louie a bunch of violets; that was the first of
several new amenities Louie noticed in her manner. Louie discouraged
the second amenity, which was a shy motion as if to embrace her. And
the third showed when, after a few minutes in which Kitty's fluttered
spirits had become a little calmer (_she_ was not the one to turn her
back on people in trouble, she had said, let others hold up their
heads as they pleased), she wistfully took Louie's hand on the
coverlet. She had cried over Louie a little. Her eyes were still wet.

"Of course--but I don't know whether you've heard--I might have been
just like everybody else, only something else has made an awful
difference too," she said, her eyes downcast.

"Oh? What else?" Louie asked a little offhandedly. She had not wanted
to be wept over.

"Oh, then you haven't heard.... I'm engaged. I've been engaged nearly
two months."

"Really? Then I must congratulate you. Is it a secret who to?"

"No," said Kitty. "It's to Mr. Jeffries."

Slowly Louie sat up. She turned, as if, like Buck, she had been deaf
on one side. "_Who?_" she asked.

"Yes. To Mr. Jeffries. Since early in March. You remember he told
Archie there was somebody?--and," Kitty became suddenly voluble, "I
couldn't believe my ears at first. I'd never dreamed--never dreamed.
And after I'd been such a beast--I don't mean a beast exactly, but
getting at him, you know. I was just as bad as the others--about his
baths and all that. Oh, I did feel ashamed--as mean as mean--oh!" She
choked a little. "I don't mind saying it now, but I'd--I'd begun to be
afraid I should _never_ get off!"

"Yes--no, I mean," Louie murmured, dazed.

"Just fancy, it's being me! That night, when he asked me, I thought I
should have gone clean off it. Sometimes I can hardly believe it yet.
I hadn't a notion--not a notion! And it makes everything perfectly
wonderful, knowing a man's so struck on you, though he _is_ quiet and
don't say much about it. Of course they mean all the more, that sort.
We walk along the streets, but he won't let me stop out late for fear
of tiring me, and he always takes me right to the door, and I'm trying
hard not to be selfish, but it makes me so sorry for other girls who
haven't got off--and perhaps if I sell some of my shares to start us
with we can get married next year--if he gets a permanency, that is."

Louie was still thunderstruck. Mr. Jeffries engaged to--Kitty Windus!
That unnamed personage was--Kitty Windus! She, Louie, was asked to
believe _that_, in the face of all she had seen!

"I am glad," she found herself murmuring again.

"Did _you_ guess?" Kitty asked eagerly. She would have given her ears
to be told that somebody else had guessed.

"No," Louie replied, and added, seeing Kitty's fallen face: "I should
have thought Mr. Merridew. You seemed such great friends."

At that Kitty broke in: "Poor Archie! I said it made one selfish....
His father's very ill. We were going on Putney Heath to-day, all four
of us, Archie and Evie and Jeff and me; but Archie had a wire to go
home this morning, poor Archie, and so I'm going to meet the others
by-and-by. But anyway, if anything does happen, he'll be able to get
married as soon as he likes--he's an only son."

At this Louie was even more startled. Mr. Jeffries and the Soames girl
together at that moment! She remembered those irrevocable looks.

"So Mr. Merridew and Miss Soames are engaged, then?" she said.

"Well," Kitty admitted, "it comes to the same thing. They're as good
as. I wish Jeff was coming into a bit, like Archie."

"You say they're here, at Putney, this afternoon?"

"Jeff and Evie? Yes. I'm meeting them at five."

Even as Louie was inwardly predicting that Kitty would not see her Mr.
Jeffries at five, Miss Dot Mayville entered. But Louie did not want
Kitty to go just yet. She wanted to know more of this extraordinary
development of her drama. "May we have some tea?" she asked, and Miss
Dot went out again. Louie lay back on her pillow and frowned at the
foot of her white-painted bed.

"It's very kind of you to give up your afternoon to me," she said
by-and-by.

"Oh, my dear, as if I wouldn't!" Kitty broke out almost reproachfully.
"I keep telling myself I mustn't be selfish, when Jeff and I have
years before us--I'm just beginning to realise it--years--and, oh
dear, here I am, selfish again, talking all about myself and never a
word about you."

But Louie did not want words about herself. She wanted to hear all,
all, about Kitty and Mr. Jeffries. The thing became more incredible
moment by moment.

"I'm sorry about Mr. Merridew's father," she said presently. "I
suppose Miss Soames is very much upset?"

"Frightfully," said Kitty. "But Jeff's looking after her. It was he
who persuaded her to go out this afternoon. It's better for her than
moping indoors."

"Perhaps Mr. Merridew asked him to."

"Oh no. He only got the wire this morning. But it isn't a surprise.
Jeff saw him last night----" She checked herself. She had no gibes
about brown-paper parcels now.

"Well, you'll be quite a courting quartet," said Louie presently, with
a brightness she did not feel.

"Yes; jolly, isn't it? But there, I'm simply _not_ going to talk
about myself one moment longer. I feel a regular beast. But it's only
because I'm so happy. Now let's talk about you. How long are you going
to be here? What sort of people are they? Isn't it fearfully
expensive? Are you frightened?"

The suppressed inquisitive questions and Louie's preoccupied parries
lasted through tea. At a quarter to five Kitty rose. Again Louie found
herself wondering whether Kitty would see her Mr. Jeffries that day.
Kitty bent over her.

"I should like to kiss you, dear, if you'd let me," she said timidly.
"You wouldn't believe what a difference it makes. And I'd love to come
again; I love little babies. Now I must run. I won't say a word to
Miriam Levey; you know what she is--but I simply must learn not to say
those things. Good-bye, dear."

And she was off, waving her skimpy hand from the door.

Louie did not know why her heart should ache already, as at a
premonition--for she had no certitude. Indeed, in all that portion of
her relation to Mr. Jeffries she had no certitude; but she was only a
little less certain on that account. Already she entirely rejected the
figment in which Kitty so pathetically believed. Months before she had
snapped her fingers at his impudent tale of a shadowy _fiancee_; now
she wondered whether he had not been caught in his own trap and found
himself compelled, by mere daily exigencies, to give that shadow
substance--the substance of Kitty. Impossible--and yet the conceivable
alternatives were equally impossible! Incredible that he should have
chosen Kitty for his stalking-horse--yet whom else had there been to
choose? If this really was a putting-upon the Business School, Mr.
Jeffries would see to it that his dupe was as known as his purpose
was secret. That left him three candidates from whom to choose
indifferently--Kitty, Miriam Levey, and herself.

In her indignation she was unconscious of the pink that crept like a
danger signal into her cheeks.

That poor, unconscious, betrayed woman!

Good gracious! It was blackguardly and monstrous! Kitty of all women!
To have "predestined spinster" written large all over you was bad
enough, without being played upon thus and then cast back into
spinsterhood after all! And this new softness of Kitty's, this timid
opening of the heart, this new, awkward unselfishness, these pathetic
little maxims of conduct! The man must be a cur. Deliberately to waken
a heart that was sealed, asleep and not unhappy, and then to leave it
to a pain it must keep for ever--good gracious!

Still ignorant of the tell-tale red in her own cheeks, she found Mr.
Jeffries vile.

But she must be just to Mr. Jeffries. Perhaps she was wrong. Perhaps
there was--nay, there must be--something she didn't know. Why, even if
Mr. Jeffries could be so cruel, Kitty herself could hardly be so
blind. Struggle with new magnanimities as she would, jealousy was
native to Kitty, and jealousy has sharp eyes. No, she, Louie herself,
was building a fantastic fabric. It was mere common-sense that Kitty
must be supposed to be capable of looking after herself.

But it was one thing to tell herself that she must suspend her
judgment and another to do it. That theory of hers seemed to unroll
itself brightly and convincingly before her again. She would discard
it when she found one that better explained the known facts. Mr.
Jeffries was with Evie Soames at that moment. Louie's thoughts flew
to Evie Soames.

It was then that she became conscious that her cheeks were hot. It was
then also that she told herself angrily that they were not, and found
them grow hotter still. The hotter they grew the more she denied their
heat. Why should they grow hot? And even granting that they were hot,
wasn't this imposture that was being practised on Kitty enough to make
anybody's cheek hot? That was it. That discovery made, she admitted
the heat--for Kitty's sake. That that great, taciturn, clever man
should be infatuated by that pretty fool she resented--for Kitty's
sake. That his sleek head, bright as the coat of Buck's horse, should
stoop over that empty dark one she found ironically unfit--for Kitty's
sake. She told herself all this, forgetting that she had just set
Kitty's engagement down also as an absurdity. Her indignation would
have been neither more nor less honest had Mr. Jeffries engaged
himself (as according to her theory he might quite well have done) to
Miriam Levey.

Or to herself.

She lay, the colour coming and going.

At last she roused herself and sat up. "Pretty thoughts for an
expectant mother!" she muttered. "I'll go downstairs and talk to Dot."

She dressed, and descended to the nurses' sitting-room in the
basement.

Miss Dot and her Registrar were there; they had just come in from a
walk. They were telling of a nightingale they had heard sing near
Queens Mere. "Oh, and we saw your friend again, the one who came to
tea," said Miss Dot, turning to Louie.

Louie pricked up her ears. "Oh? Alone?" she said quickly.

"Yes. Coming down Putney Hill."

"Yes, she said she was going to take a walk," Louie remarked.

But to herself she cried with conviction: "I knew it--I knew it--I
knew it!"

For the rest of the evening she was lost in her own thoughts. Miss
Cora Mayville worked a hand sewing machine; Miss Dot and her Registrar
played bezique at a separate table; other nurses, in print aprons or
cloaked and bonneted, came and went; but Louie sat and gazed into the
fire. When spoken to she smiled mechanically and then resumed her
gazing. There was no more continuity in her thoughts than there was in
the shape of the flames that illumined her grey eyes. Roy appeared in
them for a moment or two--she had seen Roy's name in _The Gazette_ a
week before--and then Roy was supplanted by Burnett Minor. Her old
French governess at Trant popped up for no particular reason, and then
she too gave place to Mr. Mackie. She heard Buck saying again, "That
little girl"--and then came a wrangle between Dot and her Registrar.
In the adjoining kitchen she heard sounds of frying, and then somebody
came in to lay the table for supper. The gas rose and whistled as the
stove in the next room was turned off. The three night nurses came
down. Louie had her gruel where she sat, and at half-past nine went
upstairs again. She got into bed, and dreamed that night that she was
dancing with Mr. Jeffries again at the breaking-up party. Her hand lay
like a willow leaf in his. "_You_ understand," he was saying to her;
"it's no good hiding things from _you_; _you've_ got the key of it
all. It had to be somebody, and you'd left. There was only Kitty for
it. You see what an ignominious thing you escape. Don't tell me how
degrading it is; I know it; but I'd do it a thousand times for the
woman I loved and meant to marry."

Louie knew, in her dream, who that was.

Then she awoke with a start. The street lamp outside, shining through
the venetian blinds, made long bars of light on the walls and ceiling.
The hot-water bottle at her feet was cold. She heard the creaking of
Dot's bed in the little dressing-room adjoining, and the minute
ticking of her watch on the table by her bed-head. But what had woke
her had been the sound of her own reply, in her dream, to Mr.
Jeffries.

"You'll shuffle Kitty off," she had replied, still dancing with him,
"but _I_ should have found a way to keep you."

Then, with a deep sigh, she turned and went to sleep again.


III

Her boy was born towards the end of June. Her mother did not visit
her; instead, she sent a letter the chief characteristic of which was
fright that she had dared even so far to disobey her brother. Louie
understood, and in her dictated reply made allowances. She wondered
whether she should write to Roy also, but in the end did not. The
child was born at three o'clock in the morning; he was hardly six
hours old when Buck arrived. The old champion stood looking down on
his little girl's little boy. It was long before he spoke.

"I wasn't let see you," he said, two big tears rolling down his
cheeks.

"You shall teach him to box, daddy," said Louie, smiling up at him.

But Buck shook his head. "No, no," he said gently--"except just to
take care of himself--when he's fourteen, perhaps--if I'm here.
Swimming, not sparring. They're a queer lot, them in the ring."

"You must go now, Mr. Causton," said Miss Dot.

The boy was thirty hours old when there arrived for him a great case
of toys suitable for a child of four. Buck and Chaff had been round
the toyshops together. Mrs. Buck, disobeying her husband for the only
time in her life, came by stealth with a flannel binder that might
have enwrapped a six-pounds' child; Jim (as Louie had decided to call
him), weighed ten pounds, beef to the heel.

He throve at once, and continued to thrive.

The pair of them were the pride of that pagan Putney Nursing Home.

The first of the two incidents that may be allowed to close this
portion of Louie's story was a second visit by Kitty Windus to Louie.

She came at ten o'clock at night, and only with difficulty obtained
admission. She was allowed ten minutes, on the condition that Louie
was awake. Louie was awake. Kitty neither lifted her veil nor asked to
see the child. There was no trace now of her little maxims of conduct;
she spoke agitatedly, and out of a stinging, jealous pain.

"I've come to ask you something, Miss Causton, and you've got to tell
me," she announced, without preface. "I've a right to know."

"Speak a little lower," said Louie, glancing at the babe. "Sit down
and tell me what it is."

But Kitty would not sit. Incapable of grandeurs of style, she
nevertheless attempted them.

"I don't know whether you happen to be aware what people are saying
about you," she said. Her boat-shaped hat and Inverness cape gave her
a little the appearance of a scanty tree with which some topiary
artist had done his best.

Louie could not help smiling a little; she could have that kind of
thing out with herself without calling in Kitty.

"My dear! Of course I know they might be saying anything!" She drew
her child a little closer to her.

"Suppose we keep the my dears till we've finished talking," said Kitty
coldly. "I mean what they're saying at the Business School."

Louie spoke quietly. "I suppose you mean about me and my boy?"

"Yes, I do mean that, and I've come to ask you to your face; _I'm_ not
the one to beat about the bush! I want to know who----" There was no
need for Kitty to complete the sentence.

"You won't know that," said Louie, more quietly still.

"Ah! perhaps you won't tell me because you daren't?"

"I've not told anybody, and I'm not going to tell you. I'd die first.
Perhaps before we go any further you'll tell me why you want to know?"

"You don't suppose I'd ask you if it wasn't my business, do you?"

Slowly Louie turned her eyes on her. She spoke slowly too. "We should
get on more quickly if you didn't jump so to conclusions," she said.
"I don't know what your conclusions are, but you seem to have made
your mind up about something. If you'll change your tone I'll talk to
you; if you won't, I won't."

At that Kitty began to sob. She had to lift her veil in order to put a
wisp of wet handkerchief to her eyes. But she changed her tone.

"I only want to know," she said. "And I don't want to know if it isn't
my business. But I _have_ seen him look at you, and he _did_ dance
with you, and when they said----"

"Who said?" Louie interrupted; but she had already made a guess. "And
said what?"

"Jeff, of course," Kitty replied. "Miriam Levey noticed him looking at
you first, but after that I saw for myself. And you did dance with
him. I might forgive him, but I'd never, never forgive _you_."

Louie suddenly put a question. Apparently it was for nothing less
preposterous than that question that Kitty was here.

"One moment," she said. "Do you mean there's something about Mr.
Jeffries and myself you want to know?"

"Yes; and I mean to know," Kitty snapped.

"And that's all?"

"Enough, _I_ should say!"

"Please hear me out. In fact"--Louie paused for a moment and then
rapped out sharply--"you want to know whether my lover was Mr.
Jeffries?"

"That'll do to be going on with," said Kitty sullenly.

"Then I'll tell you if you'll tell me who said he was."

"I don't see what that's got to do with it, but I'll tell you if you
like. Archie Merridew said so. There!"

Archie Merridew!--But Louie restrained her gasp. "Thank you," she
said. "May I ask whether you've asked Mr. Jeffries? _He_ might be in a
position to know, you know."

"No, I haven't."

"But evidently you've seen something in his manner that would make it
not quite impossible?"

"I tell you, you've danced with him, and he's looked at you in a sort
of way--more than once, Miriam says--and you're trying to shuffle out
of the question," said Kitty, her suspicions aflame again.

"Oh, I'll answer the question! If it had been he"--she glanced at the
little head under her breast--"I'd tell you in a minute--for my baby's
sake, you see. But it was not; and you might have saved yourself a
journey if you'd gone to him first. And now please tell me a little
more."

Kitty still looked at her suspiciously. "You said you'd die sooner
than tell," she cried quaveringly.

"You mean you don't believe me? Well, I can't make you. If I told you
the truth you'd just think I'd made up a name."

"It _was_ somebody else?" cried Kitty eagerly.

If it wasn't Mr. Jeffries, naturally--there was the child----

"Oh, I _want_ to believe you!" Kitty suddenly broke out.

Louie laughed desperately. "Well, my dear, you may. If it was so, I
suppose you'd get it out of me. It isn't, that's all. And now I think
I've a right to know exactly what this Mr. Merridew has been saying."

Kitty looked hard at her for one moment longer, and then sank on her
knees by the side of the bed. She had no choice but to believe. She
broke into a torrent of words, low-spoken, not to rouse the child.
Louie heard them, amazed. Slowly her incredulity turned into contempt.

The horrid little beast! But, after all, she was not surprised. It was
all in his character. Perhaps he had been drunk; perhaps it was merely
a fancy-stationery idea of humour. Not that she minded a straw; she
laughed; she supposed she was there to have stones thrown at her; it
was merely a little annoying that they were not thrown straighter. She
could picture the over-pocket-monied little bounder, measuring all
pecks out of his own bushel, leaning up against a bar somewhere,
probably too fuddled to distinguish his own humorous fancy from a
story of life with names given, and believing it himself by the time
he had repeated it once or twice.

The little worm!

"But," she said presently, disgustedly smiling, "_you_ remember when I
came to the School, and that I asked _you_ who Mr. Jeffries was----"

"Of course!" said Kitty, suddenly entirely believing. "How absurd! But
oh, I do love him so."

Louie mused.

"And he--Mr. Jeffries--knows nothing about this, you say?" she asked
presently.

"No. He thinks something's wrong. He's been teaching at the School,
you know, and of course he must have wondered what was the matter all
this last week."

"It's a week since Mr. Merridew--did me this favour?"

"Yes. But perhaps Jeff thought----" She checked herself.

"What? I think I ought to know what Mr. Jeffries may have thought."

Kitty hesitated, and then, with a little burst, told her. It was
curious. It appeared that Mr. Jeffries had been very hard up indeed,
so hard up that, quite recently, he had actually had to take a
position as a commissionaire. It was known, and possibly he had set
any oddities of behaviour towards himself down to that.

A commissionaire! Louie was astounded.

"And aren't you going to tell him?" she managed to get out.

"I must, the very next time I see him."

"You mean to-morrow?"

"I don't know. You see"--Kitty hesitated again--"he's left the School.
Practically been dismissed. He's got some work at Bedford now."

"Dismissed on account of this?"

"I expect so."

"And now, of course, you've got to tell him that you believed this?"

Kitty dropped her head on the bed. She gave a little moan. "I don't
know how I shall ever do it!" she groaned in the bedclothes.

Louie considered herself entitled to agree that it wouldn't be easy.

Presently Kitty rose. She crossed to Louie's mirror and adjusted the
boat-shaped hat. Then she came back to the bedside again and craned
her head forward.

"May I see the baby?" she asked.

"Another time, I think," said Louie, her lips compressed.

Kitty left.

Louie's mind was in a whirl. At her request, Kitty had turned out the
gas before leaving, and only a nightlight glimmered on the little
invalid's table. She gazed at it. So she too had been haled into the
drama!

On the young fancy stationer she wasted never a thought, either of
indignation or of anything else; but Kitty--Evie Soames--Mr.
Jeffries--Roy--herself!--What a nightmare--what a pantomime! What an
incredible genius this Mr. Jeffries seemed to have for getting himself
into complications and dragging other people after him! It might well
have puzzled anybody--anybody who had not the key of the puzzle--to
know which among them all he really had honoured with his choice! Only
Miss Levey seemed to be immune. Surely, for the sake of completeness,
he could have found a way of dragging her in too!

Louie had to hold her key exceedingly firmly in order to retain even
that lunatic theory that seemed to be the truth.

By dint of holding fast, however, the theory still stood the strain.
Evie Soames and Mr. Jeffries were still the central figures of the
piece. Kitty was still the stalking-horse behind which, for whatever
reasons, he machinated. She herself was still merely dragged in at the
whim of a vicious little scoundrel over whose tongue whisky and
calumnies ran indifferently, and this little beast was still engaged,
or all but engaged, to Evie Soames. Yes, the triangle re-established
itself. Kitty and herself were no more than imported complications.
The big man and the red-waistcoated youth were still the protagonists,
and they faced one another over the stupid little head of Evie Soames.

And yet Louie, lying with her boy at her breast and blinking at the
nightlight, refused to class herself with the superfluous Kitty. She
did not see herself in a "walking on" part. Though she made her entry
late, something told her that she would have a word to say--or else it
was a botched and mangled piece indeed. Of life itself as a botched
and mangled piece she had no conception; though she kept her thoughts
of Him locked within her own breast, it was still the bed of them that
there _was_ an Artist over all. But for a false start she would have
been on the stage now, and she would have given a voice to that
pitiful part of poor Kitty's. Say she had not left that Holborn School
when she did--she remembered that breaking-up dance--had one more
opportunity like that been given to her----

Then in the darkness she coloured violently. She had realised her own
thoughts. This was as much as to say that she would have accepted
Kitty's role--would have consented to be an understudy--would, like
other understudies, have ousted the principal in time--would have
topped the bill with a man the latest of whose mysterious activities
was that he had been a commissionaire----

She loved, or was on the point of loving, Mr. Jeffries----

"Nonsense!" she ridiculed herself.

But nonsense or not, it was stronger than all her efforts to think
about something else. Perhaps it was her own false start that set her
wondering, and ever returning to her wonder, whether he had not made
one too. He seemed to have set up the figure of Evie Soames in his own
imagination, and probably had not looked at Evie Soames as she
actually was since. He seemed to have his full share of that masculine
vanity which will have nothing to do with the compromise by which the
world jogs on; his rapt, lion's eyes might see visions afar off, and
he would not as much as know that his shins were black and raw with
the bruises of the hard facts among which he stumbled. Little as Louie
knew of him, she thought she knew that. Lucky Evie Soames, who might
be as stupid as the mud beneath her feet, yet in one man's blind,
far-seeing eyes could do no wrong!

But of course it was nonsense that Louie should have to recognise Evie
Soames for her rival.

Yet, on one other point, as she lay with the babe at her breast and
her eyes fixed on the little flame of the nightlight, she was already
prepared to make a wager with herself. Her theory was still only a
theory; she could not prove it; but it could prove itself. It would
work out or it would not work out; if it worked out--well, Louie was a
woman, and no woman hesitates for a single moment to put on the mantle
of the prophet. Indeed, she had prophesied long before. "Circumstances
are strong," this Mr. Jeffries who had since been a commissionaire had
admitted when she had danced with him, "but is anybody ever beaten
unless they deserve to be?" And he had taken his failure in the
examination as a sign that he ought not to have gone in for it, and
had refused to enter again. Yes, the earthenware vessel was on the
point of collision with the one of bronze, and which would break the
months or the weeks or the days would show. Kitty must not think that
it availed a predestined spinster anything that she got engaged; Mr.
Jeffries would never marry Kitty.

And if Louie herself had returned to the Business School after
Christmas----

Her dream of how she had danced with him, and he had said "_You_
understand," and she had replied, "_I_ should have found a way to keep
you," returned vividly to her----

She would have found a way.

Then she remembered that which even then had stood between.

Excitedly she clutched her boy to her--he woke with the pressure, and
gave a little croaking cry.

This, then, was the first of the two things that remained to be told
about this part of Louie's story.

For the second of them she had neither years nor months to wait, but a
bare fortnight. A very few words will tell it.

One evening after the boy had been put to bed she went down into the
nurses' parlour and helped Dot and Nurse Chalmers to overhaul the
blouses in which the doctors operated. Besides themselves, only Miss
Cora was present; she was reading an evening paper. Louie saw her
purse her lips and then throw the paper away. Presently Louie, tossing
a patched blouse aside, reached for the paper.

A few minutes later Miss Cora, with a "Why, what's the matter?"
started forward and bent over her. Louie had gone deathly white.

"It's nothing--I shall be all right presently," she muttered, her eyes
closed.

Miss Cora took the paper. The page at which she herself had last
looked was still uppermost. It contained an account of a suicide.

"What is it, dear?" Miss Cora asked again. "Not that?" She pointed to
the paragraph. Indeed, there was little else of interest on the page.

"I shall be all right in a minute," Louie murmured again.

There was nothing remarkable about the suicide. A young man had hanged
himself behind his bedroom door, and a verdict in accordance with the
evidence (which, it was suggested, was largely medical) had been
returned. He had left a letter for his mother, precisely like almost
every other such letter, and parts of it were quoted. The young man's
name was Archie Merridew. He was to have been married on the morrow.

"Is that it?" Miss Cora asked again.

Louie nodded.

"Did you know him?"

Louie made no reply.

They are experienced women at nursing homes; especially about
suppressed medical evidence they are able to draw conclusions. The
next morning a few rapid guarded words passed between Louie and Miss
Cora. The effect of them was to give Louie a sudden feeling of nausea.
Miss Cora's whispered explanation seemed only too probable. That also
was all in his character.

"That's it, you may be sure," said Miss Cora. "They ought to be
lethal-chambered, nasty little sewer-rats; one of 'em's saved them the
trouble at any rate. Did you know the girl he was going to marry too?"

"Yes," said Louie.

"Well, she's had an escape. But don't think about it. You have your
own little boy. Come into the garden till your father comes and then
have a nice long drive. Shall we wrap Jimmy up and let him go with
you?"

That, then, was the second thing; but already Louie had heard a
prophetical whisper in her soul.




PART IV

PILLAR TO POST


I

When, in the October of 1896, Louie Causton left Mortlake Road, with
half the nurses of the home waving their handkerchiefs after her, she
went to a house near the Parson's Green end of Wandsworth Bridge Road.
As she left that house before Christmas, going to another one near the
Walham Green Town Hall, there is no need to describe it. Neither need
the Walham Green house be described, since from there she went, in
February 1897, to yet another house, in a street off the Bishops Road,
Fulham. These and other removals did not necessitate the use of a
pantechnicon; a four-wheeler sufficed on each occasion. Louie, the boy
and the nurse went inside; the top was quite big enough for her
belongings. She stuck to the south-western district; at no time did
she move farther east than when she took two rooms in Cheyne Walk,
over a bicycle shop near the Chelsea suspension bridge--which rooms,
by the way, she was forced to leave at an hour's notice, her landlord,
a man of straw, being himself ejected and involving his sub-tenant in
his own catastrophe. She kept to this district because of its nearness
to Kingston and the Molyneux Arms. By the time the boy was nine months
old she was living in Tadema Road, not far from where the Chelsea
power-station now stands.

The nurse whom she had engaged was a link--save for Chaff the only
one--with Trant. She was, indeed, her own old French governess, once
Celeste Martin, now Celeste Farnier and a widow. She was a
Provencale, from Arles. On the death of her husband, which had taken
place while Louie had been still at the home in Mortlake Road, she had
sought out Chaff with a sheaf of testimonials, and by-and-by Louie had
engaged her. She paid her ten shillings a week, on the distinct
understanding that she must not hesitate to accept the first decent
post that offered. It was already plain that, even if Celeste could
have brought herself to leave the little girl to whom she had taught
the order of the personal pronouns in French, her affection for Master
Jim would have haled her back again.

Louie changed her abode so frequently for one reason and another. In
perhaps a third of the cases the landladies to whom she offered
herself as a lodger found reasons for asking her to leave when they
saw that her letters were addressed to "Miss Causton." Then, to save
cab fares, Louie began to make her position plain at the outset.
Sometimes this made a difference, sometimes none. On the whole, London
S.W. showed itself charitable or merely indifferent. By May 1897 she
was at another house in Wandsworth Bridge Road.

She had not refused to accept, easily and as a loan, a sum of money
from Buck; but thrice she had well-nigh quarrelled with Buck because
she would accept it only as a loan. Twice, for the same reason, she
had had tussles with Chaff. But money, until she should find something
settled to do, she must have. No doubt Richenda Earle would have
shaken her head and have pointed out that now Louie not only had the
Scarisbricks behind her, but a prosperous publican also; but Louie,
though she lived as frugally as if she had to earn every penny, did
not see why her boy should go short while there was money to be had.
She took the sensible view of the matter, and borrowed, while walking
her shoes out and answering advertisements for this, that and the
other.

Up to the summer of '97 her occupations had been almost as various as
her addresses. She very soon discovered that her Holborn training was
of little use to her, and she could not (as also she discovered) play
the piano well enough to give lessons. What she dreamed of, of course,
was a comfortable private secretaryship; no young woman is so
ill-trained or so incompetent but she fancies herself good enough for
a private secretaryship. Perhaps Uncle Augustus might have helped her
to one, but she would have nothing to do with Uncle Augustus; and
Chaff was unable to beat up anything of the kind. Buck's proposal,
that she should keep his books, had been the cause of their second
altercation. Common-sense in the matter of borrowing she was prepared
to be; beyond that point she remembered her pride and Richenda's
words. So for the present she was spared the worst of the pinch.

So, in the early part of that year, she was in an A.B.C. cash-desk,
traveller for a History, and saleswoman at an Earls Court
chocolate-stall. Then, in June, she obtained, actually in the face of
considerable competition, a place in the showrooms of a Bond Street
photographer. Perhaps her dresses, of which several still remained,
helped her to this place. She wrote letters, arranged appointments,
answered press and other calls on the telephone, and received sitters.
No doubt some of these knew Uncle Augustus. Robson, of the Board of
Trade (who came one day), would probably know him; so would George
Hastie, Robson's friend and colleague, and perhaps Sir Peregrine
Campbell and others. Some of them, the more sporting sort, might even
know Buck too, for Buck was still a tradition; in short, Louie's own
position amused her immensely. By taking her letters home with her and
leaving a younger assistant in charge, she was frequently able to
leave the showrooms by half-past four and to spend the evenings with
Celeste and her boy. Incidentally, Louie improved her French a good
deal, for Celeste crooned over the boy in French and English
indifferently.... "The darleeng--the lo-ove--the precieux--oh, oh, oh,
mais il existe--il manifeste, le petiot----"; and she would break off
to sing, in a cracked voice, "Le Pont d'Avignon," or some lullaby of
Frederic Mistral. She idolised the infant; when he was put to bed she
did not delay long to follow him, for Louie, who had her work to do
during the day, must not be roused at night; and so Louie frequently
sat alone, writing her letters or wrapped in her own musings. She
received thirty-five shillings a week. Her job had the appearance of a
"permanency." In July she got a "rise" of three shillings a week. She
also got ten days' holiday, the greater part of which she spent in the
company of her father. She was beginning to know what holidays meant
now.

On one of those days she had an unexpected little meeting in Richmond
Park. Celeste and the boy had gone on by train, and she was walking.
The meeting was with a girl called Myrtle Morris, who, when Louie had
kept the confectionery stall at Earls Court, had sold cigarettes at
the stall adjoining. Miss Morris was accompanied by a tall young man;
she stopped to greet Louie, and the young man walked slowly on. Myrtle
asked Louie what she was doing now. Louie told her. "And you?" she
said.

"Oh, I've gone back to my old trade," the girl said, nodding towards
her retreating companion. "Artists' model. That's my present
employer--Izzard."

"Who?" said Louie. The name seemed familiar.

"Billy Izzard. Know him?"

"No," said Louie. But she remembered now where she had heard the name.

"Jolly clever painter," said the model authoritatively. "Nice fellow
too. Shall I call him?"

"Thanks, but I must be getting on," said Louie. "Good-bye."

"So long. Come and look me up some time, won't you? 25 Edith Grove."

"Thank you. Good-bye."

So that was Roy's friend! They had not gone down with the yacht that
had lain under the hill at Rainham Parva. But she had only seen Mr.
Izzard's back. For a moment, but only for a moment, she thought of
Roy; then the sum-total of a long sequence of reveries returned to her
again.

Or rather, the factors that made that total returned. In spite of her
broodings late at night, when her letters were written and Jimmy's
food prepared for the night, she was still unable to cast them up. Had
she been asked to state her relation now to Mr. Jeffries her attempt
would have been something like this:

"It's perfectly absurd, of course. There is no relation--nothing that
can properly be called a relation. How can there be, with a man I
don't see--haven't seen since that queer party? I don't even know
where he is or what he's doing; he may be a commissionaire again for
all I know."

"Yes, but," she now answered herself, as if it had been some form of a
dialogue, "don't forget that other night, at Mortlake Road, after
Kitty'd gone."

She did not forget that night. She had told herself that night that it
was nonsense that she should love Mr. Jeffries. Again she answered
that critical objector within herself.

"But it _is_ nonsense after all! How _can_ I? I suppose I mean that if
things had been different I might have loved him. Moping about a man
you never see is all very well for a schoolgirl for a week or two, but
not for grown women, and mothers at that."

"Then you mean he's just the same to you as Buck and Chaff?" the
dialogue continued, as she walked.

"All I mean is that he might have been more."

"Well, suppose you were to hear now that he'd broken off with Kitty,
and--you know--that other were to happen?"

She did know what she meant by "that other." It was the most familiar
of her thoughts. It was what in her heart she was stilly waiting
for--to learn one day that Mr. Jeffries had broken off with Kitty and
had become engaged to Evie Soames. And at that point she always tried
to stop the dialogue. Beyond that point lay something that she vaguely
apprehended might be horrible.

She had no definite reason for supposing this horrible thing to exist.
The horror, indeed, was that it might exist, and to entertain morbid
thoughts about something that merely might exist was neither pleasant
nor wise. But at times she could not forget the promise she had once
made to herself--that if anything unaccountable ever happened to a
certain young man she would know in what quarter to look for the
likely cause of it. And something had happened. Part of what had
happened she had had from Miss Cora; "A lethal chamber--the nasty
little sewer-rat!" Miss Cora had said; and it had happened on the eve
of his wedding to Evie Soames. To commit suicide had been the only
thing to do.

And of course he had committed suicide....

Then that second voice within her tried to speak again. "Remember," it
said, "that this Mr. Jeffries, of whom you can't help thinking when
all's said and done, had suffered innumerable insults from him--you
yourself were dragged into one of them----"

"Quiet!" the other self commanded peremptorily.

"--and as far as that girl you hate's concerned--Evie Soames--if the
reason was good enough for suicide it was good enough for the other
thing."

"What other thing?" Louie, in spite of herself, could not help asking.

"Oh--_you_ know!"

"Do you know what you're saying?" This was an attempt to browbeat the
other Louie.

"Oh, perfectly well! _I_ know myself--you--us--Louie Causton--better
than you do! And I know that lion better! Have you forgotten? Don't
you remember what you thought of him, that if he set his mind on a
thing he'd get it sooner or later, one way or another? Don't you
remember what he said--'I wonder if anybody's ever beaten who doesn't
deserve to be?' They are dangerous men who believe that! And the way's
clear for him now, isn't it? Of course it is! Why, suppose you hear,
first, that he's thrown Kitty Windus over; suppose you hear, next,
that he's forging ahead in his business, whatever it is--you know he's
as ambitious as Satan; then suppose you hear that he's engaged to Evie
Soames--married to her. Suppose you hear all this?"

"Oh, anybody can make up an _a priori_ tale like that!" the other
scoffed.

"Perhaps they can; but what _is_ a murder anyway? Whoever sees one
committed? Don't they hang men on just such _a priori_ tales, as you
call it? Suppose that, rather than let him marry that girl----"

"Oh, stop, stop!" Louie positively shrieked within herself.

She was white. This scene always turned her white. She quickened her
pace, but her ghastly pallor remained unchanged. A hundred times she
had argued it all before, and she knew the conclusion that would
presently come.

It came, the conclusion. That portion of herself that always seemed
resolved to convict Mr. Jeffries of a hideous thing spoke, as it were,
softly, seductively.

"And what then, Louie? What then? Come, don't be afraid of yourself!
You know it in your heart all the time! Roy--you remember--_you_ had
to make the love there; and you want to be _made_ love to, not to make
love. _You_ didn't find Mr. Jeffries a butt and a laughing-stock, you
know. You envied that little chit of a milliner's hand--envied her and
hated her. And she hates you, and always will, because you caught her
in the dark with that other creature. Yes, yes, I know you were
overstrung at that time, and didn't see yourself very clearly, but
look at the thing now--you're calm now. When you saw his eyes, all
full of perils and stratagems and deceits, all for her sake, you know
you longed to have a man do all that for _you_! And when he did that
mad thing with Kitty Windus, you know you wanted a man who would go
even to those lengths for _you_! And you know that when he throws her
over--brutally, heartlessly, without conscience--you'll want a man who'll
be just as brutal and heartless and conscienceless for _you_! You all
want it! You all love a ruthless man! You know it's the men who are the
merciful sex when sex comes into the question; you're only merciful
when it doesn't--just as those stupid men are merciless about the
abstractions you don't care a straw about!... So suppose--suppose----"

"Oh, stop!" Louie besought herself faintly.

"--suppose it turns out as I say! Won't you immediately love him a
little more when poor Kitty's sent about her business? And won't you
love him a little more still when you hear he's engaged to Evie
Soames? And won't you, when you learn that he's been willing to go all
lengths--all lengths--for love, love him past all mending? You will,
you will, you know you will!" The cry rang out almost exultantly.

"But--but--those people--coroners' juries--are supposed to know all
about these things."

"Coroners' juries!... Do you remember his eyes?..."

Beyond that point Louie never got. She usually rose quickly and went
out to post the photographer's letters. There, then, were the elements
of her sum. Sometimes some of them presented themselves, sometimes
others; more and more she shrank from casting the total. And often, to
shake off the hideous, fascinating obsession, she did the most trivial
thing she could think of--went to a drawer and overhauled her
dresses, selecting the one she would wear at the photographer's
showroom on the morrow.

It was in her to turn from the thought of a possible murder to the
shaking out of a crumpled dress.

But she never wore the oyster-grey at the showrooms in Bond Street.
Nevertheless she shook it out frequently, putting it back into the
drawer again.

       *       *       *       *       *

That day, at the Molyneux Arms, Buck was alternately at his fondest
and at his most tyrannical. The fondness was for Louie and the boy,
the tyranny for everybody else. As Louie entered the little private
parlour (she was not allowed to set foot in the rest of the premises)
she heard loud crowings; they came from Jimmy, and were for the
Pilgrim of Love who held him up at arm's-length in the air; but the
next moment Buck was scolding a barmaid who had had the temerity to
borrow the current number of _Modern Society_ before Louie had seen
it. "Not that I don't make 'em all read it," he said, "but at times
and seasons, and in their proper places; what with all these Radicals
and what not we don't want chayoss coming again! You bring it back
this minute, miss!--'Oryn--thia my Beloved!"

Buck kept his divided humour through tea; then there was another
outburst. This time it was about a letter that had not been given to
Louie immediately.

"And how do _you_ know that it isn't important?" he broke out on his
wife. "Not a word--not a word! I _know_ it is important--all letters
addressed so are important, mind, for the future! Those letters aren't
about the butcher and baker and candlestick-maker, I'll have you
know! Give it to her at once, and let Madermoselle hook up the back,
or your next dress shall fasten down the front, I promise you!...
What, little man! A granddad, eh? 'No re-(_h_)-est--but the
gra-(_h_)-ave----'"

For all Louie was able to guess from the signature, her letter might
have been from butcher, baker and candlestick-maker, all three; the
name--"hers to serve, Frank Hickley"--was unknown to her. But the
single other name that the letter contained was known. It was that of
Kitty Windus. She was laid up somewhere in Vauxhall, and wanted to see
her.

The next morning, in a shabby respectable street off the Vauxhall
Bridge Road, Louie rang a bell beneath which, punched in a strip of
aluminium, was the sign, "F. Hickley, Agent." F. Hickley himself
opened the door. Later Louie learned that he was an agent for his
wife's shopping, boot-cleaning and potato-peeling. Mrs. Hickley was
Kitty's cousin, but the bit she had coming in was not enough to
relieve her of the necessity of keeping a lodging-house. That it was a
lodging-house Louie guessed from the number and variety of hats and
coats that hung in the narrow yellow-painted hall. Mrs. Hickley
appeared from somewhere below; Mr. Hickley, descending again, passed
her on the stairs.

"Are you Miss Causton?" Mrs. Hickley asked.

"Yes. I've had a letter saying Miss Windus was here."

"Will you come up? Don't take too much notice of her, what she says,
especially about tracts; Uncle Arthur's side's liable to it. This
way."

"Is she ill?" Louie asked.

"Not to call ill. She'll go to Margate in a week or two, for the air,
though Margate's too strong for me; Littlehampton's my favourite. And
Bognor. Mind the stair-rod--I must tell Frank to fasten it down."

As Kitty had formerly found Louie, so Louie now found Kitty--in bed.
Her muteness as long as Mrs. Hickley remained in the room seemed
obstinate, _voulu_; the rapid speech into which she broke without
preface when her cousin's step had ceased to sound on the stairs
confirmed some vague impression of secretiveness. Louie was uneasy at
the change in her.

"You're not to talk about it," Kitty said, the words falling one over
the other; "that's what the doctor meant, though of course he didn't
know what it was. And Mr. Folliott too--the Reverend Mr. Folliott of
St. Peters. He gave me the address in Cliftonville, quite the best end
of the town; there's such a lot in a good address, don't you think?
You know Margate?"

"How are you, dear?" said Louie gently. "Yes, your cousin told me you
were going away for a bit."

"Right away," said Kitty. "I can, you see; I haven't got to work if I
don't want to; though I'm not rich, of course. Neither is Annie, but I
don't like to see men doing the housework like Cousin Frank for all
that. I've told Frank so again and again. '_Be_ an agent,' I've said
time after time; 'for typewriters, or mangles, or tea, or anything you
like, but get out of the house; it isn't a man's place.' And it
isn't.... You've heard?" she broke off suddenly to say.

She blinked at Louie. Her neck above her nightgown was hardly more
substantial than that of a chicken; her hands seemed to have become
as veined as a skeleton leaf. Louie took one of them.

"Always running errands and setting the table--it isn't a man's life,"
Kitty continued. "'What does agent _mean_?' I said to him. 'Pull
yourself together and _make_ it mean something, Frank!' I said.
'You're not very big, but you're strong, and you've got your wits
about you,' I said.... You've heard?" she demanded once more.

"Well, tell me how you are," said Louie, patting the thin hand
soothingly.

"But have you heard the news? Glad tidings for all. 'Come unto Me, and
I will give you rest'--that's what we all want--rest; though why they
should print 'Come' in red and 'unto' in green and 'Me' in purple, and
all the letters like twigs, I'm sure I can't tell you, my dear. And
always Oxford frames. I must ask Mr. Folliott. 'Though your sins be as
crimson----'"

"You haven't asked how my little boy is, Kitty," said Louie.

"'Suffer the little children, and forbid them not'--how is he?"

But she did not wait for an answer. She was off again--the doctor, the
Reverend Mr. Folliott, her approaching visit to Margate. And always
she returned to the indignity of a man's doing women's work about the
house. It was in this connection that she suddenly mentioned, in a way
that gave Louie a slight start, the name of Mr. Jeffries.

"I will at least say that for him," she prattled; "I shouldn't have
got sick of the sight of him; out of the house at half-past nine he'd
have been, and that would have been the end of him till six o'clock;
not always bumping into you like Frank. I suppose you know Miss
Levey's there too, at his Company? He's getting on there like
anything. So's Mr. Mackie; you remember Mr. Mackie? He takes the
auction himself now on Mondays and Thursdays; in Oxford Street;
everybody stops as they walk past; he's a caution, is Mr. Mackie, I
can tell you! But of course Jeff"--here she became mysterious, and
nodded once or twice--"Jeff's on the way up--up. It's a different
class of work from Mr. Mackie's; better, as you might say; he's in the
Confidential Exchange Department, Miriam says----"

"How is Miss Levey?" Louie asked, at a loss what else to say.

"Oh, in the pink--but the soul's the chief thing; what shall it profit
a man; and I don't know whether her soul's in the pink. Do you always
_hold_ with the Church of England, Louie?" she asked earnestly.

There was nothing to be made of her. She ran on weakly, irresponsibly,
from trifle to trifle, and it was at Louie's own risk that she gave
her talk any significance at all.... Suddenly she insisted that she
herself had broken the engagement, not he. She spoke of his place in
the Company--it was the Freight and Ballast Company; it appeared to be
a "permanency." He was getting on--on; _he_ wouldn't polish brasses
and take the lodgers' boots to be mended!... As she talked, Louie
looked round the poor, neat little bedroom. It had framed texts and a
picture of a lady shipwrecked in a nightgown; this was entitled
"Simply to Thy Cross I cling." There was a good deal of muslin about,
tied back with flyblown bows.

But suddenly Kitty seemed to remember something. Louie was once more
gently patting the hand on the counterpane when she gave a quick
little clutch and sat up.

"They wrote to you to come, didn't they?" she asked, looking hard at
Louie.

"Yes, dear. I'd have come sooner if I'd known. The letter was sent on
from Mortlake Road. I came as soon as I got it."

"That's all right," said Kitty, nodding mysteriously again. "I want to
talk to you. Is the door shut?"

"Yes; but don't talk. Let me talk to you instead."

"No; there's something I want to say, and I shall forget it if I don't
say it now.... You heard about it, didn't you? I don't mean the glad
tidings for all----"

"Lie down, dear." (Kitty was squatting up in bed.) "Tell me the next
time I come. I'll come again."

"No, I must tell you now. Though Jeff's sins be as scarlet. Of course
you heard about Archie?"

"Hush."

"Of course you'd be down on him; quite right; so was Jeff. Jeff didn't
half give him a talking to, I can tell you! 'Oh, I'll give him a
dressing down,' he said; he was pretending it wasn't much, so as not
to alarm me; but _I_ know him! 'Miss Causton and me?' he said. 'What a
ridiculous idea!' And he made Archie apologise before the whole
school. And now Archie's gone, and they said it was suicide; but what
I can't understand is about Jeff's having that black eye, that very
day. He'd fallen when he was drunk, he said, but Jeff never got drunk.
He said he tripped on the step; but he never _got_ drunk, if you
understand what I mean. Wine is a mocker, isn't it, Louie? But I'm
sure Jeff wasn't drunk. He isn't that kind of man."

Louie herself wondered why she should interpose as quickly and
peremptorily as she did. She wondered, too, why she should do so in
the words she used and in a voice so thin and harsh.

"Oh--of _course_ he was drunk! My father keeps a public-house, so I
ought to know. And they often get black eyes when they're drunk. Let's
talk about something else."

"Well," said Kitty, with her head on one side, "a public-house is as
paying a business as there is, especially in a poor neighbourhood. But
I'd rather have my little bit in tramways. People ought to be careful
how they invest their money; dividends aren't everything; what shall
it profit a man? So you think I needn't worry about Jeff's black eye?"

All at once Louie felt an almost hysterical need to turn Kitty's weak
wanderings into another direction--any other direction. Glibly she
began to improvise.

"It's horrid," she said, her voice a little raised. "I've seen them at
my father's. They get drunk, and fall, and then they get black eyes
quite easily. And," she ran on regardlessly, "they knock themselves
about fearfully! I saw a man in the Harrow Road one night----"

Feverishly she extemporised. To something she had once seen from the
top of a bus she gave colour and circumstance. Kitty was impressed.
"Dear me!" she said.

Then, when the danger, whatever it was, seemed to be averted, Louie
turned, though not much more calmly, to Margate. Kitty was perfectly
docile; Margate or that dangerous other were all the same to her.
Louie had never been to Margate, but she compared Margate with other
places--Bournemouth, Ilfracombe, Scarboro.

"I should like to go to Scarboro," Kitty mused--"Harrogate
too--Harrogate's tremendously toney, isn't it?"

"Very; all hotels and kursaals and pump rooms and things," averred
Louie, who had never been to Harrogate either.

Then, ten minutes later, she rose. She said good-bye. But even as she
did so she received another start. Kitty had suddenly called in a
sharp, loud voice.

"Was that Annie at the door?"

"No," said Louie, her nerves all on edge. "There's nobody."

"Open the door and look!"

Louie did so. There was nobody. She returned to the bed again. Kitty
was once more squatting up. She still spoke sharply.

"It's all very well to be so cocksure," she said, "but if Annie was to
guess, or Miriam Levey or any of them, it would be all U P, I can tell
you! Or Evie Soames either! I only told you because you're different
and can hold your tongue! The tongue is a little member, so the best
thing people can do is to shut up, you take my tip! And _I_ broke it
off, mind you! There's as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it,
without girls making themselves cheap, and if he ever wants to know
I'll tell him straight--no drunks and black eyes for me! Not that I
don't forgive my enemies; I'm as good at that as the next one; but
when I'm engaged again it'll be to somebody who's TT absolutely,
though he does clean the knives!" Then, dropping her voice again, she
said equably: "Good-bye, dear--you will come again, won't you? I
sha'n't be going for a fortnight--the rooms aren't at liberty
yet--there isn't a sea view, but it isn't a minute from the Ramsgate
tram--you must come and stay with me----"

Louie left her. Downstairs in the hall she had a few words with
Kitty's cousin. She asked when the engagement with Mr. Jeffries had
been broken off, and was told a year ago. Part of the time since then
Kitty had spent with another cousin, Alf Windus, who lived in Kilburn
and played the first fiddle at the Metropolitan in Edgware Road; part
she had spent at Alf's sister-in-law's at Wealdstone; and for the rest
of the time she had been at the Hickleys'. She was only a little
flighty at times, and Mrs. Hickley was too busy, what with breakfasts
at different hours and some liking one thing and some another, to pay
much attention to her. She would have taken her for nothing if she
could, but life was a struggle and business was business, and Mrs.
Hickley had been lucky enough to let her room for the time she would
be away at Margate. If Kitty really had anything to keep from her
cousin, apparently (Louie concluded) she had kept it. Probably Kitty's
condition (Mrs. Hickley added) was a result of the shock of Archie
Merridew's suicide, coinciding with her rupture with Mr. Jeffries.
Beyond that Mrs. Hickley minded her own business--plenty, too,----

"Thank you for coming," she said, opening the door for Louie.

"I shall come again if I may," Louie replied.

Already she knew that she would go again--must go again--though it was
only when she had left the house behind her that she began to ask
herself why. Then followed another dialogue. The critical Louie began
it.

"Well, what did I tell you? His engagement's off, and he's getting on
in his business. I'm right so far, eh?"

"Too right," the other Louie muttered. "Let it rest."

"Will it let you rest--that's the question! Well, what do you want
next--his engagement to Evie Soames?"

"I don't want anything. I've got my boy and my living to earn. That
fills my life."

"Then why are you going to see Kitty again? Come, don't shirk it. You
know why you're going. You're going to----"

"I'm not!"

"You're going to protect him! If that poor creature thinks she
guesses, you're going to tell her the notion's perfectly absurd!
You're going to lie to her! If she has weak fancies, you're going to
see that they're just as wide of the truth as they can be. Do you
still deny what the truth is? After whatever the tale is he's been
telling about drunkenness and a black eye? _Is_ he that kind of man?
_Isn't_ that just as likely as not to be one of his blinds? A man has
to be cunning, you know, to hoodwink a coroner's jury, but somehow he
seems to have done it."

"I don't know anything about it."

"You mean you believe he hasn't done it? Then why are you going to see
Kitty again? Oh, don't pretend to me! I tell you you're going to
protect him. And why are you going to protect him? (Ah, I didn't think
of that before, but I see it now!) You'll love him a little more still
just for that! You'll love him because you have his safety in your
hands. You'll keep it in your hands. Even if you have to take Kitty to
live with you, so that you can watch her every spare moment, you'll
take care she never, never knows. You're planning it now. You're
going to have a right in that man no other woman on earth has, Evie
Soames or anybody else. And you're going to take him from Evie Soames
too, if you can!"

The other attempted irony. "What, me? With my story?"

"You only regret your story because it stands now in your way of
getting him! Would you marry Roy now even if you could gain a kingdom
by it? Why, you wouldn't before, let alone now! What are you going to
see Kitty again for--to-morrow? We shall see! Your nerves are all
a-jump at this moment; you don't feel it safe to leave here even for a
few hours! And another thing. Miriam Levey seems to be at his place,
wherever it is, and you're positively trembling about _that_! While
you're trying to worm things out of Kitty on the one side, she'll be
at the other--_you_ know what she is! So the first thing you'll do
will be to find out exactly what Kitty's got into her head."

But here the normal Louie temporarily triumphed. "What a tale you're
making up!" she laughed. "These things simply do not happen. Actually,
you're trying to force it on me that I love a man simply because he's
committed a----"

"Not simply because----"

"Well, that I'm in love with a man who has committed one. Tell that to
the world, and see how you're laughed at!... Oh no, it's too much.
People don't do it, especially when it's guesswork, pure and
simple----"

So she triumphed. The other Louie held her peace.

But for all that she went to see Kitty again on the morrow.


II

It was an error of judgment that caused Louie to leave the
photographer's in Bond Street. The money she owed to Buck and Chaff
was on her mind; she saw that Richenda Earle had been right; she was
not yet out in the open. She sought to diminish her indebtedness by
finding a better-paid post.

The opportunity presented itself. She obtained, at a salary of three
pounds a week, the coveted secretaryship. Never mind to whom she
became secretary; he is now a renowned author; and Louie was with him
for just a fortnight. At the end of that time he offered to double her
salary. Louie's answer was to walk immediately out of his house. She
had now no job at all.

The story of the pinch shall be passed over lightly. The boy did not
feel it; it was she who tightened her belt. Promising herself that it
was for the last time, she borrowed of Buck, and then removed to Edith
Grove, taking two small rooms in the same house as Myrtle Morris, the
model. But Myrtle had gone for the Christmas season into pantomime,
and as Louie was out all day, and asleep when Myrtle returned at
night, she saw little of her. She would have gone into pantomime too,
but she was too late, and still hoped for something better. Of
necessity Celeste remained with her; Celeste kept the place going with
her needle. This was at the beginning of 1898. February found her
again in a cash-desk, this time at Slater's. The desk had a mirrored
panel in the front of it that extended from the narrow counter to the
floor, and at first Louie wondered why clerks and shop-assistants put
down their money, stood back from the desk, and grinned. Then one
day, when somebody else was inside the box, she noticed the illusion.
The head and shoulders of the girl in the cage appeared to be
continued downwards by the trousers of a man. As she could not afford
to throw up her job, she continued to bear the grins disdainfully.
After her day's work she acquired from Celeste the art of crochet. Her
mats and table-centres and borders for teacloths went in with
Celeste's own work.

Her improved French enabled her to pass, in April, from the cash-desk
at Slater's to one at a foreign restaurant in Soho. She still lived in
Edith Grove. For several weeks that summer she was again at Earls
Court, but with the reopening of the theatres she obtained a place in
the ladies' cloakroom at His Majesty's. One night she helped Miss
Elwell, the daughter of Sir James Elwell of the Treasury, off with her
cloak. She was unrecognised. She wondered how B. Minor was getting on.

She was still at His Majesty's at Christmas 1898; but the New Year saw
her at still another place--a Ladies' Turkish Baths, in St. James's.
Buck, angry and disapproving of the whole course of her life, liked
this least of all; massage somehow brought it home to him. But there
was a worse shock still in store for Buck. In the spring of '99 Louie
became an artist's model.

Myrtle Morris introduced her to the profession and to Roy's friend,
Billy Izzard, at the same time. This also was in Edith Grove. Billy
Izzard, whose large, boyish face and loose, shambling figure somehow
gave Louie the impression that he had either grown too quickly or else
not yet filled out, was telling Miss Morris, with a candour entirely
disarming, that for some purpose or other her own form was no good at
all; and Miss Morris asked him why he didn't try the Models' Club. He
snorted.

"Try it? I have tried it; tried everything. Fact of the matter is,
it's like going to a Registry Office for servants; you find the rich
people have snapped up all the best before they get there. Old Henson
gets 'em. He's got the very girl I want; Miss Gale; but I can't pay
what Henson pays. And the rest of you are like that egg--good in
parts."

Louie wondered whether Billy had ever heard her name before; she found
a way of making sure. The talk turned to holiday-places for the coming
summer, and Louie contrived to mention the Somerset coast and the
Bristol Channel. The unsuspecting Billy told her that he had once been
yachting there with a fellow and had had a smash-up. It was amusing.
According to Billy, the other fellow had rather fancied himself as a
patcher-up of broken centre-boards and suchlike, had put in at some
place or other, and had said he'd made the centre-board all right; and
he'd come pretty near drowning the pair of them off a place called
Combe Martin. Luckily they'd been spied by the coastguard, and a boat
had been put out to them. "Rottenest piece of navigation in England,"
Billy grumbled on; "there's a place called the Boiling Pot----" He
described it....

Louie felt a little gush of gratitude towards Roy. He had not
chattered. But of course he would not----

She did not offer at once to sit to Billy; it was a fortnight later
that she screwed up her courage to do so. During that time she thought
the matter out. Perhaps the stark simplicity of the thing attracted
her. No acquirement she was ever likely to possess would greatly
improve her circumstances; it would probably be the same to the end of
the chapter--cash-desk, waitress, Earls Court--Earls Court, mannequin,
and a private secretaryship with an offer of double wages. At two
colleges she had learned little or nothing; she lacked application;
but here was something that quietly brushed acquirements
aside--something that went flagrantly by favour. It was femininity
reduced to its simplest statement. She had no fear of Billy Izzard.
She guessed that to him she would be little more than a more complex
whitewashed cube or cone or pyramid.

She did not even colour when she made her proposal to him....

"But I expect you'll go off to old Henson or some other swell
presently," he sighed, as she stood before him....

And of course Chaff, barring her face that was best suited with a
large shady hat, had given her her testimonial long before.

Buck was furious. The original, genuine Pilgrim of Love had reason
enough to know what happened in studios. Young women of high birth (in
Louie's case it would probably be a young man) began to take their
lunches there, and one day burst into jealous unhappy tears, and after
that the Pilgrimage began. But Louie only laughed at him. She reminded
him that she had reason to regard herself as a pilgrim too. At that
Buck looked hard at her.

"Little woman," he said slowly, "d'you mean--that there is somebody?"
Louie laughed again, but more consciously.

"Once or twice lately," Buck continued, still looking hard at her,
"I've wondered whether there might be----"

"How can there be, daddy?"

"Well, the other isn't befitting," said Buck, shaking his head and
returning to the original point.

"My daddy did it."

"Ah, men's different. For high ladies it--it isn't befitting."

"I'm not a young girl, daddy."

"No." Buck sighed. If he had only known her when she was a young girl!
But the whims of the Scarisbricks were still the Scarisbricks' whims,
and as such above his judgment. "But I want to see this Mr. Izzard,"
he added grimly.

"That you certainly sha'n't," Louie replied promptly. "Fancy your
taking me round everywhere I go!"

"Everywhere?" Buck repeated, alarmed anew.

"Of course. If it's a business it's a business. Why, Mr. Izzard alone
would be--dreadful! It's no good, daddy; you can't change my mind."

He saw that he could not, but he still tried. It only delayed a little
her carrying of her point. In the end--well, she was her mother's
daughter. There was no more to be said.

So she began to make the round of the Chelsea studios, and presently
moved, with Celeste and the boy, to more comfortable quarters in
Lavender Hill, Clapham Junction. This took her farther from her work
in Chelsea, but brought her nearer to the Lambeth and Westminster
Schools of Art, where also she obtained sittings, sometimes during
the day, sometimes in the evenings also. She sat for Billy when Billy
could afford to pay her. "No, no--no tick, Billy," she told him once;
"I don't do this for amusement." Of the boy Billy knew nothing....
Buck, still strongly averse from the whole proceeding, at first
refused to hear her gossip of the day's work; but, as his silence did
not alter matters, little by little he began to come round. Soon they
exchanged experiences quite freely. He told her what Sopley had said
about his deltoid, Henson about his thigh. "You vain old daddy!" she
said, stroking his cheek, "I believe for two pins you'd do it again!"
She took a pleasure in fondly shocking him in the same sort. Sometimes
he mused long. You will admit that it was something to muse over. And
so--well, so Louie, throwing acquirements aside with her clothes,
became, by virtue of her peculiar commodity, economically emancipated.
As female models, women are eminently better than men.

She did fairly well at it. So well did she do that from the three
rooms in Lavender Hill (the third one Celeste's) piece by piece her
landlady's furniture began to disappear. Her own took its place. She
intended, when she had enough of her own, to save the difference in
rent between furnished and unfurnished quarters by taking a small
flat. So her two chests of drawers and her wardrobe were her own; so
were much of her cutlery and bed and table linen; and so, of course,
were Jimmy's various paraphernalia. But she was not ready to leave
yet. The summer of 1900, she thought, would be early enough.

And in one particular at least she was now able to hold up her head.
She still owed money both to Buck and Chaff, but she knew as much
about the struggle for a livelihood as Richenda Earle herself. And
she had not grizzled. Life had not knocked her out. She was her
father's daughter after all.

And yet, once more, she felt herself her mother's daughter too. The
reason, which was not very far to seek, was this:

The earlier stages of that furtive romance that in the end had left
her former husband no Rest but the Grave were known only to Mrs.
Chaffinger herself. Henson had not guessed them; Lord Moone had seen
only the resultant scandal of them. But Louie understood a little now.
She could at least guess what had happened to her mother between her
first setting eyes on the splendid Buck and that final petulant,
pathetic cry: "Oh, that I should have to beg a man to marry me!" By
sympathy she was able now to divine the sighs, the half-acknowledged
longings, the half-shamed daydreams, the revulsions, the sinkings back
again. For Louie now knew something of these things within herself.

Not that there was not harder stuff in Louie. There was. There was,
for example, that sense of proportion which is humour. How could her
thoughts of Mr. Jeffries not be rather preposterous? She found it
difficult sometimes to remember even his personal appearance; she had
well-nigh forgotten his voice; many idle repetitions had dulled the
memory of that odd little thrill she had felt when her hand had lain
in his. True, she remembered these things in a way. She remembered the
tawny bulk of him, the lion's eyes, the gloss of his hair, the
modeless fashion of his speech; but these were mere noted facts, no
more hers than everybody else's. Yet what (she asked herself) had
become of her sense of humour that she should want something of him
that nobody else had? What had happened to her sense of proportion
that she did not forget him as she had forgotten scores of people of
whom she had seen far, far more? And how had it come about that, for
one thought she cast on Roy, Mr. Jeffries had twenty? And why this new
and curious understanding of her mother?

She asked herself these questions behind the grilles of her
cash-desks, behind the counters of her Earls Court stalls, posing or
crocheting on her model thrones, riding backwards and forwards to her
sittings or what not on the tops of omnibuses. Usually she answered
herself more or less like this:

"It looks very much as if I was making of him what he seems to have
made of that Soames girl--a sort of _idee fixe_; if I were to fall
really in love now, I suppose I shouldn't think any more about him.
Luckily it doesn't matter; it's my own affair. Good gracious, suppose
he knew! He'd think me as imbecile as I am!--There I go again!" (This
probably, some minutes later.) "Suppose I _had_ met him earlier, and
things _had_ been different--what about it? What's the good of
remembering all that now? Well, it puts the time on down this beastly
Kennington Lane.... Thank goodness I'm not likely to come across him;
I can't help thinking something would happen if I did.... Poor
mother!" she usually ended inconsequentially, "I suppose she'd be
about my age. I'm turned thirty--thirty-one in fact--shall have to
stop counting soon. Time you stopped counting when it occurs to you
that your mother had dreams just as silly as yours----"

And so, whether this Mr. Jeffries meant much or little to her, he did
not mean so much but that any trivial near occurrence--a cold of young
Jimmy's, a cold of her own that prevented her from sitting for a day
or two, or a fall in the crochet-market--put Mr. Jeffries and the wild
and tangled ideas that seemed to cloak his image temporarily quite out
of her thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

When early in the year 1900 she got regular sittings for a time with
an artist who lived in St. John's Wood, she never went up or down
Tottenham Court Road in the Victoria bus without half expecting to run
across Evie Soames, who lived in Woburn Place. Because she did not
meet her, she concluded that very likely she lived there no longer.
But, late on a windy afternoon in March, at about the time when the
street lamps were being lighted, she did meet her.

It was opposite the Adam and Eve, in Euston Road, and on either of the
two women's parts there was a curious momentary hesitation. If Evie
Soames still lived in Woburn Place and was going home, the first bus
that came would do for her, and Louie had already seen her glance as
it approached; but as it happened, that bus was the Victoria bus for
which Louie herself was waiting. Louie spoke; it seemed to her that
not to speak would be to apologise, by silence, for that episode in
her career that had brought Kitty Windus in haste to the Nursing Home
in Mortlake Road. A large parcel she was carrying gave her an excuse
not to shake hands.

"How do you do?" she said.

Something, she could not have told what, had instantly drawn her eyes
to the girl's attire. Evie Soames was wearing a black jacket and black
fur cap, but the wind, turning the jacket aside, showed the narrow
black and white stripes of the blouse beneath.

"Oh--fancy meeting you!" Evie said, turning her dark eyes as if she
had only that moment seen Louie. There was something in her manner
that Louie interpreted as meaning, "Very well, if I've got to be
cordial I'll _be_ cordial!" "Are you going by this bus?" she added.

"Yes."

"Oh! Where are you living now--Putney?"

It may be that Louie met any slight the last word might have conveyed
half-way and more. She replied, a little shortly: "No, Lavender Hill;
I change at Victoria. After you----"

"Oh no--after you!"

Louie ascended; they couldn't stand on the kerb discussing points of
precedence. "Let's go in front," Evie said, "and then men won't smoke
on us," and they settled down.

"Well," Evie said, adjusting the apron, "and how are _you_?"

"Thank you," said Louie, "perfectly well."

"There's room for your parcel here. Such ages since we met! Let me
see, when was it?"

They discussed when it was, and then, "And have you seen Kitty Windus
lately?" Evie asked.

Since her first visit to the Hickleys' Louie had seen Kitty perhaps
half-a-dozen times in all, not oftener. Kitty had been to Margate,
thence to Whetstone, and after that to Alf Windus the violinist's.
Louie had simply not been able to see her oftener; she had had far too
much to do. And, after all, nothing (the nothing of Louie's fears and
fancies) seemed to have happened. Except to herself (Louie guessed)
Kitty made no mysterious allusions to black eyes. She was merely
puzzled, pathetic, harmless. She had not that perilous thing, a
preconceived theory into which events had a fulfilling way of dropping
of themselves. So Louie replied to Evie Soames in a tone as casual as
her own:

"Oh yes, I've seen her several times. Of course you heard that her
engagement to Mr. Jeffries was broken off?"

"Oh yes," said Evie, looking straight in front of her.

"Have you seen her, then?"

"Oh no. But of course Mr. Jeffries himself would know, wouldn't
he?--that is, if you call it breaking off when a person just
disappears without saying where she is or anything about it. Don't
bother to unbutton; I have some pennies----"

But Louie also had pennies. "Any more fares?" the conductor called,
and then went downstairs again. The two women fell into a silence. The
early lamplight came and went on their faces as the bus jogged on.

Presently the silence seemed to have taken almost the character of a
contest as to who should speak next, with either resolved that it
should not be herself. Louie knew perfectly well what was the matter.
Miss Soames might speak glancingly of Mortlake Road and offer to pay
her bus fares, but really she hated Louie because of Louie's discovery
in the old ledger-room on that examination day that now seemed so long
ago. The girl seemed to be still in some sort of half mourning--but
Louie did not want to think much of that and all that it might mean.
Rather desperately, she strove to forget that she had ever had a
theory about what might have driven Evie Soames into black and of
what might happen when she went into colours again. She must, she told
herself sharply, have a hideous mind ever to have thought these
things. Indeed, she was so short with herself about it that,
relinquishing the contest of silence, she again made the small
immediate thing banish the large shadowy one behind.

"Do you ever see Miriam Levey nowadays?" she asked suddenly.

"No," Evie replied. At any rate she had not been the first to speak.

"Oh? But aren't she and Mr. Jeffries at the same place now?"

"Yes, I believe they are--in fact, I know they are. I suppose Kitty
told you?"

"Yes."

"Poor Kitty! But let me see: was Miriam at the office when Kitty came
to Mortlake Road? I thought it was after that she went."

"I've seen Kitty more than once," said Louie, compressing her lips.
The bus was slowing down opposite the Oxford.

"Ah, yes, you said so. Well, remember me to her when you see her
again, won't you? I get down here. I hope you'll get your parcel home
all right; it's rather a large one, isn't it? Good-bye."

As Evie Soames's figure was lost in the crowd that jostled in the
lights of the Horse Shoe Louie did not look round. She was too angry.
"Good gracious!" she exclaimed, "the insupportable little creature!
Why, I never looked at one of my mother's housemaids so! _De haut en
bas_--her to me! But I did catch you that day, Miss Polly Ross, and
you know it!"

But as the bus moved southwards again, she was trying once more to
forget that white stripe in Evie Soames's dress. She did not want to
think that anything had suddenly seemed to come a stride nearer. And
she would now rather not have been told, what apparently was the fact,
that, whether frequently or not, Evie Soames did see Mr. Jeffries.

The parcel she was taking home contained a dress; she had been sitting
in it; but it was not the oyster-grey. The old oyster-grey, too,
served to bring her nearer to her mother and that weak flicker of
romance long ago in Henson's studio. Not for worlds would she have had
Celeste see the idiotic looks she sometimes gave that dress in which
she had danced with Mr. Jeffries. And sometimes she would suddenly
toss it aside, roughly, anyhow. She was not seventeen (she would tell
herself), to moon over a flower a man had given her or a dance
programme on which he had scrawled his name. She was a woman of turned
thirty-one (she rubbed it in), with her living to earn and an
illegitimate son to provide for.... But sometimes she was very wistful
too. She had never (she sighed) really been a girl of seventeen at
all; looking back, she saw that she had missed that. She blamed
nobody; no doubt she had been unruly, ill-conditioned, unmanageable;
still, she had missed that. The thought always sent her off into her
reveries again; and then, how differently, how much more admirably,
she was able to plan everything to herself! Over and over again she
built it all up, unbuilt it again, rearranged it, played with it. Had
she, as a girl of seventeen, met Mr. Jeffries--had this circumstance
been different, that particular not been the same--had she nursed no
grudge against her mother--had it been Mr. Jeffries, not Roy, with
whom she had kicked her long legs during the vacations at Mallard
Bois--had she, in a word, had the arranging of the world herself and
the choosing of the places she and he were to occupy in it----

"Bosh!" she usually cut herself abruptly off. "I shall be afraid of
turning a corner soon for fear of walking into the gentleman! What
shall I take in for supper?"

       *       *       *       *       *

She did not know yet--indeed it was only some months later that she
learned it, but it is set down here--that already, at a Langham
Exhibition, Billy Izzard had one day seen a big stranger standing
before one of his sketches, had gone up and spoken to him, and had
liked the fellow--had liked his hewn slab of a face with the yellow
eyes in it so much that presently, having an old sketch he was never
likely to sell, he had given it to him. But Billy would at any time
rather give away a sketch to somebody he liked than sell one to
somebody he didn't like, and he still set, moreover, less than their
real value on those paintings of flowers that he "knocked off" in a
couple of keen and nervous hours. One of these sketches, by the way,
Louie herself coveted--a straggle of violets, a few white ones among
them, in a lustre bowl; and she offered a certain number of sittings
in exchange for it--another elementary example of the transaction in
kind. But Billy shook his head. He wanted that for a wedding present
for a fellow, he said. He'd give Louie another some time--after he'd
found another studio. He was sick of Chelsea; when a fellow got to
know the cracks in the flagstones it was time he moved. He thought of
going up north somewhere, Camden Town or Hampstead or St. John's
Wood--better air. So Louie could make up her mind to the bus-rides,
or else move too. He wasn't going to let Henson get hold of her.

But Louie still delayed to move from Lavender Hill.


III

Louie's adventures, as she continued to sit, would fill a book: but
not this book. Her sittings were the accidents of her life; her real
life she reckoned from Sunday to Sunday. Sundays were the blest days
she devoted to Jimmy.

He was now nearly four years old, and (as Celeste continued
delightedly to exult) "existed" and "manifested" indeed. Louie herself
gave him her bath before she set out of a morning; she did so in a
waterproof and little else--why, the splashed condition of the
wall-paper in the poky little bathroom explained. It was the same old
waterproof she had worn at Rainham Parva. Buck's admiration of the
boy's chest and limbs was merely fatuous; he himself was teaching him
to swim at the Public Baths. He had announced to Louie, with a great
show of harshness, that the money she was fool enough to refuse, the
boy would have the benefit of; that at least was something she
couldn't prevent, he informed her, and though Louie scolded fondly
back, it was a weight off her mind. Chaff, the other grandfather, came
occasionally on Sundays; he came, for example, on the Sunday after the
opening of the Royal Academy. He brought a catalogue with him, and,
taking Louie into a corner, desired her to mark the numbers for which
she had sat. Whether the poor old fellow meditated the buying of them
all up, or what else, there was no telling. Her sittings, too, were
"just like Mops." Perhaps that was more than some of the pictures
were.

But it is not true, as has been reported, that for Henson's last
picture, "Resurgam," Buck Causton and his daughter posed together.
Buck never posed after his first marriage. Louie only posed for Henson
once, and that was in wet drapery. She caught a pretty cold in
consequence. She exulted in that cold; it gave her three whole days
with little Jimmy. They played with tops and balls and soldiers on the
floor. The boy wanted an ensign's uniform, like that of the fourth
Lord Moone in the miniature, and Chaff bought him a dragoon's helmet
and cuirass. Buck laughed because the cuirass was already too small;
and then he sighed. Perhaps he remembered the suit of armour of Big
Hugo at Mallard Bois.

Well, if a little money was all that was necessary, the boy could be
put into the army by-an-by.

And so things might have gone on had they been destined to do so; but
into Louie's life of busy sitting and foolish dreaming and Sunday's
rompings with her boy, there came a disruptive force. Kitty Windus
brought it on a Sunday morning in early June.

Celeste was reading a story to Jimmy when she walked in; Louie was
putting the last touches to a piece of crochet; and all three were
awaiting Buck's arrival with the trap--he was going to take them to
Hampton Court. She entered unannounced, and, to Louie's way of
thinking, would have been better in bed. Her face seemed unusually
small and thin; she spoke in a high, painful voice.

"Louie, I want to see you--quick----"

It was as if Louie too caught an instant alarm. Hurriedly she dropped
her just-finished crochet and rose.

"What's the matter?" she asked quickly. "Come into my bedroom."

In the quite prettily furnished little bedroom Kitty began to walk
rapidly to and fro. Once or twice she turned her looks to the
brown-papered walls, as if she expected to find texts there; for the
rest the blinking little eyes roved ceaselessly at about knee-height
from the floor. Then she stopped before Louie.

"They're getting married in a fortnight," she cried harshly,
accusingly.

There is no need for Louie to ask who, nor did she know what instinct
again, as before, bade her take up a definite attitude without a
moment's delay. She only felt in her very bones that delay would be
perilous, and that not the shade of an expression must cross her face
that was not natural and unsurprised.

"Yes, of course; didn't you know?" she said quietly. "Mr. Jeffries and
Evie Soames, you mean?"

Again Kitty made that painful little sound--_a bouche fermee_. "You
knew?" she cried.

A simple lie would not have availed; this was so obvious that Louie
lied deliberately, circumstantially and at length.

"Yes, of course I knew. Of course I did. Do you mean to say you
didn't? I made certain you did; I was going to write to you. In about
a fortnight, isn't it? I'm--I'm giving them a wedding present;
it's--it's that piece of crochet you saw me doing. It isn't much, but
these things don't go by value; it's the intention. What are you going
to give them?"

She almost blushed for the lameness of it. As a matter of fact, she
had intended that piece of crochet for the new flat, when she should
take it; but to soothe Kitty now was of more importance than crochet
for new flats. She watched her covertly, anxiously.

"How did you know?" Kitty flashed out, again stopping in her walk.

"Sit down, dear; sit on the edge of my bed; I'm sure you're tired. How
did I know? Why, I saw Evie herself. I saw her on a bus one day in
Tottenham Court Road. It was near the Adam and Eve. And--I say,
Kitty"--dropping her voice confidentially, she made an appeal to
Kitty's hunger for gossip--anything for a diversion--"I doubt if
they'll have too much to live on--it takes a tidy bit to get married
on--and I don't suppose she has any shares to sell."

But Kitty did not seem to hear. She flashed out again.

"Why didn't you tell me?"

"My _dear_! I made sure you'd heard it from Miriam Levey. And I wasn't
sure where you were; you move about so, you know. I wonder what Miriam
will give them! Something far more expensive than mine, I expect. And
you ought to give them something too, Kitty. What's done's done, you
know, and after all, lots of engagements are----"

But once more Kitty flashed out. "Oh, _I_ shall give him a bottle of
arnica, or whatever it is, for black eyes!"

Louie laughed almost hysterically at the joke. The tension was getting
almost too much for her. "Oh, come, he isn't a wife-beater yet!" she
protested.

"But he will be, that man!" Kitty cried aloud with frightening
vehemence. "He'd do anything--anything--much he cares! Did you know I
got lost the other night? In Lincolns Inn Fields; policemen coming up
to me, if you please, and asking me where I lived! Much he cares! I
believe it was her all the time--he never wanted me at all, and as
soon as Archie's out of the way he goes and marries her! Miriam Levey
herself says she can't help thinking it's funny--and I can't think
what _your_ game is either, to be going on as if it wasn't! I'll tell
you what _I_ think, if you want to know----"

"Hush, hush, hush!" came from Louie. She had her arms about Kitty.
"Perhaps you're right, dear; he was cruel to you! And"--she rushed
into another extemporisation--"I don't know that I would give him a
present, after all. If one can't forgive an injury one can't, and it's
no good pretending. He did wrong you, and perhaps he oughtn't to be
let off, after all. I won't send him one either."

She said it because it was better to confine Kitty to her own wrongs
than to allow her to approach a number of frightening unknown
possibilities that began with black eyes. And apparently she
succeeded. Kitty fell back on her own injury, and became a little
calmer.

"Oh," she said cunningly, "but you'd have to send yours, and Miriam
Levey'd have to send hers too--then, don't you see, I should be the
only one who didn't, and he'd notice it! I just hope he does notice
it. Serve him right. I wasn't as hard up for a fellow as all that--I
carried on with a fellow at that breaking-up party. I did--you ask Mr.
Mackie.... You _do_ think Jeff never intended to marry me at all,
don't you, Louie?" She peered curiously at Louie.

Well, better that, Louie thought. "I don't think he meant to for a
single moment," she replied.

"Oh, the _rotter_. Come on, let's send your present now. We'll show
him!..."

She was quite eager about it; but Louie kept her in the bedroom a
little longer. Kitty began to speak of texts again. Again she wondered
why "Come" was written in green and "Unto" in red and "Me" in purple,
and why all texts had Oxford frames. "You haven't any, I see," she
said, glancing again round the brown-papered walls. "You ought to have
'Remember thy Creator,' you know, Louie; it always reminds you, you
see. What's this?"

It was one of Billy Izzard's etchings. Kitty examined it with her head
a little on one side.

"It's very nice, whatever it is," she conceded; "but where's the other
one? I always think pictures look better in pairs. But you can get odd
ones cheap sometimes; Mr. Mackie had a great sale of Art Engravings
one day in one of those Oxford Street places--you can hear his voice
right across the street--and _he_ said they were cheap because they
weren't pairs, but they'd do splendidly for the middle of anywhere,
like over a mantelpiece. And what a nice looking-glass! Really, you're
quite comfortable here!"

She seemed to have forgotten all about Mr. Jeffries again. She walked
round Louie's bedroom, bestowing encomiums and preening herself on her
own pound a week.

At midday Buck came, but Louie did not join the party; she sent
Celeste and Jimmy, and herself stayed with Kitty. She hoped Kitty
would not stay long; she wanted to lie down and think--think. Nor did
Kitty stay very long; but before she went she returned to the subject
of the crochet. She wanted the article--it was a teacloth--sent
immediately; she would run out and post it herself, she said; and
_then_, when he got presents from Miriam and Louie and none from
herself, _that_ would be rather a nasty one for Mr. Jeffries!

"Do pack it up. _I'll_ show him I'm not to be trampled on like the
dirt under his feet!" she persisted vindictively; and another approach
to the subject of black eyes caused Louie to yield hurriedly. She
folded the cloth and found a piece of brown paper; Kitty did not
notice that she enclosed no message.

But suddenly Louie had an odd little hesitation. She knew it to be
ridiculous and a sentimentality, but while she did not want to send a
particular message, she yet did not want to send the teacloth entirely
without one. The opportunity for the little secret luxury would
probably not occur again.... Kitty was condescendingly appraising her
furniture again; on the mantelpiece lay a piece of blank card; it
seemed to be there almost for a purpose, and furtively Louie took it.
She scrawled an "L" upon it and slipped it into the parcel.

A few minutes later Kitty left, taking the wedding present with her.

Left at last alone, Louie once more went into her bedroom and threw
herself on her bed. She lay with her hands clasped behind her head,
her gaze now resting on Billy's etching, now straying idly over the
brown-papered walls.

So they were to be married. And after that?

Well, she thought that on the whole she was glad. The curtain was
about to fall on that drama that had begun at the Business School in
Holborn, and so there would be an end of _that_.... What now? What
about those fancy pictures with which she had beguiled herself as she
had ridden on buses and trams and worked at her crochet during the
rests? What about those half-whispered, nonsensical conversations?
What about those drowsy, secret quarters of an hour out of which she
had come with slight starts to smile at herself? They were to be
married. What next?

The answer came as if for months it had been merely awaiting her
pleasure. It was as plain as day that she could now have as much of
these as ever she pleased. For what it was worth, the freedom of her
cuckoo-cloud-land was about to be definitely made over to her. Because
nothing else was hers, that was all the more hers.... Kitty's tidings
brought it so sharply home to her that she forgot that those sweet
hours of licence were no new thing. She forgot that it was no new
thing to walk, in fancy, the woods of Mallard Bois and the lanes of
Rainham Parva with him by her side, no new thing to call his name down
the remembered glades--"Jim!" (not, as others called him, "Jeff"). She
forgot that it was old and outworn already; she saw in it only newness
and liberty and delight. A Jim of sorts was now hers, ineluctably and
for ever--a Jim who did not fool predestined spinsters--a Jim who
would know better than blunder into a blind and stupid marriage--a Jim
whose relentless hand had not--had not--had not----

But here, as she paused, the colour that had made her cheeks rosy
ebbed as if a brush loaded with white had been passed over them. His
ruthless hand had--had--almost certainly had----

It was as if, in her fancy, a prison bell had tolled and a black flag
had been run up in the morning breeze----

He was certainly a murderer; over the threshold of that hideous fact
she must step before she could enter her palace of insubstantial
delights. Stained she must take even the phantom of his hand, or not
at all. Suppose the joy were to leave her, but the horror to remain?

She closed her eyes.

But she opened them again. She faced it. Say he was--that; what then?
The joy and the horror were fatally one. A man capable of
all--all--even of that--and her lover! Oh, the moment the shudder had
passed the worst was over! He had killed; yes, but for a cause! He had
been horribly to be feared; yes, but without the dread of him too she
would not have had the whole of him, and she wanted the whole of him.
_Not_ kill, with such a reason? Withhold death, with something
approaching that was worse than death? Oh, Louie knew all about that;
Miss Cora had told her....

A murder? There were things by the side of which a murder, once you
had made up your mind to it, was a trifle!

       *       *       *       *       *

Are women so? Is it so that they will place their soft hands, like
willow-leaves, in those other hands that may be black with dreadful
work, red with destruction, yet, seeing less than man and more than
man, they care not? Is it so that they will set their lips, as if for
a kiss, against the mouth of war itself with its ten thousand deaths?
It seems to be so. Their loved ones, when they die, do not do so of
fevers and shattered tissues, but of their own clear and trusted
heroism. "Go," they say to the next one, even to the little Jimmy,
"go--and come back if you may--and, though wooden props keep you
together, you shall be beautiful to the mother who bore you--to the
wife whose task it must be to take you to pieces and put you together
again--to the woman who, because of her own heavenly dreaming, cannot
think of the fiend you were in that hour when the call sounded and you
dropped the point of your lance to the charge."

       *       *       *       *       *

But one thing was clear: her dreams must remain dreams. If she would
keep what was left her, she must never, never, never see him now!




PART V

THE CONSOLIDATION


I

The habit of sitting for artists leaves its mark on a woman. This mark
is the lack of mystery--the "looked at" appearance. But it has its
compensations. Chief of these are a physical unconsciousness, an
absence of coquetry, and a liberation of the mind so complete that a
sudden recall has all the effects of shock. Thus, a model posing for a
whole class of men has been known to faint because she has been seen
through the skylight by a "man" who mended the roof.

In some such state of liberation Louie, on an afternoon late in the
June of 1900, posed for Billy Izzard. It was in Billy's new studio, a
large upper room in Camden Town, opposite the Cobden Statue. The place
was so light that Billy had actually had to cut some of the light off.
The upper part of the far window, that towards which Louie's face was
turned, was darkened by a linen blind; the lower part of it was
shrouded with tissue paper. The whole corner was enclosed by a screen.
It was there that Billy did his etching. Behind another screen was
Billy's bed. At present Louie's clothes lay on it.

It was half-past five, but the best light of a changeable day. They
had had tea; the tray with the tea-things lay on the floor; and,
except that he grunted occasionally, "Raise your hand a bit," or "Head
a bit more round," Billy's absorption in his work was complete. He had
even worked through the short rests. During these intervals Louie had
crocheted. The crochet, only a little whiter than the foot near it,
lay on the throne now.

Louie was not thinking; you can hardly call it thought when any trifle
on which your eyes rest gives your mind its cue. Louie's eyes, the
only parts of her that moved, had rested on the crochet, and that had
brought Celeste into her mind. Celeste was leaving her; it had
something to do with phylloxera and a brother's vines; Celeste,
between two loves, must leave the boy and return to Provence. Then
Louie's eyes fell on the chair in which Billy etched, and presently
Kitty occupied her--Kitty, who liked her etchings in pairs, but
surmised that odd ones came cheaper. Louie had really no choice but to
do what she was going to do about Kitty. Jimmy must have somebody
during the day, and Louie, moreover, must have ten shillings a week
from somewhere. As a matter of fact, Kitty had agreed to pay her
fifteen shillings, and, in the intervals of looking after Jimmy,
proposed to type. Then, as her eyes moved to the screen round the bed,
she remembered that her boots must be resoled. They would carry
another sole, and it had been raining off and on during the greater
part of the day. And then something else brought little Jimmy into her
mind again.

For a wonder, she had not thought of a bigger Jimmy all the afternoon.
But on other afternoons she had. Billy sometimes remarked on a passing
tender colour; she always had to restrain a smile at that. Her tender
colour? There was not a particle of that looked-at superficies of hers
that, often and often, did not answer to a secret thought.... Perhaps
Billy, plain common-sense man, could have told her what those secret
thoughts really meant. Perhaps Billy, sensitive painter, could have
told her how sweet and pale and charming things must shun comparison
with the robuster stuff. As, in some delicate pastoral or _fete
galante_, art might turn its happy eyes inward on itself, so that the
putting on of a slipper and the nymph's hand trembling in a silken
fold and the promised favour of a smiling look hardly die because they
hardly live, so Louie too turned her eyes inwards. What she found
within herself still sufficed her.

"Better rest a bit," said Billy, looking up as he began to scrub in a
background.

Louie stepped down from the throne, cast a wrap about her shoulders,
and began to crochet again.

Again she hoped she was not doing an unwise thing in having Kitty to
come and live with her. But the flat was at last taken. It was a top
one in the New King's Road. A Board School now blocks out the pretty
view that Louie presently had at night, of the distant cupful of light
that was Earls Court, with the illuminated advertisement of the Big
Wheel appearing and disappearing as the structure slowly turned. Well,
Kitty's fifteen shillings would pay the rent, and the experiment would
be a good thing for Kitty also. Louie had furniture enough--in fact,
it would be a very good thing--all round.

"Come along--time," Billy grunted. "And I say, can you stop a bit
later to-night? I've got to go out, but if I don't finish this thing
to-day I never shall----"

Louie mounted the throne again, and again the silence was broken only
by Billy's stepping back from his canvas and forward again.

The light began to fail, and Billy began to work the more furiously.
"Give me just another ten minutes," he muttered, a brush between his
teeth; "this'll make some of 'em sit up, I think; it's _painting_,
this is!... But I don't know, perhaps I'd better let it go as it is;
it's a job, anyway. All right, Louie, thanks.... Right-o, Jeffries; I
didn't think it was so late."

The last words were spoken to the man who had knocked at the door and,
without waiting for a reply, walked in.

Louie had heard the steps on the stairs; perhaps--she could not
tell--she had already thought it unusual that the steps had not
stopped at the water-tap on the landing below that was the supply for
the two upper floors. Billy used that tap when he washed his brushes;
he was looking for his palette-knife now.

But Louie neither saw Billy nor heard his grumblings because the knife
was not to hand. She was looking past Billy, past the easel with the
study upon it, at the man who had entered. For one moment she was
wondering that she had not always known, not only that he would come
some day, but that he would come that day; the next moment she had
told herself that she had always known that.

Of her whole body, from the foot near the crochet to the last brown
hair of her head, her lips were the only portion that did not receive
him with a lightsome, quiet, fair, trusting smile.

Absurd ever to have supposed that they would never meet! Wise to have
known so perfectly what would happen when they did!

What had happened? Oh, every particle of her seemed to sing to every
other particle what had happened! Those pittings of her profession?
Oh, there they went, washed out, all out, in the baptism of a look!
Her fancies--those idle promises to pay drawn on a non-existent bank?
Oh, they had gone, and here was payment itself, the solid, actual
cash! She was suddenly rich. As she stood there, rich in seeing him,
rich in being seen by him, every one of those worthless bills was
honoured in full. She could have laughed at her past poverty. She
could have cried aloud: "Jim, I'm here--look at me--no, not my eyes
only----"

And he too seemed to be as she had always known he would be--singled
out, down to his very manner of wearing his clothes--among men.
Stupid, that of all those times she had thought of him she had never
once thought of him as in evening-dress! But that, in all this
perfection, was only one more reciprocated perfection: she so--he
so----

"Oh, Jim--_not_ my eyes only!" she well-nigh cried again.

But the lion's eyes never moved from her own grey ones.

"Right, Louie, I've finished," said Billy, looking up from his
palette-scraping.

And within herself she wailed: "Oh, _so_ soon? Must it be over
already? Must I sit for men all these days, and then, when _my_ man
comes----? Oh, a moment!... Well, he shall see me move--and I won't
look at him--I'll tell myself--oh, just one more fancy!--that he isn't
here."

She descended from the throne and passed behind the screen.

Was it strange that already, as she dressed in Billy's studio, she
knew that she would never dress in an artist's studio again, and made
of her fastening of hooks and strings a grave little
ceremonial?--(There! With that fastening yet another chapter was
closed; oh, trust her, there should be no reopening of it!)--Or that
she should have a little shiver, at the thought that he might not have
come? Suppose he had knocked at the door, and Billy had cried:
"Half-a-moment--slide, Louie--come in!" Suppose--but the tremor
passed. She had always known he would come; she had known it just as
she had known everything else about him. Again every fibre of her was
joyous. She was here on the earth--she, Louie Causton, daughter of a
pugilist and of a Scarisbrick, gardener, typist, artists' model, and
all else she might ever be--that she might know all about this man. To
have ever doubted it would have been not to deserve him. And here he
was, in the same room with her--he, beyond the screen, she behind
it--only the two of them, for Billy had gone down to the tap to wash
his brushes.

_Now_ what should she do?

No, she would not go out and join him; not as she now was; not a skirt
and blouse, after that fairness. Nor yet would she speak. Surely it
was for him to speak now! She had been speaking to him, singing to
him, all music to his eyes; there does come a point (she told herself)
when the woman ceases to do everything; he must speak now. She knew he
would speak. So she stood, upright, close to the screen, waiting.

He did speak, and like smoke another flock of fancies fled for ever.
They were the fancies in which she had tried to remember his voice. It
came, henceforth unforgettable, pure rest after her strivings. He too
seemed to be near the screen; only a screen between them; but the
phrases that were breaking their long silence were merely automatic.
He was saying something about seeing her presently; she heard him
pronounce the word "Piccadilly," and the most familiar image of
Piccadilly sprang up in her mind. "Swan and Edgar's," she was
whispering back over the screen.

"No, no." This came quickly, protestingly.

"At half-past ten," she whispered.

"Yes."

Then the dialogue was at an end. Billy had returned. Some moments
later she heard more words, a laugh, and the closing of a door. She
realised that he had gone.

Only then did she come out from behind the screen.

Billy was wriggling into his overcoat and muttering something about
being late. "Got to go and keep that chap's wife company," he said.
"Regular little Philistine, she is; I suppose that's why I go; can't
stand these blessed artists. I say, he'd no idea I'd a model, you
know--sorry."

"All right, Billy," said Louie demurely.... "Sorry!" So was not she!

"And I say, I'm afraid I shall have to pay you next time. I'm cleaned
out."

"It doesn't matter. Send me a steak in as you go out; I'll have my
dinner here."

"Right. Odd-looking chap that, isn't he? A good sort though. I picked
him up at the Langham one night. I took this place from him when he
got married."

"He lived here?" (What, another wonder?)

"Yes. Well, I'll send your steak in. Good-bye." Billy bolted.

He had lived there too! How ex--how entirely to have been expected!
Louie walked round the room, looking at the walls, the ceiling, out of
the windows, anew. He had lived there: read, eaten, slept there; what
a coinci--what a perfectly natural circumstance! Then, leaning against
the wall, she found Billy's study. Her eyes devoured it. She set it
against the throne, and then walked to where he had stood when he had
entered. She gave a rich, low laugh; she told herself what a fool she
was; but folly so lovely made life. Again she looked at the wet
painting. She had looked so to him----

She put the study back against the wall, but in another place. "That
study's mine, Billy," she muttered; "mine, not yours or anybody
else's, do you understand? You gave him my violets; he's welcome to
them; this belongs to me. Jim! Jim!" she murmured.

"Well, I suppose it's crochet now," she went on by-and-by. "Do you
realise, Louie Causton, that you've sat your last? And have you any
idea of what you're going to do instead? It looks as though Kitty's
fifteen shillings would come in useful after all."

As if otherwise she might have forgotten it, she repeated to herself,
over and over again, that she was to meet him at Swan and Edgar's at
half-past ten. At one of the repetitions--it was as she was cooking
her steak over the little gas-ring that, perhaps, had once been
his--it occurred to her why he had muttered that quick "No, no," when
she had proposed that meeting-place. She glowed, she laughed through a
sheen of tender tears. "Dear, dear one! _You_ don't think that corner
good enough for us, my sweet little outcast and me. Well, we won't
thank you; we won't belittle him by thanking him, will we, Jimmy?----"

But she did not promise not to look her thanks when she met him at
Swan and Edgar's at half-past ten.

Presently she pushed her plate away; she could not eat. She had felt
her bosom rise once more. It had risen as it had never risen for
anything or anybody save for the little Jimmy, and it rose, it seemed
to her, for a similar reason. For in her hands even his physical
safety lay. He was to be mothered too. Her unfelt arms were to be
about him, the milk of her protection to be his life. By his strength
he had thought to give himself to somebody else, but by his need he
was still hers. A gladness richer than she had ever, ever known
swelled within her. He, the great weakling--she, the strong one, to
cherish and support----

"Jim!" she murmured, smiling, uplifted, lost. It was as if his weary,
tawny head was on her breast.

And she was going to hear his voice again, at Swan and Edgar's, at
half-past ten.

She feared that her own emotion might have exhausted her ere ever the
hour came.


II

"Your hat will be spoiled if you don't take your share of the
umbrella," she said. It was a silk hat, and she supposed that silk
hats cost money. A fine, persistent rain was falling.

She thought that he answered that it didn't matter.

"Then you might at least turn your trousers up." Her own shabby old
grey coat didn't matter, but his trousers----

He seemed to be on the point of replying that they didn't matter
either, but changed his mind. He stooped and turned them up. She held
the umbrella while he did so, and then gave it to him again,
replacing her right hand where it had been--on his left forearm.

It was on these mere externals of him--his hat, his coat, his
trousers, his boots--that she had hardly for a moment ceased to feed
her eyes. Anything else might wait; for the present the stuff of his
sleeve was more to her than the stuff of his soul. She luxuriated
shamelessly in the smallest actualities of his presence; why, even
mirth stood but a remove away. His overcoat, for example: it was not
that old tawny one that had made him so much like a lion, but it was
an old one for all that; was she _never_ to see her man in a new
overcoat? Jim and his overcoats! But the rest of him was beyond
criticism. Certainly he must be making money. She wished she could
have called money to him with a wand, conjured it to him, as much as
ever he wanted. Had it not been that she would have had to take her
hand from his sleeve, she would have liked to step back to look at his
great church-door of a back again. Of his face she could see little,
but that did not prevent her looking until it would hardly have
surprised her had he flushed and said, "Don't gloat over me like
that." His hat was tilted down, the large peaks of his overcoat collar
projected like wings.

No, she did not want to know what he thought or felt; bother all that
part of him! When her thirsty senses had drunk their full, then would
be time enough for the other things.

They were walking somewhere behind the Horse Guards. Stretching before
them was the long, empty avenue of the Mall. She was looking at the
perspective of lamps and trees and drizzle, when suddenly he spoke.
Instantly all her faculties seemed to become one overgrown faculty,
that of hearing. Not that he was saying anything; he was, as a matter
of fact, only asking her whether she was warm; and she replied,
"Quite." She was almost amused that he should ask. His nearness warmed
her more than did her garments. Her hand thrilled deliciously on his
sleeve again....

Oh, the satisfaction of that, just that, after all her past
inquisitions into his soul!

But come to speech they must, and that very soon; and perhaps that
curious magnification of trifles made it easier. Indeed, half the
formidableness of the single question she wanted to ask him had
vanished already. To say to him, now or in a few moments: "Did you
kill Archie Merridew?" seemed somehow not very much more unusual than
asking him the time. Now that she came to think of it, even that
question seemed less important than another one: "Can you kill
somebody and still be happy?" She hoped in her heart that he could. It
would be his justification. Had it been an unrighteous killing, that
would have been another matter; as it was, she would have had him
unhappy only had he not killed. And, as he showed no sign of breaking
silence, she might as well ask him that now.

So, reluctantly turning her eyes from his face and looking ahead into
the haze of the rain, she suddenly said: "Are you happy?"

She wasn't surprised that he didn't reply at once. Of course men
didn't. They had their usual formalities to go through, of "Why do you
ask?" and so forth--a sort of routine before they could answer a plain
question. As he began to go through it now she made a little impatient
movement. She didn't want all that. Then he deigned to reply to her
inferior intelligence. Yes, he was happy.

"You _are_?" she said, with an exultant little leap.

Yes, he was; but again, apparently, he couldn't say a thing and leave
it. In the middle of more stupid, logical, masculine things (he seemed
to be qualifying his statement with something or other about his
conduct to Kitty Windus) she cut him short.

"Tell me," she said, repeating the little impatient gesture, "you
killed that boy, didn't you?"

They had been following the railings that divided the Mall from St.
James's Park, but she had stopped to ask her question. And she was
looking full at him now. But she could not see him very well; a lamp
and a plane-tree made all an obscurity of vague shadows and wet
reflections. But then he stepped slowly back, taking her umbrella with
him, and twice, as he held the umbrella unsteadily, the light came and
went on his cheek and chin; and then, as he took a step farther back
still, the umbrella bobbed on the railings, from the points of it came
little bright slivers of drops, and she found herself searching under
a lamplit sector of alpaca for his eyes.

The danger of asking, actually, a question you have asked, but not
actually, a hundred times before, is that your own mere familiarity
with it throws you out in your calculation. Now she found herself
suddenly hoping that what she felt to be working beyond the umbrella
edge--for she felt it rather than saw it--was not fear.

For, of course, she had miscalculated a little--had been stupid to
think that it was all as old a story to him as it was to her.
Obviously it would not at once occur to him that there had been
nothing to find out, but that instead the whole thing had been merely
enacted before her eyes; he was sure to be thinking that on some
point of evidence he had been betrayed. What sort of point that could
be, unless it had something to do with the black eyes that seemed to
haunt Kitty, he might know, but she could not guess; and all at once
she had a purely physical shrinking. She would rather not know. She
could string herself up to the thought of murder, but the bestial
details--no, not those. Those were his affairs. They were to be taken
for granted as things necessarily involved. And already she was on the
point of feeling herself a little disappointed in him. For in the
shadow of the umbrella her eyes had now found his; his head was a
little turned, and she saw the whites of them.

It _was_ fear. She, it seemed, could contemplate unafraid a sacrifice
that he quaked to have carried out.

But as, with another little falling of drops from the umbrella, he
steadied himself and stepped forward from the railings again,
additional light came to her. It was fear, but not that fear, that
haunted the amber eyes. The fear was of herself. He feared, not the
information she possessed, but her whole understanding and
condemnation. He feared lest she also should say: "It was murder; you
are here to be judged; me too, with all the world, you must account
against you; I set my mark too upon your brow."

And as he appeared sorrowfully to acquiesce in that also, nothing
could have seemed lonelier nor more touching than the quietly spoken
words with which he held the umbrella over her again:

"You're getting wet."

It was as though he told her that though he went outcast she must not
get wet.

Her answer was to put her hand under his sleeve again. They walked on.

But he had not answered her question. Perhaps he thought he had: to
all intents and purposes he had; but she wanted, not so much the word,
as that he should not withhold the word. He was walking slowly,
heavily, like a tower by her side; she had the sense of his fearful
overweight; she would give him time. They continued to walk, their
mingled shadow on the pavement as they passed each lamp creeping away
before them as if the beam of some lighthouse had had the sinister
property of obscurity.

Then, within a little distance of Buckingham Palace, she stopped
again. Again their eyes met under the wet, black mushroom of the
umbrella.

"You did kill that boy, didn't you?"

He had a slight start. It seemed to her that he even apologised for
having kept her waiting for the answer. Formerly she had seen
stratagems in his eyes; now, as he dipped the umbrella for a moment
and stood full in the light of another lamp, she looked only into
grave, candid depths.

"Yes," he said. "You know I killed him."

"Ah!"

Again her hand slid, as if of itself, back into its place. Again they
walked on. The next thing that came to her was another ridiculous yet
oddly precious trifle. She wore kid gloves; before, when she had
danced with him in an old frock of oyster-grey, she had worn white
ones; must she (she wondered) always wear gloves with him, as he
always wore old overcoats? She longed to take one glove off; yet
she--she, who had met Roy by the stile at night--for very bashfulness
dared not. The circumstance struck her; how was that? Gifts of
understanding for her he had: had he that gift too, the gift of her
own bashfulness back again? Up went her spirit on wings....

Yes, it was that--or for a night at least she would have it so. As
impossibilities are reconciled in a dream, so he seemed, by his mere
towerlike presence, to resolve in one large atonement, her own life as
it had been and the sweet and virginal and dear smiling thing that it
might have been. In no less a miracle than that she seemed to herself
to be walking. He could not only have kissed her; he could have had
her first kiss. He could not only have turned, as he did turn, leaning
against the pillar-box by the Equerries' entrance of the Palace, to
look at her again, but he could have received in return--did receive
in return--such a look as she knew he also could hardly have had the
like of before. And it made no difference--as in a dream such a thing
might make no difference--that he had a wife, she a son. Let him have
his wife, she her son; she could find room for wives and sons too.
To-morrow, perhaps, it would not be so; to-morrow might be like
yesterday again; but to-night--to-night--oh, the first garden was not
less trodden than these rainy streets, the Barracks, Gorringes', and
Grosvenor Road! Her hand moving again on his sleeve was telling him
even now, if he would but listen, that though man may not know that it
is not good for him to be alone, woman knows it, and maybe still
remembers it out of her knowledge of the place whence she came later
than he.

And he too understood now, for she was not so rapt but that she
remembered that he asked her, somewhere between a sandbin and a street
lamp, whether she was happy too, and that, looking up at him, she
smilingly whispered: "Yes, now." And she was not so rapt but that she
remembered telling him, flatly and with another happy and laughing and
triumphant look: "You can't prevent it!" But she was so rapt that of
much else that he and she said she had no very clear recollection.
Words that seemed unforgettable when they came had eluded her almost
in their own echo. But she knew that she gave him the liberty of
herself with no more reserve than she had claimed that of him. She
knew that because, later, but she did not know when, he muttered, in
some street or other, she did not know where: "God bless your boy."

Well, if she forgot things now, there would be many days to come in
which she would remember them.

Merely because it must be very late--she had no idea what time it
was--she grudged the going of the moments almost angrily. Already she
was becoming as hungry again as if she had not broken that long, long
fast. But she admitted that it was not unnatural that he should think
of his own concerns a little too, and want to ask her questions. She
began to answer the questions hurriedly, to get them over.--Kitty
Windus? Oh (she told him) he might leave Kitty to her; she'd answer
for Kitty!--His wife and her complete ignorance? (His wife's ignorance
appeared to be complete.)--Miriam Levey? (Oh, why would he not be
quick, and she so hungry!)--And then back to his wife again; what
about her? (he wanted to know). Louie wondered a little that he should
consider her to be his wife's keeper also, but she answered his
questions. That, she told him, was his private affair; but, if he
really wanted to know what Louie thought about it, Louie could not
conceive of a marriage with so huge a secret in it continuing
undisclosed. _Voila_; there he had it; and _now_ might she please be
permitted to enter into her own happiness again?

She was back into it, bathing in it again, almost before she was
aware. A minute before she had not known what street they were in; now
she saw the Chelsea Hospital on the other side of the road. On this
side was a row of houses; she knew one of them; a painter for whom she
had sat lived there; his studio was in the yard at the back. The
thought of a studio was all that was needed. She thrilled again.

No more studios! So poignantly did she burn that she could hardly
imagine that her glowing did not communicate itself. Studios, after
that beautiful, beautiful sketch of Billy's? Good gracious, no! She
was going to Billy's to fetch that sketch on the morrow; she would
like to see Billy deny it to her! And that poor, poor old oyster-grey!
Just because he had seen her in it once she had mooned over it, smiled
over it, sighed over it; but it could go now--she had a richer
memory!... Furtively during the last few minutes she had been working
off her right glove; it slipped from her hand to the pavement; but she
was afraid to stop. Let it stay; somebody would turn it over with the
point of a walking-stick in the morning and perhaps wonder who had
lost it.... She stole another look at him; her hand crept along his
sleeve; the tips of her fingers were on his wrist; her lips shaped his
name: "Jim!"

Then, unexpectedly, it rushed upon her in full measure. She knew these
streets familiarly; they were in Swan Walk now; and the thing happened
all in a moment. Again, during those anxious questions of his about
Kitty Windus, Miriam Levey, his wife, she had that sense of his
terrible overweight: now, passing a doorway, he suddenly reeled. He
began to sink....

In an instant her arms were about him. Not the unfelt, immaterial arms
of her mothering vision in Billy's studio, not that other breast,
offered but impressed, sustained him; she held him within her two arms
of flesh and blood, upon that firm, warm bosom that changed its shape
to his weight upon it--the bosom he had seen yesterday, white hives,
all their honey his.... She bent and kissed the shoulder of his coat.
Oh, if he might but faint, quite, that she might carry him somewhere,
or, if she could not carry him, stay with him where he was--she cared
not--rest by his side through an endless night! Her heart, yes, her
lips too, called him; a whisper might not reach him; she called him
aloud:

"Oh, come, come! Come, come!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Afterwards she thought of it as a hail from a ship to another ship
across a stretch of water so narrow that it was all but a stepping
aboard. How could such a hail be a farewell also? They were not
passing; as they glided side by side together, either seemed
stationary. Other things, the whole offing of Life, were in motion;
these slipped past, as it were sky, shore, shipping; but for a space
he and she spoke from bridge to bridge. And he heard the hail too, for
he opened his eyes. Though they never looked on her again they did so
now, relinquishing all to her. Was there anything she had not known?
There was nothing she might not know--now----

By-and-by she had helped him to a seat on the Embankment and had made
him sit down. She took off his tie and collar; she smiled as he
thanked her. "That was absurd," he said.

Then he asked her where she lived.

It was over.

Well, perhaps more would have been more than she could have borne.

But when she sat at last alone in the hansom he had called, conscious
that she was wet to the skin and that her boots needed to be resoled,
she still had the image of the ships before her eyes, gliding together
side by side, with all else in quiet, relentless motion behind them.
She held fast to it. She could not have endured to think that of that
night's long wandering all that would remain on the morrow would be
yet another dream and a wet glove left behind in an empty Chelsea
street.


III

Louie Causton would have been more than human had she not frequently
thought, as her life became a moving from pillar to post again, that
there was an exasperating proportion of absence in her heart's story.
But at first she was not petulant. Some absences are brimful, as other
presences are mere vacancy, and, now that she no longer sat, she had
other things, plenty of them, to think of.

There was little money in the sale of crochet; there was not much more
in sitting in costumes hired from the Models' Club. From both these
things she quickly turned. Perhaps she turned from them the more
quickly because of Kitty Windus--for Kitty was now with her in the
flat in the New Kings Road, and the way in which Kitty, without
spoken words, paid over her weekly fifteen shillings, was in itself a
spur. Not that Kitty always spared her the words either. Two words at
least that she did not always spare her were "rise" and "permanency."
Often Louie felt all the amazement, and now quite without any leaven
of amusement, that she had felt when first she had entered the
Business School in Holborn; but she was not keeping Kitty (or Kitty
keeping her) either for love of Kitty or her own mere necessity. To
keep Kitty was part and parcel of that absence she was already
beginning to resent. It was merely safer to keep Kitty than to have
anybody else keep her. Besides, as long as she kept Kitty, she had
only to write a note, justifying it afterwards as best she could, and
two ships (so to speak) would come together again. She delayed to
write the note; none the less it was in her power to do so.

So (to turn for a moment to that moving background of Life in the
offing) the September of 1900 found her answering the advertisement of
a Bayswater seedsman and discovering the precise market value of her
old Rainham Parva training. But by the end of the same month she was
temporarily installed at the clerk's table of an exhibition of French
paintings at a Mayfair gallery, and glad of the job. Say (the question
is hardly worth going into) that it was the influence of the paintings
themselves that once more caused a manager to propose that Louie's
wages should be substantially increased, for a consideration; it
didn't matter; Louie, who did not now throw away jobs for nothing,
merely told the man not to be silly--than which, as it happened, she
could have done no better thing, for at the close of the exhibition
the manager, now looking upon her almost as a dear daughter, found her
another place, this time at a gallery academic both artistically and
morally, warned her against dangerous young men, and kissed Louie on
both her laughing cheeks. After that her French again served her turn,
for she entered the office of an illustrated weekly; or if it was not
entirely the French that did it, so much the luckier Louie to possess
even yet a frock that was a rest to the proprietor's eyes after a
succession of applicants in walking skirts and white muslin blouses.
This job Louie actually kept till June 1901; then an amalgamation took
place that threw her out of work again. Three weeks later, after a
severe trial of her temper by Kitty, she was a "carpet designer"--that
is to say, she coloured, in an upper room near St. Paul's Churchyard,
pieces of paper so minutely chequered that sometimes for an hour or
two she could not get the flicker out of her eyes. She made a grace of
retiring from this occupation as soon as she saw that if she did not
do so her employer would retire from the office of paymaster. After
that she was reduced to sitting again, in costume. Nothing else
offered. Jimmy must eat, Kitty's fifteen shillings be covered. The
female figure in "The Two-stringed Bow," which caused such a
(journalistic) sensation in the Academy of the following year, is
Louie. Chaff did not recognise it. Billy Izzard, who had seen the
costume at the Models' Club, did. He persecuted Louie to sit for him
again as before.

Of the Models' Club she was still a member, and she got on well with
the girls. Once she took Kitty Windus there, but only once; a
black-and-white man, knowing nothing of Kitty's pound a week, asked
her to sit to him as Miss Tox, in "Dombey and Son"; and Kitty,
presently reading the book, treated Louie for some days with marked
superciliousness. That came of making yourself cheap, her manner
seemed to say; and she reported Miriam Levey, whom she met near
Piccadilly Circus one day, as having said, "Vell, vat do you expect?"
Louie did not much like this meeting with Miriam Levey. She remembered
the Jewess's pertinacity and curiosity for curiosity's sake. Many such
meetings between Kitty and Miriam Levey might easily complicate her
own life.

There were two bedrooms in the flat in the New Kings Road. In the
larger one, that at the back that Louie shared with Jimmy, there hung
at first the sketch she had begged ("stolen" was Billy's word) after
she had ceased to sit. When Louie took this down one day and put it
out of sight, she told herself that she did so on Jimmy's account; but
perhaps those absences that she had to convert into presences as best
she could had something to do with it too. Perhaps, if she did not see
the thing for a time, its first freshness would return.

Sometimes she thought these absences really too bad; she began to
think so with increasing frequency as Kitty's fits of patronage became
no rarer. Really it didn't seem fair that she should be asked to bear
them. The least Jim could have done, since she bore them for him,
would have been to let her know that he still existed. She did not
much mind looking after Kitty, but it was a little too much that on
his part _all_ should be absence!

And that was why, with Kitty always at hand for her excuse, she did
not write to him.

In a word, the joy of bearing for him was becoming fainter in
proportion as the burden itself increased.

Then a piece of news with which Kitty came home one night added its
trifle to her smart. She was alone in the flat that night; Jimmy had
been in bed two hours and more, and Louie, after having folded his
clothes, cleared up his litter of toys from the floor, and tried to
read a newspaper, had turned low the gas, drawn up a chair to one of
the three windows that looked down on the New Kings Road, and sat
gazing out over the trees and houses and scattered lights that
stretched away to Earls Court. It happened that that night the
Exhibition was closing for the season; a firework demonstration was in
progress; and out of the little pool of orange light rockets rose from
time to time, falling again in slow showers of red and green and
white. If no cart was passing she could just hear the muffled
detonations.

She knew that if an impossibility could have happened, and Jim could
have walked into the room, sat down by her, and watched the white and
green and red rockets with her, that slight constant smart at her
heart would have gone; but now she told herself that it was not as if
she was young, with unlimited time before her. She was thirty-two, and
too much absence is not sustenance enough for thirty-two. But that,
she supposed, meant nothing to a man. Men did not appear to get old in
quite the same way. The man who had tried to make love to her at the
French picture exhibition was sixty if he was a day; sixty, and still
fiery; and apparently he had found her still desirable also. But it
was not for much longer. Women died with their beauty. Of course she
had her little darling asleep there; men had the comfortable theory
that women wanted nothing more than to "live again" (as they called
it) in their children; well, all that Louie could say was that she did
not agree with them. She knew one woman who wanted more. It might be
wicked and unnatural to endow Jimmy, as she had done, with a sort of
vicarious father, but Roy was gone out of her life--gone; to have
married him would have made more mischief than it would have cured;
and Louie saw no reason for not telling herself the truth about
herself. But a vicarious father who stayed away was altogether too
vicarious....

Well, well, she supposed that if a woman would have a man at all she
must put up with a selfish one.

He, of course, knew exactly what he wanted, and had got it; nor could
she say that he had not earned it--grimly. But now that he had got it,
what about somebody else who was helping him to keep it--somebody
called Louie Causton, who stepped in when she was wanted, took half
the burden off his back, and was presently sent about her business
again? (For she had remembered now the quite personal, preoccupied
questions, about Kitty and Miriam and his wife, that he had put to her
on the night of their long walk.) Oh, no doubt she would be there when
she was next wanted, to share with him the thing another woman ought
to have shared (but thank goodness the other woman had not!). It had
not in the least surprised Louie that his wife knew nothing. It would
have surprised her very much indeed if she had known anything. Jim
might humbug himself as he liked, but at the bottom of his heart (she
now saw) he knew better than to tell her. She was not the kind; it was
Louie who was that kind, and he knew it too. But there: she was
pretty, and men asked no further; give them hair and eyes and an
unlined brow and the rest could go hang. Heart and vision--no; courage
and devotion and the strength to bear--no; but twenty years, a curving
eyelash, and a bloom more quickly gone than the falling rockets
yonder, and ah, how they ran! But they didn't trust them. No, the
other sort was sent for then. And it was the business of the other
sort to be, always, as strong as they sometimes thought themselves.

The last rocket fell; the lights of the big wheel began to make
quicker revolutions; and Louie left the window and turned up the gas
again.

As she did so the electric bell in the kitchen rang. It rang again,
and then Louie remembered that the street door four floors below would
be closed for the night. She passed out on to the landing and
descended the stairs. It was Kitty. She had forgotten her key. Kitty
panted as they ascended again.

"How long have you been in?" she demanded, as she took off her hat and
coat in the little hall.

"All the evening," said Louie. "Have you had supper?"

"No, I haven't," said Kitty shortly, and then came her grumble. Why
hadn't Louie had the gas lighted? Fireworks indeed! And there Kitty
had been waiting for twenty minutes and more, thinking nobody was
in--anybody might forget their key once in a while, mightn't they?
Hadn't Louie forgotten hers not a week ago, and that not the only
time? Kitty had a right to forget her key sometimes. And there had
Louie been in all the time, watching fireworks! Well, what was there
for supper? And the fire almost out too; really, if Kitty paid for the
coals, Louie might at least keep the fire in!

Louie mended the fire and got Kitty's supper. When Kitty had finished
she cleared the little round table again, and by the time Kitty had
put on a pair of red bedroom slippers and turned up her skirt to the
blaze she deigned to relent a little. She admitted that it wasn't as
if Louie had known she was waiting in the street, but all the same it
was annoying.

"And now I've got a piece of news for you," she said, warming her
hands. "It's a dead secret, but I don't suppose Miriam would mind my
telling you. She's in for no end of a good job in a few weeks! But she
always gets good jobs. She has determination, Miriam has, you see."

Louie was standing by the end of the mantelpiece, stirring a cup of
cocoa. She only said "Oh?" Her own lack of determination was now an
old reproach.

"Ra-_ther_! Have you heard me speak of a Mr. Pepper ever? But no, you
won't have; you're always a bit sniffy about Miriam, you see, and that
doesn't encourage people to talk. Well, she's his confidential clerk
at the Freight and Ballast Company, but he's chucking that, and who do
you think with?--James Jeffries!"

She paused to see the effect on Louie, and then continued.

"Yes, James Jeffries! What do you think of _that_? They're going to
start on their own, in no end of a swell way, and Miriam's going over
with them. It's Mr. Pepper's doing, of course, and as Mr. Pepper isn't
exactly a nobody even where he is, you may bet your boots he won't
change for the worse! Oh, James Jeffries knows the kind of person to
hang on to! He's to be a partner, if you please, as good as Mr. Pepper
himself; how's that for greasing in? Friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, I _don't_ think!"

Kitty had this way now of speaking of her former _fiance_. Sometimes
she so extended his name that it became "Mister James Herbert
Jeffries." And however Jim now "got on," his advancement would still
be, to Kitty, a magnification of her own superiority in those days
when she had had a pound a week and he nothing. She began to take out
hairpins and went on.

"Oh dear, I wish my brushes were here!" (Louie fetched them.) "What
was I saying? Oh yes, about Miriam. She's to have an office to
herself, perhaps, or at any rate she's not going to sit with the other
girls; and when I tell you it's in Pall Mall, you can judge for
yourself--not just a couple of offices rented, but a whole
building--what ho! The stone that the builders rejected if you like!
And she'll have her own extending-bracket telephone, the very latest,
and arms to her chair to put her elbows on, not like the typists! And
Mr. Pepper's most friendly with her--she takes down his conversations
with no end of swells! And I say, Evie Jeffries won't be half set up
over it all, oh no! Even _his_ office--James Herbert's, Miriam
says--is going to be perfectly scrumptious!"

Her head was on one side; her short hair, as she brushed it, hardly
reached farther than the sharp point of her shoulder; and Louie was
thinking of that spurious engagement again. And suddenly--this had
happened before, but never before with so keen a stab--the thought set
her raging.... She herself had been so near!... Her elbow caught her
cup of cocoa; it spilt, and ran in a little stream from the corner of
the mantelpiece.... So near! And once again she cried to herself that
_she_ would have known how to keep him, Roy or no Roy!... Kitty? What
could his courtship of Kitty and her bones have been? _She_ would
have shown him the difference! To have been so near and then--Mortlake
Road, Putney!

Suddenly there seemed to her to be a great deal to be said for
conventional morality after all.

For a moment her heart was full of hate--hate of Kitty, hate of Evie
Jeffries, hate of Roy, hate of herself. To have been so near!

But the sharpness of it died down to a sullen ache. In his affairs he
seemed to be going up, up; she had always known he would; and less
than ever might she expect to hear from him now. And he would take his
common little wife up with him. He might go anywhere, meet anybody;
but sourly she wondered what sort of a figure he supposed his Evie
would cut up there--would have cut at Trant or Mallard Bois? Oh, Louie
would dearly have liked to see her there, to have pointed to her, and
to have told Jim to his face that whatever ability he might have
seemed to be yoked with an unimaginable stupidity, since he had not
known instantly the one woman for him.

Well, there was simply no accounting for these things.

But if he was going up, Louie did not very much like the channel by
which she had received the information. She had known that Kitty saw
Miriam Levey; now she seemed to hear her thick voice again, "I _vill_
find out!" She was aware, too, that there was little love lost between
Miriam Levey and herself. She herself had encouraged Kitty in her
present attitude of "Mister Jeffries," but it only needed the Jewess
to propose the contrary attitude and in all probability there would be
a struggle between them for the possession of Kitty. She detested
Kitty; yet in order that Evie Jeffries might make an exhibition of
herself among the people whose equal Louie was, Louie had to put up
with her, bones and chilblains and all! Much he left her, didn't he?
Good gracious, yes! And it was about time he was told that flesh and
blood women weren't made like that!

Kitty, remarking that it was a shame to leave the now glowing fire,
had passed out of the room for a minute; she now returned, in her
slippers and nightgown. Her feet, she said, were still cold with
waiting on the pavement; she would say her prayers with them turned to
the fire. She knelt by a wicker chair, and set the red slippers on the
low kerb, their worn soles to the fire. Louie, still from the end of
the mantelpiece, watched her. At a slight sound she made Kitty turned
her head for a moment; then she put it on the cushion of the chair
again.

Yes, certainly Louie must have a wicked heart, or she would not have
looked on the kneeling woman as she did. She wondered what, texts
apart, Kitty could have to say to God. To pray--with her feet in a
warm place! Why, Louie mortified herself more for an absent man than
Kitty seemed to do before her Maker!... And even when she had stifled
the thought she still had no more than a negative compassion for
Kitty. She was not unsorry for her and her weakheadedness; beyond that
Kitty was not, or ought not to have been, her affair. What was her
affair was herself and what little remained of her youth. Kitty was
hardly more than a year or two older than she, but she looked a dozen
years older; Louie wondered whether her shoulder blades too would soon
resemble the set-squares in Billy's studio, whether her waist also
would seem a broken thing within empty looking folds....

Kitty continued to pray and to warm her feet. Louie, wondering what
her next snappishness would be when she rose from her knees again,
continued to watch her.

Then Kitty rose. She turned to Louie.

"By the way, did you brush that blue skirt of mine?" she said. "Oh,
very well, it doesn't matter now; perhaps I oughtn't to have asked
you; thank you; I can do it myself in the morning. Sorry I spoke."

Louie turned away.

These were the times when she could hardly tell what had possessed her
ever to have supposed that she would be able to keep watch and ward
over Kitty at all. Kitty was perfectly free to meet Miriam Levey or
anybody else she had a mind to meet. And why, she asked herself at
these times, should she not meet her? Where, hanging and such
moonshine apart, was the risk to Jim? Indeed, it seemed to Louie that
that story that seemed so to weigh on Jim was quickly becoming
altogether beside the mark. The whole venue of his difficulties was
rapidly shifting. What he had done had not been discovered and
probably never would be discovered; what he wanted now was, not to be
protected from remote and shadowy and nonsensical dangers, but to be
told how he was to be happy with the wife whom he had seen fit, in the
great heap of his wisdom, to keep in ignorance. Of course the remoter
danger need not be entirely forgotten, but this, or else Louie was
greatly mistaken, was what those scarce-heard questions on the night
of that long walk had really meant.

And, in that case, what the devil was she, Louie Causton, doing in
this gallery at all, with nothing of Jim but silence and absence, and
nothing but peevishness and petty tyranny from Kitty? Roy, it might
be, was still ready to marry her; Buck never ceased to importune,
sulk and implore; Jimmy, one way or another, would be to provide for;
and she knew now how little she could do for him alone. Even her
desire to "show" Richenda Earle had now passed. She wanted,
desperately wanted, all the things she persisted in rejecting. Why was
she becoming morose, disillusioned, devil-may-care? It was a familiar
question now, but as she undressed that night she asked herself again
what it all meant.

She answered herself that there was no mystery about it. She supposed
it happened to every woman. It meant, of course, the passing of her
youth.

But, her head on her pillow, she had her compensating hour. No need to
re-describe its kind; there was now added again that forced and
desperate illusion, of the unity of herself, her boy, and the man she
would have had his father. She knew she merely abused her fancy and
must suffer for it afterwards, but no matter; if it was a drug it was
a sweet one, and that it might stay with her a little longer she chose
uncomfortable positions that would keep her awake. She could hear
Jimmy's breathing across the dark room. Jim, Jimmy and herself----

It was against her own will that, at two o'clock in the morning, she
slept.


IV

It was his voice over the telephone of the Models' Club that broke the
long silence. Ten chances to one but the bell had rung in an empty
room, for, save for a woman who was washing the hall floor, Louie was
alone in the place. She unhooked the receiver. "Hallo!" she
called.... "Yes, this is the Models' Club.... This is Miss
Causton...."

At last!

He did not say why he wanted to see her; he only said that he wanted
to do so at once. His minimised voice, with its suggestion of
distance, seemed to her curiously symbolic of their whole relation. A
telephone was supposed to bring voices near, but far more than that
the smallness and the distance struck her.

"No, I'm afraid not," she continued to speak into the instrument, "but
I can give you dinner here. You know the address?... Yes, at seven....
All right...."

Seek him? No, she certainly would not seek him. He must come to her.
She could give him tea and chops. As she hung up the receiver again
she glanced at the clock over the little service counter. Eleven.
Eight hours.... She had waited for months, now she must wait another
eight hours. She could have faced the months again with more
composure.

Only to look at the advertisements in the papers had she come to the
Club that morning at all. Well, she was not going to answer that
clairvoyant's announcement she had seen in _The Telegraph_ now. Kitty
would ask her that evening whether she had been looking for work, and
would hold up Miriam Levey and her determination as an example; let
her; Louie couldn't be bothered with clairvoyants and their
advertisements to-day.

And Kitty little dreamed how near Louie had more than once been to
showing herself as determined even as Miriam. Miriam was not the only
one who might be "taken on" at this new Consolidation of Mr. Pepper's
and Jim's, whatever it was. There is such a thing, when a man doesn't
come to you, as a miserable, ignoble yielding to the ache to go to
him. There is such a thing as the willingness even to keep a door all
day for the sake of seeing him go through it just once. After a
certain time pride becomes a poor staff, and--but he was coming, in
eight hours. That was why she had refused to dine with him. Your pride
stiffens again when you have just been on the point of throwing it
aside.

She knew that she would be good for nothing for the rest of the day;
in that case she might as well go and see her father. She had money
enough for her bus fares; half-past one found her at the Molyneux
Arms.

Buck was in high feather. His name had been proposed, in the interests
of Church and State, as a candidate for the Borough Council; and the
chief plank of the platform which Buck occupied during the whole of
that afternoon, descending from it with the greatest reluctance only
when Louie vowed that she could not stay another moment, was that as
long as England had Queensberrys to make her P.R. Rules it didn't
matter what Radicals tried to make of her laws. Louie fondled his
silver hair; dear old dad! Then she made him drive her back to
Chelsea.

(Buck, by the way, was returned at the head of the poll, a few weeks
later, amid acclamations that might well have rendered him deaf in his
other ear also.)

Back in the Club once more, Louie set aside the best chop, and made a
tour of the place in search of the narrowest table. The one she chose
was so narrow that the backs of the two chairs she turned up against
it almost touched. Lightheartedly she rebuked Myrtle Morris, who asked
her whether she was expecting "a boy"; and she laughed as Myrtle went
off to tell another girl that "Causton was on the warpath." Her
warpaint consisted of a white blouse, low and perfectly plain at the
neck, and a navy blue skirt. She was waiting at the window for Jim
twenty minutes before he came.

She had schooled herself to a rigorous composure. She opened the door
for him and told him to mind the hall lamp, within an inch of which
his hat reached; and the hand she gave him was not gloved this time.
But she barely touched his hand; had she not two whole hours before
her? He put aside a cheap hanging of rustling beads for her to pass,
and then followed her into the large room on the left of the hall,
empty save for a piano and a few chairs, that was used for parties and
tableaux. Myrtle and another girl appeared for a moment in the
doorway; the minxes appeared to be waltzing, but they had come to see
who "Causton's boy" was; and as they sat down she asked him, as if
daring him to find any but the plainer meaning in it, how Billy Izzard
was. She exulted that she could say these things and he could not.
Then she was told that their chops were ready. They passed into the
next room.

The table--it was a flimsy card-table covered with a cheap traycloth
stiff with starch--accounted for all awkwardnesses and proximities;
again she found it secretly delicious to murmur a demure apology for
its smallness. She lingered over the eating of her chop merely because
her plate was edge to edge with his; she would manage badly if she
could not keep him at least two hours! Then, when she could linger out
her eating no longer, she asked him for a cigarette and a light--for
in the studios she had learned to smoke. He gave them to her. Her lids
hovered as he held the match; she wondered whether she should look
straight into his eyes or keep her lids downcast. In the end she did
both, looking at him first, then down. Whether he looked at her at all
she did not know; the first at any rate was a miss. She did not ask
for a second match (she had, she told herself, some shame); instead,
she put her elbows on the table and said, without further delay:
"Well, what is it?"

She nodded as he began to tell her; it seemed to be pretty much what
she had expected. She listened, or half listened; she would not have
sworn, had he challenged her, that her attention did not wander a
little. Her thoughts were ahead of his, but a little patience--he
would catch up; he would see presently that what his wife might think
or what she might not think (for that was what he was talking about)
was of less practical importance than he supposed. Naturally his wife
must be thinking this and that; marriage that left such a thing as
a--call it a private execution--out of the calculation might even turn
out to be a little difficult; but she might as well hear what he had
to say about it. She waited for the cropping up of the names of Miriam
Levey and Kitty Windus; they duly appeared. Mrs. Jeffries, it seemed,
wanted to see Kitty, and Miriam Levey wanted her to do so. Why they
wanted these things was not very clear, but possibly, if Louie was
giving him only half her attention, Jim was not saying all he knew
either. He still considered that aspect of the affair to be wholly and
solely the problem: but no doubt he would wake up by-and-by.

Suddenly she asked him whether he and his wife had quarrelled. He
shook his head that apparently, in spite of its stupidity, she must
still love.

"No--oh no."

"Well----"

And on he went again, still quite a number of leagues behind--the
complication of his former engagement to Kitty, Evie's sense of
unexplained things, Miriam Levey, her voracious curiosity, her
presence at this new Consolidation.

But here she interrupted him. "One moment. When do you start--this
Consolidation?"

He was toying with a knife; the little reflection passed over his
massive face as he turned the blade. "In a few weeks. Why?"

"You don't intend to take Miriam Levey over with you?"

He put the knife down with a little slap. "I do not," he said. Louie
had thought as much. So, no doubt, in spite of what she seemed to have
said to Kitty, had Miriam Levey.

"Well, go on; I interrupted you," she said.

He went on. It seemed to her that if nothing had actually happened his
overcarefulness was the one way likely to bring it to pass. Then, she
supposed, he would ring her up on the telephone again.

By this time she was thinking far more of Miriam Levey's empty chair
at the new Consolidation than she was of things unaccounted for
between her guest and his wife.

And as for those unexplained things (Louie neither knew nor cared what
they might be), she could only tell him now what she had told him that
night when they had walked together, that wives must either be wives
or not, must be told things or else be something less than wives.
Perhaps she had not put it quite so plainly to him as that before,
but that was what it had amounted to. Men with secrets ought to marry
the right women.... She stole a daring look at him across the table.
He was mumbling and twiddling a spoon now. His shoulders, bigger than
Buck's, were clothed in an exquisite iron-grey cloth; she wondered
whether he knew that she had kissed one of them that night in a
Chelsea doorway.... And then, as he paused and looked up, she spoke.
She did so almost curtly. If not telling hadn't answered, she said,
she could only suggest, once more, telling. As for Kitty, he might put
her entirely on one side; as long as she remained with Louie, Louie
would answer for her.

Then, for the first time, he seemed to show a gleam of interest in her
affairs. He asked her how she got her living, now.... Her pulse
quickened. Billy had told him, then; by "now" he meant now that she no
longer sat; and his eyes avoided hers. He coloured; apparently he
thought he was doing her an honour in wiping out all memory of that
discovery in Billy's studio. An honour! She could have laughed at him.
He little knew how she longed to tell him more--to tell him about the
oyster-grey too--to tell him that for her it was as long ago as that.
But no, he had seen the pearl----

And it appeared that his talk really had an object now; but, as usual,
she had seen the drift of it before he had. He was thinking of Miss
Levey's place, if his absurd delicacies would only allow him to get it
out.

"Would you accept it?" he managed at last to ask, sounding her
earnestly with his eyes.

"Steady, silly woman," she whispered to herself, brightly flushing....

But, glancing at him, she suddenly winced. Twice before men had
offered her posts, at more than their market value, and there had been
no colour in her cheeks as she had refused them; had she coloured now
at the quick thought that if _he_ had made such an offer she might
perhaps...? If so, there was mortification and despite in her colour.
Why did he offer her Miss Levey's place? Was it his wife again--always
his ninny of a wife? If that was so, so much the worse for him; it was
time he learned that if he got into a mess he must make shift to get
out of it again. There was a new little twang in her voice as,
suddenly looking into his eyes, she said: "You've no right to expect
that of me!"

And as soon as the words were spoken, she saw too where she herself
stood, and to what point beyond she was prepared to go. She knew now
that she would have taken his job, not at added wages, but without
wages at all. But to the humiliating thought that he imagined himself
to be doing her a kindness was now superadded that of his entire
ignorance that she might be making an attack upon his faithfulness at
all. Suddenly she saw herself merely wonderful to him--_she_
wonderful!--she, who had thought she could spend all her life up in
the clouds, be content to be magnanimous for magnanimity's sake,
virtuous for the mere love of virtue! Oh, if that was all, he needn't
think _that_ any longer! Wonderful?... What she wanted was not
wonderful at all, oh dear, no: merely something common, coarse,
filling; nothing more wonderful than that.... Wise mother, to have
known that that was the end of it all, and to have taken, long ago, in
Henson's studio, the short cut! She did not even try to check a wild
little exclamation....

And he evidently saw something too, though what, as he blundered
deeper, she did not stop to inquire. He gave a groan. "Poor woman!" he
said compassionately.

He might just as well have set a spark to a fuse. There broke from her
a peremptory cry.

"Not that, Jim--that's the one thing I will _not_ bear--I will _not_
be called 'poor woman'----"

And the rest now had to follow. It was the sum of her broodings,
resentments, hatreds, dreams, desire, despair. Evie, him, herself--oh,
it was not her fault if he didn't see now how the three of them stood.
He knew only too well what he wanted: what Louie wanted she also knew
only too well. Except to offer her a job that would save him even the
trouble of ringing her up on the telephone when her help was required,
had he ever, until this moment, looked at the thing from her point of
view? He had not. She would help him still; but if their ships must
part like this, at least no false tidings should pass from bridge to
bridge: he should know exactly what it was he asked, and why she gave
it! She began to speak rapidly, uncertainly, but sparing him nothing.
Perhaps, after all, she said, his wife would understand; he had only
to tell her that her husband made away with her sweetheart; perhaps
she could bear it; if she couldn't well--he knew what was his for the
holding up of a finger....

Then, as suddenly as she had begun, she stopped. Her voice dropped.
"I've had no luck," she said, with quiet bitterness. "I'm out of it,
and there's no more to say. Give me a match."

And then she rose. He might sit there if he liked.

He rose too, and they walked down the room in silence together. The
bead screen of the hall parted and tinkled together again behind the
great church-door of his back. Without a word he took down his coat
and, under the coloured hall lamp, hoisted himself into it. And then
he looked at her.

Already in her heart she knew that that look was the end. Her offer
had been rejected. Whatever else might happen, she, Louie Causton,
would never come between him and his wife. The woman who had those
eyes would keep their looks; had it been Louie's fortune to have them,
she would have kept their looks. He was a plotter, but not of amours;
a carrier through too, but not of intrigues. So grave an innocence was
his that probably he didn't know that his look told her all this; if
so, it was final indeed.

So she took her dismissal, and then, with her hand on the letter-box
of the door, stood gazing meditatively on the ground. She had wanted
to be wooed; failing that, she had once more brought herself to woo;
and this Joseph had gravely repelled her.

At last she looked up.

"About what you were saying--I mean that place of Miss Levey's," she
said. "I don't think it would do--not now."

The man who could plan a murder but not an affair looked humbly up.

"Why not?" he murmured. It was as if he said: "I don't remember that
meetings of ours in Billy's studio; I forget this too. You see how it
is. Your taking the job would make no difference."

Slowly she shook her head. "I should be seeing you," she said. "It
wouldn't do. Good-night."

She saw that she had missed even more than she had imagined.

And yet, before Christmas came, she was at that self-same
Consolidation. In October a lofty refusal; in December a creeping back
again with her tail between her legs. Where, she asked herself, was
her pride now?

The answer was that that had been in October, and this was December.

When she told Kitty that she was succeeding to Miss Levey's place
Kitty had certain things to say about treachery and broken
friendships. She said them at some length, and then remarked that
after that of course Louie could hardly expect her to stay with her.

"You never liked her," she said, as if not to like Miss Levey was an
offence in itself. "And I know you tried to keep me from seeing her.
Oh, you think I don't notice things, but you never made a greater
mistake; I could tell you things that would surprise you! You and
James Jeffries have got some game on; don't tell me he didn't give her
the push; Evie and Miriam both say so; oh, you're a deep one, Louie
Causton! First you come between me and Miriam; and then that day your
father came and I was asking him about black eyes and he told me you
could have one _without_ having one till you came to blow your
nose--oh, _I_ watched you! And then to go worming about till you got
Miriam fired and then bag her job yourself! Thank goodness, some
people have better ideas of friendship than that! I have, for one.
Never mind the bit you owe me; you can pay Carter Paterson with it and
we'll call it quits. Perhaps it wouldn't be troubling you too much to
ask you if you knew where the luggage labels are?"

So Louie let her go. The tract she received by post on the following
day: "God's Eye Everywhere, or No Sins Secret," she dropped into the
fire. Even if Kitty really was groping blindfold on the track of that
stale old private execution, Archie Merridew didn't matter now. The
question had already entered the stage of blank fatality.


V

Louie did not succeed to Miss Levey's chair at once. Somebody else got
that, who made room for somebody else, who made room for Louie. And
her arrival at the Consolidation appeared to be the signal for Jim's
almost immediate departure from it--that is to say, she saw him for
three weeks, then missed him for some days, asked (in another week or
so) a question, and was told that a fall of some sort, supervening on
many weeks of concentrated work, had necessitated a trip to Egypt. She
hinted that she would like to know what his fall had been, but nobody
seemed able to tell her. As a matter of fact, she never knew. It was
merely an act of spite on the part of the stars against herself.

The ordeal by absence began again.

This time she was able, somehow, to endure it. She always remembered
him when she passed a shipping company's office, with a model of a
liner in the window and pictures of palms and pyramids and a sphinx
not altogether unlike himself looming up out of the tawny sand; but at
other times she well-nigh forgot him for whole days together. She
could hardly question her immediate superior, a Mr. Whitlock, about
him, and probably Mr. Whitlock could not question Sir Julius
Pepper--for Mr. Pepper was made a knight in the new year. Sir Julius
had altogether too much _nous_ and urbanity to be questioned; he
asked, not answered, questions. Such an indiscretion would have
stamped Mr. Whitlock himself as a man of a barbarous mind.

The place itself, its plate glass and marble, its gilded lifts and
high galleries and lofty central dome, its floes of desks and counters
and the tessellated floors over which rubber-tyred trollies ran to the
strong-room every night--astonished Louie. What had been consolidated,
who the men had been who had reconciled interests so great that the
mere overcoming of their mass and inertia must have been accounted a
wonder, she never really knew. Perhaps nobody really knew; perhaps not
so much men as forces had accomplished that task. In some of its
aspects the concern was a huge amalgamation of mercantile companies,
mostly railway and shipping; in others it more nearly resembled a
Government Department. But she knew that Jim knew all about it. Jim,
Mr. Stonor (Mr. Whitlock's junior) told her, and Sir Julius, had
planned the whole enterprise. Acting alone, Mr. Stonor said, Jim might
have done the work and then have been shouldered out of the rewards by
such bustling men as Robson, of the Board of Trade, George Hastie and
Sir Peregrine Campbell, and others to whom Louie had lifted up her
eyes when she had kept the appointment-books for the photographer in
Bond Street; but Sir Julius had seen to that--trust Sir Julius! Sir
Julius could cut a throat smiling with the best of them; if Jim was
the genius, Sir Julius was the impresario of the enterprise. And
by-and-by, from the frequency with which Sir Julius and other
potentates said, when puzzled: "What d'you suppose Jeffries would do?"
or "Why the deuce isn't Jeffries here?" Louie came to much the same
conclusion.

At first she was set to work with twenty other girls who, each sitting
under a porcelain-shaded incandescent that burned all day long, tapped
typewriters in the back part of the building that looked down on the
white-tiled well; and for some weeks it was a question whether she
kept her job or not. For she was dreadfully inefficient, and daily
expected a reduction to the level of the girls who, with rigid
"dolly-caps" clamped round their heads, manipulated the rubber worms
of the big telephone switchboard. But again her improved French served
her turn. Miss Lingard, who sat in Miss Levey's chair behind a screen
twenty yards away, was absent one day; Mr. Stonor haled Louie off to
Sir Julius's room; and Louie, following Sir Julius and a Frenchman
from one to another of the spring-roller maps with which the room was
lined, took down in English short-hand a conversation in French about
the boundaries of some concession or other. It was a badly botched
job, but it was initialled and passed; and Sir Julius, who did not so
much open doors and place chairs as allow it to be discovered that
doors were opened and chairs placed exactly when they should have
been, looked at Louie, thanked her, and presently sent for her again.
One night she had to wait on him after dinner at an hotel, to make
notes of certain conversations; and perhaps Sir Julius noted the
little dipping of Louie's mouth when she was summoned from the
ante-room where she had been kept waiting. She wondered whether he had
expected she would turn up in a dolly-cap. A little after that he
asked her out to dinner, without any business excuse at all. Presently
she was wondering whether she would have to walk out of the
Consolidation or else to tell Sir Julius Pepper not to be a fool.

It never came to that; exactly how near it was to doing so, Louie
never knew. It was her Uncle Augustus of all people who saved the
situation. His name came up; Louie could not restrain a sour little
smile; and "Do you know Lord Moone?" Sir Julius asked. "Oh yes," Louie
replied. That was all. Sir Julius's charming smile never varied. But
the case was altered. Amanuenses of sorts are one thing, ladies with
private information about the peerage another. Perhaps Sir Julius was
a little of a snob. At any rate, he did not allow his little
gallantries to interfere with business.

So Louie became a quite superior writer of Pitman's shorthand. The
weeks passed. Jim still remained away.

Nor had she any news of Kitty Windus, of Miriam Levey, nor yet of Evie
Jeffries. She still, however, remained good friends with Billy Izzard.
It was from Billy that she heard, one night in April, something that
filled her with a vague and ineffectual trouble.

She had gone up to his place in Camden Town, intending to spend an
hour or so with him; but five minutes was all the time Billy had to
spare for her. He was just off to Victoria to meet a fellow, he said;
if she was going that way they could go together; and she needn't
think he was going to leave her in the studio to steal his sketches.
"One of our heroes just come back from South Africa, a fellow called
Lovenant-Smith," he said. "Coming?"

"I'll go with you as far as Charing Cross," said Louie.

Before she left Billy at Charing Cross she had learned quite a lot
about his friend, Mr. Lovenant-Smith. There was nothing especially
heroic about Roy's homecoming; no doubt his work had been useful, but
it had not been fighting; for a year and a half he had not left Cape
Town. He had now come into money, and was handing in his papers; he
would hunt and manage his estate somewhere down in Shropshire. "I
shall go and stop with him," said Billy. "I only hope his horses are
better than that old yacht he nearly drowned the pair of us in." And
at Charing Cross he left Louie.

Roy was back home, then.

Well, it made not one atom of difference. Jim away was all to her, Roy
in England nothing. No doubt it was wicked.

So much the worse for Louie.

Then, not a week later, Jim returned from Egypt.

But he returned only to go away once more, this time to Scotland. She
saw him, for just one moment, coming out of Sir Julius's room. He was
very brown, but much thinner, and he had a new overcoat. He went
straight on to Scotland that day. Mr. Stonor said that he intended to
stay there for the rest of the summer. "Overwork, of course," said Mr.
Stonor.

So yet another absence in her story of absences began.

She filled it chiefly with work. She rarely got home before ten, and,
save on Saturdays and Sundays, had to leave Jimmy entirely to the
young woman who had succeeded Celeste. Billy had left town, and had
probably gone to stay with Roy in Shropshire. Of Councillor Causton
she now saw little. She wished she could save more money. Jimmy was
now five and a half years old.

Then, in October, Jim returned from Scotland. Louie half expected that
it would be she who would have to leave now, but this did not happen.
Not that she saw much of him; he did not come until eleven, and went
home again for tea. Sometimes, after he had left, she or Mr. Stonor
had to ring him up at his house in Well Walk, Hampstead; for the rest,
he remained in high seclusion. She was glad it was so. A half absence
such as this had not all absence's pangs, nor was his half presence
too much perturbation; she could take a command with calmness, and she
had nothing but commands to take. She knew by this time that he had a
second child, a little girl, and that seemed definitely to close and
bar the door against any wild and lawless hopes she might ever have
entertained. And so things went on until early in December.

The thing that entirely changed their course may have seemed an
accident to Jim, but a little reflection made it plain enough to
Louie. She had not seen Evie Jeffries since that afternoon when they
had met at the step of the bus opposite the Adam and Eve; and Evie's
whole face and manner gave the lie to the story she told when, at a
little after three o'clock one afternoon, Louie came upon her in the
counting-house of the Consolidation itself. Near the table with the
calculating machines Louie heard a clerk whisper: "Mrs. Jeffries!"
Forty pairs of eyes were furtively watching her over desk-rails and
glass screens. Some of the clerks even made errands in order to get a
better view of her. If she wanted her husband she had only to ask to
be taken to his room at once, but she stood, a slender figure in new
black furs, by a waiting-room door. Then, seeing Louie, she almost ran
to her.

"Oh, how are you?" she cried, in an acquired voice, touching Louie's
hand then dropping it again. "Really, this place almost terrifies me!
I came to fetch my husband home to tea--the car's outside--but of
course I know I'm early. I'd such a lot of shopping to do, but I got
through it quicker than I thought. Well, how are you?"

It seemed to Louie that she did not do it very well; the manner of the
_grande dame_ was the last thing she ought to have attempted. As Evie
put up her hand as if it held an invisible quizzing-glass, Louie
wondered whether she had come primarily to see her husband at all.

"Really, this is stupendous!" she said. "I wonder if you could show me
round--that is, unless I'm interfering with your duties? Do tell me
what these things are!"

They were the mechanical calculators; her comment on them was: "How
quaint!" Followed by eyes, Louie took her to the lifts; she said they
must have one like that put into the new house they had taken in
Iddesleigh Gate. "It used to belong to Baron Stillhausen--you've heard
of Baron Stillhausen, the famous diplomat?" she said. From the lifts
Louie took her to the department where the girls in dolly-caps pulled
at the snaky telephone plugs. "Oh," she exclaimed, "so _this_ is where
you talk to my husband in the evenings from, is it?"... Louie had a
little start.... She answered, however, that the private line was in
another place, and led the way. No, Evie Jeffries oughtn't to attempt
this kind of thing; her touch was too heavy. She told more about
herself than she ascertained about anybody else. As they left the
private line Louie somehow had the impression that Evie Jeffries was
counting the paces from Louie's chair to her husband's room.

She returned to her own place slowly. She wished Evie Jeffries had not
come. Her coming seemed all at once to have diminished Louie's
composure; it was as if a closed question had been clumsily opened
again. "Where do you live? I should like to come and see you," Evie
had said, as they had parted at the door of Jim's room; and that was
odd, since for quite a number of years Evie Jeffries, had given no
sign that she wanted to visit her. Kitty Windus, yes; Miriam Levey,
yes; but she had not wanted to see Louie Causton. But she wanted to
see Louie now, and had come that afternoon, Louie was now convinced,
expressly to see her. Why? Had Jim been talking? Had Kitty and Miriam
Levey been talking? Louie did not know. She only knew that she had
been settled and at peace and was now so no longer.

And through it all shone an unquenchable recollection--the recollection
of how she had once stumbled upon Evie Soames, not in wonderful furs,
asking for her lordly husband, but dressed in a skirt and blouse,
cheek to cheek in a dark back room with a fancy-stationer's son.

Evie would never forgive her that discovery.

With all the elasticity gone out of her, she resumed the work she had
left half-an-hour before.

But as she lay in bed that night in her little flat, Louie ate her
heart out again. She hated Evie Jeffries. She had remembered, too, an
old, old slander--the slander to know the truth about which Kitty
Windus had come to the Nursing Home in Mortlake Road. Was it that that
had brought Mrs. Jeffries to the Consolidation now?

Louie tossed and tossed. Oh, she cried vindictively, if it only _had_
been so.... But to have to submit to the indignity of Evie's jealousy
and not to be able to give her grounds for it! And Mrs. Jeffries
wanted to see her flat! Well, she should be welcome. Louie would
hardly be at the trouble to lie about things, but every stick of
furniture in this place in which Jim had never set foot might
silently lie for her if they would! Would that be to drag Jim in?
Well, let him be dragged in; a woman with a husband like Jim, to be
jealous! Why, with Louie ready and glad to lose her soul for him, he
was the very egotist of faithfulness! He could not be virtuous without
damning Louie with his grave and candid looks! She could almost have
laughed at him. When all was said, such virtue was a byword, and the
story of Joseph a thing for a quiet smile! Then Louie's laugh became a
cry aloud, that woke Jimmy. Jimmy went to sleep again, but she was no
calmer.

Bitter as spurge was that old story of hers now, and bitterer still
the only moral lesson it now appeared to her to have. Oh, no doubt
there was a deal to say for their conventional morality, but a pretty
moral lesson it was, after all, that you repented of a history with
one man only when it forbade a second history with another! And she
swore again that that first history should not have stood in her way;
more, far more than that was his own headstrong virtue, and perhaps
that was not all either. She had been born for him, she knew it; he
had had never a secret from her save those large open secrets that
scarce a woman shared with a man yet; his hands, that could take life
for love, were made to hold her. She knew it in her soul.... But huge
as it was, he didn't see it. He allowed a pretty face to blind him to
it all. "Oh, come, come!" she had called to him on the only night, of
all those nights, when he and she had walked together; and his answer
had been to take himself away. When she had kissed his shoulder she
had merely kissed the spot where another woman's head had lain.

Oh, if that slander _could_ only have been true!

She looked at, and almost tossed aside unread, a letter that came for
her in the morning. Not for a single moment had she slept, and she
wanted no letter from Roy--for it was from Roy. Still she might as
well read it. She did so.

Billy Izzard was with him; it had come out that Billy knew her, and he
wanted to see her. "I've come back for you," the letter said, "and I'm
not going to let you go this time. Do write when I can come and see
you. Off out now, but do write." She threw it into the fire. Marry
Roy? She would far rather commit another sin than such a reparation.
The trouble was that she could not commit the sin.

That morning she was sent for by Jim. As she turned the handle of his
door she was ready to make a bet with herself about what he wanted her
for. She was not mistaken. He wanted to thank her for showing his wife
round the day before.

His wife--always and for ever his wife.

"If you feel that you must----" she said, biting her lip with
humiliation and passion.

"It's merely----" he rumbled heavily on....

As if she needed to be told what it "merely" was! If he cared to hear
it _she_ could tell _him_ what was "merely" the matter with his wife!

"Oh, must you?" she said, quivering under the torture. He was playing
nervously with a pen. "Must I what?" he said, not looking up.

"Must you do this?"

He looked up. "Shut the door," he said. "Now----"

She listened to him almost scornfully. Again harping on that informal
execution, as if he had been right and not right, and as if it now
mattered one straw whether he "told his wife" or not! He was saying
something about a doctor; the doctor, Louie gathered, had said she
mustn't have another shock; what had Louie--always and for ever
Louie--to say to _that_? Louie clutched at her skirt with both hands.

"Don't you know?" she said, clenching the skirt hard.

"I do not."

"Then ask me again and I'll tell you," she threatened him.

"I do ask you."

Well, if he would have it.... "She's jealous," said Louie.

The smile that stole slowly over his face set her almost beside
herself. Even Potiphar's wife was probably not smiled at. Louie cut
short the easy words that accompanied the smile.

"Then if she isn't, why does she want to come and see me at my home?"
she demanded.

With quite remarkable clumsiness he pretended he had known his wife
wanted this, and smiled again. She stamped on the ground.

"My good man----" she broke out wildly....

What she said she did not remember very clearly afterwards. It was
spoken less to him than to ease her own breast. With nothing to give
her, he still could not hold his tongue nor restrain that smile when
she told him his wife was jealous. Jealous?...

Yes, and with a jealousy that could now never pass away! For, out of
absences, silences, refusals, virtues, smiles, everything, Louie had,
after all, secured something that all the smiling in the world could
not take away. She _had_ the secret he had feared to share with his
wife. She _had_ the answer to every riddle in his riddle-haunted
eyes. His wife _had_ grounds for her jealousy, after all, had she but
wit enough to know where to look for them. But she too was hopelessly
behind. She too was smelling at cold scents--telephones and visits to
flats. She suspected a gross infidelity, and never dreamed of the
existence of one so fatally searching that the other would have been a
mere incident by comparison with it. Little dullard, how should she?
Her conception even of jealousy was as limited as everything else
about her; a call or two on the private wire at night, and she was
found asking questions at the Consolidation the next day.

And suddenly Louie saw--fool that she had been not to see it
before!--why Evie Jeffries wanted to come to her flat. It was not to
see the place and its furniture. It was to see Jimmy.

Oh, if her boy could only have had eyes like a young lion!


VI

When Kitty Windus had come to Mortlake Road and had refused to sit
down until Louie had told her the truth about the wanton slander that
had linked her name with Jim's, Louie had dismissed the matter with
amused contempt. But now there seemed something rather terrible in it.
Its author's stamping-out notwithstanding, for Evie Jeffries it
appeared still to live. What had brought it up anew Louie could not as
much as guess, but there it seemed to be.

"So that's it?" she muttered to herself. "In that case I may certainly
expect to see you again soon. You won't say anything to your husband;
he'd only smile and disbelieve his eyes and ears if you did--his
powers that way are really tremendous; but you'll probably go to
Miriam Levey, who's rather a gift for these things, and Kitty'll back
her up, and you'll make out your case one way or another. Very well.
When the water's troubled there's the best fishing. _I'm_ not above
certain things now; good gracious, no! I'll find a reason for ringing
him up to-night, and if you go to the telephone yourself so much the
better. And you'll be round to see me at my flat before very long."

Evie delayed to come, but Louie knew the reason for that. Jim was
moving into his great new place in Iddesleigh Gate. That would take a
little time. Well, there was no hurry. When she did come Louie would
be ready for her.

Did she still hope, if those waters could be sufficiently troubled,
for a catch? Was she in her heart now as resolved to wreck the peace
of Jim's household as formerly she had been to preserve it? She could
hardly have answered the questions herself. It was Evie, not she (she
told herself), who was going the right way to make a mess of things;
nevertheless, she had only to remember Jim's smile to feel the tigress
stretch itself within her. The loved fool! Could he go all lengths for
love without thinking that a woman might do the same? Louie could not
kill, as he could, smoothly burying the consequences afterwards, but
she could do other things; and she was not sure that she couldn't kill
too. Ten words, it appeared, would do it. Jim, who did not fear
murder, feared those ten words; well, men feared one thing, women
another, that was all. She had only to open her mouth where Jim kept
his shut.

The only thing was that it did not seem a very sporting thing to do.
Jim had taken his risks; she would be taking none. It was not much,
perhaps, but it was enough to give her pause.

In the meantime she continued to ring Jim up frequently on the private
telephone.

It was on the second Saturday afternoon in April that Evie at last
paid her visit. Louie had sent out Rhoda, Jimmy's nurse, for the
afternoon, and was herself setting out with the boy for one of their
precious jaunts. They were half-way down the four flights of stairs
when she heard somebody ascending. She and Evie Jeffries met on the
second landing, where the charwoman ceased to whiten the edges of the
stairs.

It seemed to Louie that Evie Jeffries must have a sort of lucky-bag of
greetings into which to dip. She could hardly have been surprised to
meet Louie on Louie's staircase, but she drew a wrong one for all
that.

"Well, this is a sur--a pleasure!" she cried. "You see, I promised to
come, and here I am! Don't tell me you're just going out!"

"No; we were only going to the South Kensington Museum, and I was in
two minds about it. Come up, won't you?" Louie replied.

At first Evie wouldn't hear of it, but even as she spoke she had
ascended another step. They went upstairs again, and Louie put her key
into the lock. "You'll excuse me a moment, won't you?" she said, as
Evie entered. "In there's my sitting-room."

And she herself, turning along the passage, entered her bedroom and
took that old study of Billy Izzard's from its paper wrappings. She
hung it up on its old nail. If Evie Jeffries wished to see her flat
she should see her flat. Then she returned to the front room that
looked away over the trees and houses to Earls Court.

"So this," said Evie, as she entered, "is your little boy!"

"Yes, that's Jim. Won't you sit down? I'll put the kettle on and we'll
have tea."

She went into the kitchen, filled the tin kettle, and set it on the
gas-ring.

Evie was dressed in an exquisite coat and skirt and an expensive and
wrong hat; silk linings made whispers whenever she moved; but Louie,
who kept her good clothes for the Consolidation, wore the battered old
grey felt hat and long grey coat in which she had passed from studio
to studio. But she knew that Evie envied her her distinction of
motion. Evie's figure was pretty and "stock," charming but with no
surprise--that of a demonstrable beauty. And the acquired tones had
come into her voice again.

"How ripping up here!" she approved. "Such a splendid--view! I wish we
had a view like it in Iddesleigh Gate; but as I told my husband, even
money can't buy a view in London. Delightful! Have you the morning
sun?"

"That's in my bedroom," said Louie. "How did you come--by car?"

"No; I felt that I needed the walk. Really people will be forgetting
how to walk soon. Well, at all events, he's a beautiful boy!"

Louie saw no reason why she should not say, in the simple French which
may more or less be assumed to go with large houses and cars, that she
preferred that the boy himself should not be told so; and then she
went into the kitchen again to smile. She remembered Burnett Minor:
"Voo affectay feele!" she murmured softly. Then she made tea.

"I suppose you're not quite settled yet?" she said, returning with the
tray.

"Settled! Why, it will take us months!" Evie purred.

"Of course. It seems very odd to talk over the telephone, though, to a
place you've never seen. Sugar? Is this place at all like what you
imagined?"

Again came the ready-made answer: "Oh, it's really quite too
delightful!" It was a pity, Louie thought, that Mrs. Jeffries had not
had the advantage of a few minutes' talk with Mrs. Lovenant-Smith
before coming to see her. The Lady-in-Charge at Rainham Parva might
have warned her.

But Louie knew that already her very chairs and mats and brown-papered
walls were silently whispering to Evie Jeffries. She might talk of
Iddesleigh Gate, but she was thinking of nothing less than of
Iddesleigh Gate. Perhaps she had been reassured in the matter of
Jimmy's eyes, which were as blue as Roy's, but her own eyes were
taking in everything for all that. Let them. Louie wondered whether,
did she turn her back for a few minutes, her visitor would question
the child.

"The Amaranth Room?" she presently interrupted Evie's flow to say.
"Have you really a room called that? How lovely it sounds!"

"Nearly fifty feet long, my husband says; why, it has to have three
large fireplaces, as well as the radiators, but of course there's
steam-heat all through the house. It's delicious, not to walk into
cold patches all of a sudden. And all the windows on one side are
double, so that the place is perfectly quiet. You must come some time.
Of course," she took herself up, "our other house was quite a poky
place; my husband never really settled there; but at Iddesleigh Gate,
he says, he can really stretch himself."

Louie meditated for a moment. Then: "What's really been the matter
with him?" she asked. She knew that Evie would probably not believe
she didn't know; for that reason it was better to ask.

But she got no information. It was overstrain, Evie replied lightly,
and then on the top of that he'd slipped one night and caught his head
on the corner of a fender. He'd slipped because he'd been really
fagged out, what with starting the Consolidation and one thing and
another. "But he looks all right now, don't you think?" Evie asked.

"Perfectly, I should say, from the little I see of him."

"Of course you mostly do Sir Julius's work, don't you?"

"Mostly."

"It must be great fun for you, being taken out by Sir Julius
sometimes. My husband told me that."

"Quite amusing."

"Miss Levey was never taken out like that!"

"No? Have you seen her lately?"

But again Louie got little information. Included in what she did get,
however, was a lie. Evie reported that Miss Levey, now at some Women's
Emancipation League or other with Kitty Windus, had actually been
going to write to Louie to suggest that she, Louie, should apply for
her old place. Louie gave a little nod. Of course Miriam Levey, rather
than own to defeat, would pretend that she had left the Consolidation
of her own accord. Louie rose.

"But perhaps you'd like to see my place?" she said. "Not that I think
you'll find it very amusing. But you can see it if you like."

"I should love it! Is Jimmy coming? Do you know, Jimmy, I've got a
little boy like you, but not nearly as big?"

"Has he got a helmet like mine?" Jimmy demanded.

"No; but I think I shall have to get him one."

"You stay here, Jimmy," said his mother; and she led the way to the
kitchen.

Evie praised the kitchen and its meagre appointments, and was then
shown the bathroom. "It hasn't a crystal bath," Louie said, "but it
does to wash in." She lingered in the bathroom a little; she was
thinking of another bath and certain old jokes about brown-paper
parcels. Then, first showing Evie the bedroom that had been Kitty's,
she passed to her own room at the back.

Against the wall on the left lay Jimmy's bed; her own was across the
room, with its head under the break of the mansard roof. The little
built-out window, from the glass sides of which rows of chimney-pots
could be seen, faced the door, and over the fireplace on the right,
full in the light, hung Billy's study. It was the second thing on
which Evie's eyes rested. Louie was careful not to look at it.

For in that place at any rate she was going to strike; the rest might
fall out afterwards as it would. As she turned away to pat Jimmy's
pillow she was suddenly fighting white; the little creature had come
for it and should have it. And she should have it swiftly and without
warning. Even as Louie had turned her back her heart had given a
leap....

For up to that moment it had been always possible that Jim had not
spoken of his intrusion into Billy's studio that evening; but there
was no doubt now! Jim--or perhaps Billy Izzard--had told her. Probably
Billy. Probably Billy first, and then, seeing she already knew, Jim.
All at once there rushed upon Louie, as she passed from Jimmy's bed to
her own and smoothed the coverlet of that also, what had happened
later that same evening, when her arms had supported a collapsing Jim
in a Swan Walk doorway and she had passionately called him: "Come,
come! Come, come!"

She spoke quietly; quietness was so much more destructive.

"This is where I get the morning sun. But it's very windy. The wind
blew that picture you're looking at down the other day." Then, without
either pause or change of tone: "By the way, that's what you came to
see, isn't it--that and my boy?"

Simultaneously with her blow she was commenting to herself: "That's
good-bye to you, Sir Julius; she'll see I don't come back to the
Consolidation after that; will you have Miss Levey back again, or will
you try her friend Miss Windus? I don't think you'll offer Miss Windus
an--er--increase of wages. As for me, I suppose I can sit again;
nothing matters now. Or there's a plainer way still----"

The next moment she had called sharply: "Go away, Jimmy, till I call
for you! Go and look out of the window for Rhoda!"

Then she turned and faced the woman who had taken two quick, running
steps towards her. Insolently she smiled into her eyes.

"That was it, wasn't it?" she said.

Mrs. Jeffries did not fight white. The blood had thronged to her head
until her very lips seemed swollen; Miss Levey could hardly have
spoken more thickly. She spoke, too, in a passionate ellipsis than
which Louie's own five words did not go more straight to the heart of
the matter.

"Oh, you would if you could--I've known that a long time!" she cried.
"Wouldn't you just--rather! You'd do it if it was only to give _me_
one for myself! _I_ know you."

Louie thought she rather liked her for making a fight of it. She still
smiled. "Then that was it?" she said.

Evie flushed even more deeply. "You didn't suppose I didn't know all
about that absurd meeting, did you?" she said, with a still darker
flush.

"Dear me, no. I've known for weeks that you 'knew'--if we mean the
same thing. Perhaps we don't, though. Anyway, I can quite understand
your wanting to see for yourself. Miss Levey can't tell you
everything."

Evie's inability to speak for mere fury was so evident that Louie,
after watching her for a moment, continued:

"As for that picture, naturally I wanted to keep it. I'm sure you'll
see that for yourself."

Here Evie flamed. "'Naturally!'" she broke out. Louie gave an almost
humorous shrug.

"Well, surely it's natural?"

"Natural!... As if his coming in wasn't the merest accident!"

"Oh, I know that; but what _are_ you here for then? And now that you
_have_ been and seen, what can you possibly do about it?"

Evie's lips seemed as thick as if a bee had stung them. She broke out
again.

"'It!'--I like your 'it,' Miss Causton or Mrs. Causton or whatever you
call yourself!"

Louie coolly smoothed the folds of her blouse. "By 'it,' I mean, of
course, my loving your husband," she said. "As you guessed, I knew
that you knew about that picture. But it's really a much older thing
than that! I don't quite know how old; while you were still engaged to
somebody else--as old as that anyhow. And as it's purely my affair,
and even he can't stop it, I wonder what _you_ can possibly do!--I'm
'Miss' Causton, by the way."

Louie had almost a genius for these last words that could be taken up;
she smiled again as Evie, taking them up, said: "Oh, _are_ you!"

"Well, I don't think I need be longer than I like, but that's neither
here nor there. The important thing at present is whether you were
wise to come to-day or not. I wonder whether you'd let me give you a
piece of advice?"

And that, as Evie still stood speechless with rage, might be described
as the end of the first round. There was a long pause during which the
two women stood looking at one another. Then the second round began,
with a rapid exchange of half sentences.

"Advice! Thanking you very much for your kindness----"

"Oh, please don't raise your voice; they aren't double windows here."

"Advice is cheap."

"Far from it, believe me."

"You common----"

"Sssh, ssh, ssh! Your husband wasn't above asking my advice----"

"I'll take very good care----"

"Please--there are other people in these flats."

"Well, is noise anything new here?" said Evie grossly.

"Oh, you really shouldn't say those things!"

And again they fell back, as it were, for breath. It was Louie who
presently resumed.

"I don't in the least know why I should want to advise you," she went
on. "I'd no intention of doing so when you came into this room, and to
be frank I still half hope you won't take the advice. But you'll
please yourself about that. It's this. Don't be a little fool. Go
home, and don't tell your husband you've seen me at all. If you do
you'll make a sad mistake. You say advice is cheap; well, this isn't;
it's fearfully dear. It's not the first time I've tried to help you,
and I really haven't strength to do it any more. No, don't try to
think of fresh names to call me either; already you've called me
common and told me that the tenants here are used to hearing angry
wives, and one can have too much of that. So go home, and say nothing
to your husband about where you've been. Believe me, it'll be quite
the best."

It did in truth cost her more, far more, than she had intended to pay.
The greater fool she, she told herself, but--she gave a quick, defiant
glance round the bedroom, as if her eyes sought somebody who dared to
meddle in her affairs. She would be a fool if she wished; who should
stop her? This jealous little scold had fair warning now; let her take
it and go while there was yet time. Louie had all but spoken her
former _fiance's_ name once; with much more provocation she might
forget herself and involve Jim too in a catastrophe of ten little
words; and she wanted to do the sporting thing after all. Let Jim's
wife take her fill of that canvas of Billy's, then, and go. Her eyes
were glued to it now. As she looked Louie exulted; it _had_ been
so--precisely so; not all Evie Jeffries's looking could alter that
fact....

But suddenly, as if even in this gratification and triumph lurked a
peril best avoided, Louie strode to the canvas, took it from its nail,
and set it on the floor by the little fireplace with its face to the
wall. She had felt the tigress stretch again. To put that thing out of
sight was the safest thing to do. She turned to Evie again.

"Please go," she said. ("Yes, mother's coming in a minute, Jimmy.) You
see, he's calling me. Forgive my turning you out like this, but do, do
go, and don't tell your husband where you've been. Good-bye."

But Evie Jeffries seemed to suspect that Louie was merely "coming it
over her" with something indefinable, essential, not to be acquired.
After all it was she, this shabby, grey-eyed woman, who wrote
shorthand for a weekly wage, and herself, Mrs. James Herbert Jeffries,
who lived in the mansion in Iddesleigh Gate. Perhaps she felt herself
challenged; at any rate she plunged her hand into her lucky-bag once
more.

"Oh, there's no need for such a hurry," she said frigidly. "For one
thing, I'm a little particular about who I take my advice from. You
needn't think I don't see you're just shutting me up?"

Louie was almost hushing, soothing. "Then let me shut you up. You've
seen all you came to see; if there's anything else you want to know,
ask me, quite quickly----"

And Louie, in her eagerness to get rid of her and to remove herself
from danger, almost gladly submitted to what Evie said next.

"Oh, of course, if you've--an appointment," she said, with a toss.

"Yes, I've an appointment--you understand," she answered, with a
little shepherding movement of her hands.

But the next moment that too had turned into something else.

"Oh, you little fool!" Louie broke out, suddenly seeing. "You don't
suppose I'm trying to get you out of the way so that I can meet _him_,
do you? Good gracious, woman, he's never set foot in this place in his
life, and I'll see he never does! Perhaps I wanted you to think he
had--I don't know what I thought--with one and another of you I'm
getting almost past thinking--but that's the truth anyway! _Now_ are
you satisfied? Or have you got the idea so thoroughly into your stupid
little head that nothing will shake it? If you're going to spend your
Saturday afternoons going round to every place you think might
possibly----"

But the denial counted for nothing. Evie turned haughtily.

"Who's making the noise now? And why should I believe you? I knew
before I came you'd say that----"

"Oh, how you try me!... I _do_ say that. There's nothing else to say.
Do you think if it was any other way I shouldn't boast of it, to you
or anybody else? Why, how _can_ you know so little of him--not to
speak of myself----"

"You needn't talk as if you hadn't already had the cheek to tell me
you loved him!"

"Did I? Upon my soul, I sometimes don't know whether I do or not! Say
I don't--say I lied--say I sometimes almost hate him as much as I do
you and you me."

"Oh, very likely, the grapes being sour," Evie scoffed.

"Then if they're sour----? What more do you want? Isn't that enough?
And isn't it more than enough that I let you stand there and tell me
so? Oh, I'm doing my best to warn you--you'll make a great mistake if
you make me _try_ to get him!" She stamped. "_Won't_ you go?"

Evie too stamped. "Oh yes, I'll go, and so will you, I promise
you--from Pall Mall----"

"Anything you like--only go----"

But as Evie took a step towards the door a little accident turned
Louie suddenly as white as paper. Billy's study leaned against the
wall; Evie's skirt or foot caught it as she passed; and the canvas
fell. Evie gave a short laugh and pushed it with her shoe.

The dear symbol, nay, the very evidence of so many dreamings, that
poor thing of wasted smiles and sighs and tears, the pearl from the
heart of the oyster-grey----

A kick of her rival's shoe was treatment good enough for it----

It was as if the hives of her own breasts and the heart beneath them
had been trodden on.

Louie stepped slowly forward. "No, stop," she said.

She stood for a moment looking down at the picture; then she spoke
slowly.

"You were quite right to come," she said. "You have reason to be
jealous."

Evie affected not to hear, but she heard. Louie continued:

"A moment ago I told you not to tell him you'd been here. Now I want
you to tell him. He may even be expecting it. You see we have spoken
of it, he and I."

Evie Jeffries seemed about to say something, but "Just one moment,"
said Louie quietly----

She placed the picture against the wall again, face outwards. She did
not display it as a taunt now; it had served its turn. As if Evie's
looks had cheapened it, she no longer wanted it. She stood looking at
it.

"It was the last time I sat," she murmured to herself.

Even that pale shadow of a bridal was to be taken from her.

Well, let it go.

This time it was her own foot that kicked the canvas aside; then like
a flash she turned--Louie at her deadliest.

"I suppose you're aware you've lost him, whether he knows it yet or
not?" she demanded truculently.

Again she was grateful to Evie that she stiffened up against her. Evie
smiled.

"Oh, that way--'whether he knows it or not'--nobody minds _that_ kind
of losing! _That_ wasn't what you were trying to make me believe a few
minutes ago. Thank you very much for the tea, not forgetting the
advice," she went on, "and if I might return the compliment, I should
like to give you a piece of advice too. You say you could get married
if you like; I'd jump at that if I were you! You see, there's your
boy. Quite a well-behaved little fellow he seems--quite a superior
child--and now that I've seen for myself, I'm perfectly satisfied,
thank you!"

"Then," said Louie, advancing, "I'm going to spoil your satisfaction.
Listen to me." Her eyes were like saucers of ice. "You've lost your
husband. I'm not going to tell you how, but I'll tell you how you can
find out. You can tell him what he wouldn't believe when I told
him--that you're jealous. You've reason; ask him what it is. If he
doesn't tell you, he daren't; if he does--ck!--it's all up between
you. Do you suppose," she said slowly, "that _you're_ the kind of
woman men tell things to? You, who can neither trust him nor be
trusted by him? You, who spy on him when his back's turned? You, who
listen while a miserable little Jewess makes mischief for you--for I
guess Miriam Levey sent you here? _You_ think you love him? Look at
me, I say"--she rapped out the words like a command--"listen, and I'll
tell you _my_ idea of loving a man! I've messed my life; if you were
anything but what you are you'd know that if you wanted to hurt me
your way wouldn't be to point at my little boy and look round my
bedroom as if you expected to find pipes and overcoats there! Oh,
that's not the way! The way would be to let me see what a perfect
marriage could be; there might be tears in my eyes then! But what's
this you show me instead? Oh, I know what your marriage is without
telling. It would take you and a woman to make a wife for a man! And
what would mine have been if I hadn't thrown my chance away? What
should I have said if I'd seen what you think you've seen? Listen! I
should have said: 'Go, if you like; find a woman if you can whose
love's like mine; search the earth for her; I give you leave, and I
shall be waiting for you, just the same, when you come back and say
there isn't one!' But had _you_ thought of that? Not you! At a word
you're off, asking whether this and that's true, because you don't
trust him; and so he gives his trust to somebody else! That's what
you've lost--and you don't even miss it, you know so little of love!"

Evie had fallen back against the wall, a little intimidated by her
vehemence. She did not understand, but she seemed to apprehend that
there was something she did not understand. Louie broke out anew.

"_You_ know love! And when and how did you learn it, pray? As you
learned your shorthand and things (oh, you're trying hard to forget
you ever knew them!) at that place in Holborn? Why, you failed in your
petty little examinations there; do you think love's easier? Something
you get out of a text-book and answer a paper on? Your husband might
know if you don't! _He_ knew just what those other lessons were worth,
but he doesn't seem to know that loving has a genius too--that one in
a million has it as a gift and the others mimic it as you're mimicking
people in your dress and talk now! And you call _me_ common--me, who
told your husband long ago what his only, only chance was! Oh, I
mustn't say any more or I shall say everything! And you toss your head
and say: 'Nobody minds that kind of losing!' That's your idea; that's
what you really think! Why, your mind wants a window as badly as that
little dark back room at your Business College.... Oh, it maddens me,
the sheer waste! A necklace of love--pearls--and good gracious, a bit
of cheap glass in the middle of it! Yes, I mean you."

She was walking rapidly up and down; she struck the rail of Jimmy's
cot with her hand as she passed. Evie, cowed, watched her from the
wall. Louie stopped before her.

"What do you _do_ for him?" she said bitterly. "What do you _give_
him? What do you _bear_ for him, suffer for him? Don't whimper--tell
me--you've made pretty free with me--put that handkerchief away and
tell me----"

But instead of putting the handkerchief away, Evie burst into loud
sobs. Louie watched her remorselessly. Tears, of course--no doubt that
was the way she managed Jim----

"That's no good with me," she said harshly. "I want to know what you
do for your husband besides following him about and asking questions
about him."

Evie's hand moved as if for a chair. There was none. She lifted her
head, walked across the room, and fell across Louie's bed. Louie still
watched her unmoved.

"Well?" she demanded again, after a quarter of a minute.

Muffled in the bedclothes, Evie's voice came.

"I give him all--all I--have. You talk as if--as if--I'd no right--to
be on the earth at all."

"Well?"

"Oh, you do--you do! How--how can I give him more--than I've got? Oh,
you think you know, but you don't--you don't know what I've gone
through--you've never had that horrible morning--when I was to have
been married--and I never expected Jeff to propose, but he did----"

"Oh, for goodness' sake, get up!" Louie cried.

"He did--one day--and I said No at first, but he caught hold of me....
And even then I was jealous about Kitty--I know I'm jealous--but he
told me afterwards that I needn't be jealous of poor Kitty because
he'd only done it because he thought he couldn't have me--I know I'm
jealous--it hurts sometimes so that I can only cry and cry----"

Louie hadn't wanted this at all. Again she cried: "Oh, get up!" but
Evie continued to sob.

"And then when Jeff saw you--that night--at Billy's--it was worse than
ever, but I kept it from him. I'm not like you, Louie--it's no good my
telling myself I don't mind--even though I knew it was all an accident
it was like a knife----"

"Oh, don't lie there like that!" Louie muttered.

"And then Miriam Levey reminded me of that thing Archie had said--but
he's dead now--and I know it was absurd, but I did think he liked you.
You've--such ways, you see--I expect you've been a governess or
something in swell houses--I've got to learn them too, now, but Jeff
says I'm really very quick at it----"

Louie was pacing the floor now, but more slowly and with downhung
head. This was the very last thing she had wanted. More than ever she
hated this unresisting piece of pulp; but strike again she could not;
no, not with Evie's soul as it were a naked picture for her to set her
foot upon. And unless she did strike it was now quite, quite final. To
take it lying down! Gladly she would have goaded her into a fresh show
of resistance; contemptuously she would have told her to stand up and
fight; but the child--Louie felt her to be a child, and herself a
faded woman--was merely beyond all decency exposed. Louie only wanted
to cover her up again as quickly as possible--her confessions, her
abjectness, her appalling artlessnesses, her humiliating appeals. She
was beginning to sob once more.

"Oh, don't go on like that; do get up and pull yourself together!"
Louie snapped.

"I do love him--I haven't anything else to give him--except my
life--he could have that--you couldn't give him more than that----"

"I could stop blubbering for him," said Louie curtly, resuming her
walk.

Yes, it was final. Evie had overcome; Louie now backed out of the
whole affair. If Jim liked to tell her of his own accord, well and
good; it still seemed the only way out; but what was the good even
then? Evie Jeffries would no more acquire love as Louie understood it
than she would ever acquire the _nous_ to preside without betrayals at
Jim's table at Iddesleigh Gate. And if Evie had lost Jim, so had
Louie. By her silence she was relinquishing him now. She saw his image
recede, slowly, slowly, as if it had been indeed that ship of her
fancy, outward bound, her own vessel already condemned for breaking
up. Yes, the ship was drawing away. The eyes of her spirit tired of
watching it; surely now she might turn them elsewhere; but no--there
it was still, very small, leaning, no doubt, to a brisk breeze, but
hardly appearing to move.... No, it was not gone even yet; that sudden
anguished searching for it was but a trick of the eyes; it was still
there--a speck----

And it had only needed six words: "James Herbert Jeffries killed
Archie Merridew."

Suddenly Louie herself sank to the floor by Jimmy's cot. Evie heard
her sinking. She rose from the bed and ran to her. But Louie cried
aloud and put up her hand.

"For God's sake don't touch me--go now--and say nothing."

The touch of Evie Jeffries would have been more than she could have
borne.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mother, there _is_ a gentleman!"

It was Jimmy's voice outside the door.

Slowly Louie rose to her feet. "Very well," she called shakily; "talk
to him till I come. Please go at once," she added to Evie.

Evie began: "I'm sorry I said----"

"Oh, do you want me to strike you?"

"Can't I--do anything--for you?"

"_Go!_"

She heard the outer door close behind Evie Jeffries. By that time her
eyes were straining at a wide and empty horizon....


VII


Sec._a_

What followed when, after a few minutes during which Louie bathed her
face in the bathroom, she entered her sitting-room again, fell
mercifully flat. Any visit would have been an anti-climax; a visit now
from Roy--it was Roy--was even welcome for that reason. If she must
see him, best get it over.

He was sitting on a rush-seated chair with Jimmy between his knees.
Jimmy was playing with his watch. Save that the rims of his stolid
porcelain-blue eyes were pinkish, as if with suppressed tears, he had
not greatly changed. He wore a braided morning-coat; his silk hat,
stick and gloves lay on another chair. His watch slipped from his
boy's hand and dangled by its chain as he rose. His voice carried
Louie instantly back to the carpenter's shed at Rainham Parva.

"It's me, you see, Louie; here I am, like a bad penny, always turning
up."

Louie spoke listlessly. "How are you? I'll get you some tea."

A minute later, with a "May I come in here?" he had followed her into
the kitchen. He merely got in her way, if she could be said, in her
complete exhaustion, to have a way at all. She was cutting bread and
butter.

"Louie, old girl," he said piteously over the bread-board, "why didn't
you--tell a fellow?"

Louie did not answer. Then Roy chirped up a little, as if something
might now, past all discussion, be taken for granted.

"Well, this settles it," he said. "Clinches it entirely. You know what
I mean."

Louie did know. "Just take the kettle off, will you?" she said.

"So you see that's settled--clinched," said Roy, quite bustling.
"Right you are. The only question now is; how soon can you pack up."

"We'll talk about it presently, if there's anything to say. There
isn't, though. Will you carry the tray in?"

Jimmy ran straight to his knee again. "May I give him some jam?" said
Roy; and then he added to the boy: "Oh, come, don't mess yourself up
with it like that!" Louie remembered his account of the accident with
the centre-board: "Jam and all the lot!" but she did not smile.

"Rhoda will be here in a few minutes, then I'll have a short walk with
you," she said. "I've nothing to say, though."

Presently Rhoda did come in, and Louie put on her hat and old grey
coat. They went out and walked slowly across Eelbrook Common towards
Walham Green. There she told Roy that his return could make no
difference whatever. "Don't talk such stuff, Louie," he said; "sit
down." They sat down on a bench on the side of the common past which
the District Railway runs and talked.

The air rang with the shouts of poorly clad children at their Saturday
afternoon play; the common was a-crawl with urchins. Into Roy's
honest, statue-like eyes tears had come; none came into Louie's. She
only shook her head.

"You're only lacerating me," she said.

"But, Louie----"

"You want to lacerate me?"

"But--the little chap----" Roy said presently, with a gulp. "Will you
tell a fellow how you manage?"

That Louie did not mind doing, more or less. "And now I must go back,"
she said, rising.

"I'll walk back a bit of the way with you. I'm not going to let you go
like this."

At the little drinking-fountain she stopped. "Don't make it harder,"
she said. He had been indicating the rabble of children.

"But look at 'em, poor little beggars!" he said. "Dash it all, I'm not
just blowing off--I _could_ do such lots for him--he could ride--and
shoot--and fish--and I've a corking little pony at grass now." He
mentioned these things one after the other, slowly, as they occurred
to him.

Louie groaned inwardly, but aloud she said: "Please don't come any
farther. Good-bye."

"But I may come again? You see, I jolly well know I could persuade
you."

"N-o----"

"I shall, though--you bet," Roy announced.

She left him, wondering whether it would have made any difference at
all had he, in asking her to marry him, told her once, even once, that
he loved her.

But she did not return home. Instead, she walked past the block of
flats, crossed Putney Bridge, and sought her old Nursing Home in
Mortlake Road. As a drunkard might pant for a drink, so now in her
extremity she wanted to hear gaiety and laughter and talk. Though she
paid for it in prostration afterwards, she felt that without some such
intermission she could never get through the night. And to-morrow was
that dead day, Sunday. Further than that she did not see; beyond the
anodyne of an ordinary human laugh she did not inquire. It seemed to
her a matter of the last moment to herself that Miss Dot and Miss Cora
should be at home; if they were not, she felt that she must walk
straight into a public-house, as a man might, and get herself
something to drink.

But Miss Cora and Miss Dot were at home; they had just come in from a
matinee. They made an onslaught on Louie. Had she seen the piece? Oh,
the funniest thing! They really had had some luck at the theatre at
last! The last time it had been a slum piece, all heartstrings and
gutter-snipes; and the time before that--would Louie believe it!--just
when they had expected to see frocks and dancing and suchlike, the
curtain had gone up on a dentist's parlour! Two half-crowns for seats
in the pit for that! It was almost like paying money to go and see
another Nursing Home!

"But give the poor girl some tea--what are we thinking of!" said Miss
Cora.

"No, thanks--I've given two people tea this afternoon already," said
Louie. "Tell me about the play."

And, both speaking at once, they told her about the play--_such_ a
frock as Ellaline Terriss had worn!--an e-_nor_-mous pink hat, pink
like a rabbit's ear, and a frock, chiffon over pink satin.

Ah! That was better!

"But where's my bonnie boy?" Miss Cora demanded.

"Oh, let's show her the new one, the little Crowley baby!"

The little Crowley baby was brought in....

"May I invite myself to supper?" Louie asked by-and-by.

"Oh, do stop!"

"Then give me some stout or something. I'm not sleeping very well."

"Oh, we'll see that's all right----"

And when, at ten o'clock, Louie left, it was with a sleeping
preparation in her pocket. She took it in bed. It did its work. Half
Sunday had passed when next she awoke.

On the Sunday afternoon she went with Jimmy and Rhoda to Bishops Park;
then, packing them off home, she crossed the bridge again and took the
bus to Buck's. At Buck's she again stayed until ten, and she smiled
as, on the way home again, she remembered the little party to which
Chaff had once taken her, pigtail and all. If Chaff had had a little
party that night she would have invited herself to it; it would have
been something to do. Although it was half-past eleven when she
reached her own door she was not in the least tired; had she not slept
until well after midday? She walked back to Putney Bridge again. There
a man spoke to her. She wondered what he would have said had she
stopped; it would have been amusing to know. She felt that she had not
had enough amusement. She wished she could have gone back to the
Business School in Holborn again. That had been amusing. Mr. Mackie
had been very amusing. One of his songs, he had said, that about the
Gorgonzola Cheese, never failed to create merriment.

She hummed as much as she could remember of the air of it as she
walked, and took two more of Miss Cora's sleeping-tablets before going
to bed.

She found, too, an entirely unexpected amount of amusement at the
Consolidation on the Monday morning. Not that everything was not much
as usual; the routine was the same; but a quite comic spirit seemed to
pervade the whole place. Lacking a Mr. Mackie, Sir Julius, dapper and
perfect in his aplomb, who had thought of asking her to be his
mistress but had found a more profitable use to put her to, seemed
somehow as funny as needs be; she wondered she had not noticed it
before. It happened that Mr. Stonor had to rebuke one of the telephone
girls that morning; there was diversion in the way in which the girl
tossed her dolly-capped head and told him that she would talk to her
"boys" if she liked. Quite right; that was the way to take things, as
a joke. And Mr. Whitlock was portentously funny over a nought or so
that had strayed into a pile of figures; and the glazed screen that
marked Louie's superiority to the other girls in the same room seemed
inanimately funny, and Jim himself was funny, when you came to think
of it, sitting invisible there in his room with people coming and
going all the time, as if the earth would have ceased to revolve on
her axis or the sun have omitted to rise if Jim had not rung bells and
jotted his initials on his bits of paper. And funnier than everything
else was the fact that Louie should be there at all. She laughed
outright when, at nine o'clock that night (she had been kept on
account of some urgent joke or other), she stepped from the
upholstered lift and out into Pall Mall.

Again she wished that Chaff had had a little party somewhere. Jim, she
understood from Mr. Stonor, was giving a party presently, not a little
one, but a large, probably a screamingly funny, one. But its humour
would probably be lost on Jim. Jim did not always see jokes; that was
where Jim had made the mistake; he needed somebody to point them out
to him. His wife, being part of the comedy herself, naturally could
not do so; she cried when she should have laughed; she had no "kick,"
no "buck," in her. It was a pity, for Jim needed these things, and
ought to have married a woman who had them. Well, it was rather late,
but not too late for Louie to go into a shilling gallery somewhere.
To-morrow, if she could get away early, she would go up to Camden Town
and see Billy. Billy was a joke too, spending whole, real days in
making artificial coloured shapes on canvases or solemnly scratching
his copper plates. One of the best things Billy had ever done a woman
had humorously kicked aside with her foot. That showed what these
things were worth in the big, big world. Of course a sense of humour
was really a sense of proportion. The dreadful lack of it showed when
people magnified trifles so. Yes, she would go and see Billy
to-morrow. To-night, the theatre gallery.

She found Billy on the following evening, still etching, the humorous
fellow, but amusingly grave too. Perhaps he had heard, or guessed,
something from Roy. He was dissolving the ground from a plate; Louie
wondered what the curiously sweet-smelling fluid he was using was;
and then she remembered. She had smelt that same smell when Jimmy had
been born--which event also, by the way, had been the consequence of a
lark. She remembered, too, the wonderful, releasing sleep that
heavy-smelling stuff had given her. It might be rather a useful thing
to know where to find that stuff; it was necessary to Louie's
enjoyment of the world and its humour that she should sleep at night.
It struck her as a very happy chance that chloroform should be used in
the practice of etching. She admitted that it was rather a shame to
steal from Billy again, but she felt that she now needed that
wonderful, releasing sleep even more than when Jimmy had been born.

An hour later she left Billy's with the ribbed blue bottle in her
pocket.

The remainder of the week also was gay; so was the next week, though
perhaps with a slightly diminishing gaiety. But the level was restored
again when Roy once more turned up at her flat, again on a Saturday
afternoon. Really she could have laughed, as they say, fit to split.
Roy, who seemed to think that you could ask a woman to marry you
without the--formality, call it--of telling her you loved her! It was
not for Louie to spoil the sport by pointing out the inessential
omission. Not that she hesitated at all now; she had only to think of
how it might have read in the paper: "At Saint So-and-So's, on such
and such a date, by a Reverend Statue, assisted by another Reverend
Effigy, a Tanagra Figure, to a trodden-on Painting by Billy Izzard,"
etc., etc. Oh no. That wasn't loving----

There was no doubt that Roy loved Jimmy, however; and that was perhaps
a little more serious. He had handed in his papers; he could provide
for Jimmy; there was riding, and shooting, and fishing, and the
corking little pony; but ... it was impossible, of course. Jimmy was
Louie's and nobody else's. If Jimmy must play on Saturday afternoons
with the rabble on Eelbrook Common, well, he must; Louie would do all
for him that she could. It was a pity--especially about the pony. It
disturbed Louie a little. It disturbed her, in fact, so much that that
night she remembered something she had forgotten about for ten days
and more--the blue ribbed bottle she had stolen from Billy. But as she
had left it in her drawer at the Consolidation she had to sleep as
best she could without it. Perhaps it was just as well. It was not a
good habit. She wondered whether Billy had missed the bottle; she
would go up again and see, taking that old painting with her. That
would square accounts a little. Certainly it was a shame to loot Billy
like that.

She went up to Billy's with the study. Billy received it absently. And
she was glad that Billy had a code, for he was grave again, and seemed
all but on the point of talking seriously to her, code or none. But it
blew over. He asked her whether she'd noticed him with a bottle of
chloroform one night; he'd lost one; stupid thing to be careless
about; must be somewhere; had Louie seen him with it, cleaning a
plate?----

"No," said Louie.

"Well, it may turn up. Thanks for the canvas. To tell you the truth I
rather wanted it. Merely as painting it's--_knuk_!" Billy made a
delectable little foreign gesture.

"I'm no judge of things as painting," said Louie. "And--I
say--Billy----"

"What?"

"I don't know that I haven't changed my mind about not sitting--if you
asked me very nicely----"

But Billy looked gravely at her again. "Oh, it doesn't matter. I'd
rather you didn't. I think I can manage. You'd do far better----"

He looked hard at her, but the code held.

"To do what?" said Louie.

"Well, not to sit," said Billy, turning away.

Louie felt ridiculously touched; nevertheless, much as she liked his
loyalty, she wasn't going to talk about Roy. "Thanks, Bill," she said
simply. "You're a good sort." And there the matter dropped. Neither
for Billy nor for anybody else did she ever sit again.

It seemed strange that so slight a thing as an indisposition of Mr.
Stonor should obscure the mock-sun of Louie's gaiety as if a vapour
had crept across it; but so it was. Occasionally urgent messages were
taken to Iddesleigh Gate at night; usually Mr. Stonor took them; but
one day Mr. Stonor left at lunch-time and did not come back that day.
Sir Julius himself, who had had dinner sent in that night from a
restaurant, sent for Louie and gave her certain papers and
instructions. As soon as she learned the errand she asked whether
nobody else could go instead. She invented an improbable engagement.

"I'm sorry," Sir Julius said, "but I want Whitlock--I shall have to
wait here myself till you come back. If you could go, and give them to
Mr. Jeffries himself--nobody else----" That was as near as Sir Julius
ever came to a direct command.

So, as Evie Jeffries had seen Louie's home, Louie was now to see hers.

She went reluctantly, by bus, changing at the bottom of Park Lane.
For days she had not seen Jim; she did not want to see him now.
Therefore, though go she must, she would not sit down; she would not
lift her veil; she would be in and out of his house again as quickly
as ever she could. She passed the Marble Arch, and at Lancaster Gate
got down and walked. She reached Jim's vast and tomblike house.

At the word "Consolidation" the man who opened the door said: "This
way, please," and led her along a low-lighted hall, round a staircase
the outspread double wings of which resembled some huge alighting
architectural bird, and along a narrower passage to the library. At
the touch of a switch the room broke into a softly masked glow of
light. "Please to sit down," said the servant; but Louie stood by the
great writing-table, looking towards the door. Evie had taken stock of
her dwelling; Louie looked only towards the door of Jim's library.

Then, as the door was opened, she pushed up her veil after all. Jim
came in.

He placed a chair for her; she still refused to sit. She continued to
stand even when it appeared that the papers she had brought would
require some examination. As she stood, a bell, not unlike that of a
muffled telephone, sounded for a moment and then ceased. It was
followed by a tap on the door.

"Come in," said Jim, without looking up.

Evie Jeffries entered, dressed as if for a State ball.

Even had Louie not seen her face, the touch of her hand would have
told her what had happened. Evie was back again exactly where she had
been; the only difference was that she now hated Louie the more that
she had abased herself before her. Many times on that other Saturday
afternoon Louie had begged Evie to go; now she longed to fly herself.
After another minute Jim put it into her power to do so. He rose and
returned the signed papers.

"Thank you," he said, and added, turning to Evie, "I don't know
whether Miss Causton's had supper?"

Evie's face lighted up as artificially as if there too a switch had
turned up masked lights.

"Yes; won't you let me have them lay a tray for you, 'Miss' Causton?
It won't be any trouble," she said.

"No, thank you," said Louie. "Please don't come to the door, Mr.
Jeffries."

He came, however.

"Good-night," he said, as the door was held open for her to pass out.

"Good-night," said Louie.

She remembered afterwards that she noticed, out in Oxford Street
again, a sandwichman bearing an illuminated board with the
announcement of some concert or entertainment upon it. Pasted across
the device was a strip of paper with the words "To night" upon it. The
date was the sixteenth of May. At midday on the day following, Louie,
coming out of Mr. Whitlock's room, saw Jim advancing as if to come in.
He saw her, stared hard at her for a moment, paused irresolutely, and
then turned abruptly and walked away again. She watched his back,
shaped like a church-door, but bowed as if with a load too great for
him, disappear in the direction of his own room. He had made no
attempt to conceal the deliberate avoidance. She half expected, though
she knew not why, that he would send for her presently. He did not.
She was infinitely glad. Something, she was perfectly sure, had
happened between him and his wife. It was the first time he had not
sought her aid. Had he, now that it was too late, told her? Had he
realised that it was too late to tell her? Had he, realising this,
determined to take his last risk and to tell her nevertheless? Or had
something happened that had at last unsealed his eyes so that he now
saw with a clearness as merciless as that of Louie herself?

Louie could not tell. She only saw his face again, the face of a man
suddenly old as he realised his defeat, and his disappearing back,
hunched under a burden that was crushing him at the last.


Sec._b_

"If I were you, Miss Causton, I should leave early to-night," said Mr.
Whitlock that afternoon.

Louie looked up inquiringly from her desk.

"Oh, if you _want_ to make it a matter of conscience! But Mr. Jeffries
is giving a party to-night, and both Sir Julius and I will be leaving
early."

He nodded pleasantly as he dropped his hint, and left her. Louie
resumed her work.

It was a report of phosphate deposits, but it had been worked over
before and needed little attention; or at all events it got little. At
five o'clock Louie gathered the sheets together and put them into the
drawer of her table. As she did so some object at the back of the
drawer knocked. She thrust in her hand. It was the forgotten bottle of
chloroform.

"I'd better throw that down the basin," Louie muttered.

"I think, Mrs. Jeffries, that you and Roy between you put me a little
beside myself for a day or two. Much better not to have things like
that lying about; to have 'em's sometimes to use 'em. I'll throw it
away now."

But as she was rising, one of the telephone girls brought her a cup of
tea and a biscuit, and she closed the drawer again. The girl began to
talk. She was Ivy Warner, the operator who would talk to her "boys"
over the telephone if she wanted. Louie, as a matter of fact, always
admired the skill with which she did this. A yard away not a word
would be audible, and yet Miss Warner would be carrying on a
flirtation in Brighton or Bournemouth under the eye of Mr. Stonor
himself.

"Well, how's Harold?" said Louie, smiling over her cup of tea.

"Oh, not at all pleased with himself; backed three winners to-day, one
at thirty to one, a gift; like to see him? He's coming up this
evening," Miss Warner replied. "I'd a chin with him a quarter of an
hour ago; dinner at seven-thirty, at the Troc; no steak-and-fried and
a small dark lager when a thirty-to-one creeps home! He's bringing a
friend, too; a dasher, Harold says; he's almost afraid to introduce
him; and Daisy says she really must give her steady a show to-night.
Know anybody?"

Louie thought for a moment. It was a thing she had never done before.
She gave Ivy a sidelong look. Again she had the hunger to go
somewhere, to see lights, hear music, smell the cigarettes of men.

"Do you care to take me?" she said.

Ivy was surprised. "You?"

"Oh, not if I should spoil sport----"

"Rather not! Do come! What a lark! I'll get on to Harold again now.
You really mean it?"

"Yes."

"Good egg!" cried Ivy, glad to make up her party and to improve her
relations with her business superior at the same time. "I didn't
really want Daisy, you see. Of course they do talk loud at the Troc,
but Daisy's just a _ti_ny bit ... well, a perfect stranger had the
cheek to come up to our table and speak to her the last time----"

Ivy ran jubilantly off to ring up Harold again.

Louie told herself it was a stupid thing to do; she was getting into
the habit of loitering about late at night, heedless of Jimmy. But she
had promised, and would go. If she didn't she would only be mopishly
thinking, and, after all, she would be no more out of place with
Harold's dashing friend than Evie Jeffries would be in another place
much about the same time. Perhaps the dasher for Evie and Jim's guests
for herself would have been more fitting, but no matter. She would be
a dasher too. She wondered how Ivy was describing her dashing self to
Harold over the telephone.

At seven o'clock she made herself ready and left the Consolidation
with Ivy.

She retained no very clear recollection afterwards of the gaieties of
that evening, but the little she did remember arrested her a little.
She had a confused impression of the lights and tables and pilastered
walls of the Trocadero as of a bright beckoning vista, stretching
before her as the white road stretches before the knapsacked and
stout-booted walker. She knew that many girls went that way.... The
air was heavy with the smell of coffee, smoke, dishes, scent; Harold's
friend was a Hebrew "killer," and reminded her of Miss Levey; noisily
he claimed the privilege, which Harold noisily disputed, of paying for
everything; and the waiter contemptuously accepted a tip of a
sovereign from him. Perhaps he was the same cavalier who had resented
Daisy's loudness; at all events he appeared to find in Louie's
quietness another--or perhaps the same--meaning; and Louie had to move
her chair and to change her attitude at the table. Afterwards they
went to the Alhambra; it was Ivy who cried out at the sight of two
cabs and refused to go unless they all went together. At the Alhambra
Louie was afraid she was rather a wet blanket; she declined to "take a
walk round" and remained seated in her stall; but Harold's friend was
fickle as well as dashing, for by-and-by she had a glimpse of him with
another lady, who had not dined with them at the Trocadero. She
wondered how Evie Jeffries had got on--or "got off," to use an
expression of Kitty Windus's.

Suddenly--perhaps it was this thought of Evie elsewhere that did
it--she got up, sought the cloakroom, and walked out of the place. She
went home, once more quietly and steadily thinking of that vista of
lights and cigar smoke and laughing mouths and gilded pilasters--the
way so many girls went.

The row she expected with Ivy in the morning was not a moment delayed.
It began in the lift in which they both happened to ascend together.

"Good-morning," said Ivy stiffly. "I hope you got home in good time
last night."

Louie waited until the liftman had clashed the doors to behind them;
then, "I'd a headache," she said.

"Well, perhaps it's better than having one in the morning," said Ivy,
more icily still. "All the same, there is such a thing as playing the
game when you go out with people."

"I'm sorry. I oughtn't to have come," said Louie, walking with the
angry girl to the telephone exchange, where the lights on the great
switchboard came and went like the sparks at the back of a gate. They
were coming and going with great rapidity that morning.

"Oh, _much_ obliged for your company, I'm sure," Ivy broke out,
"but----"

"Sssh!" came from a girl who stretched the rubber worms.

"Sssh yourself, Daisy Dawson--time you knew how to speak into a phone
by this time!" snapped Ivy.

But another and a louder "Sssh!" came from another girl, and suddenly
Mr. Stonor's head appeared in the doorway.

"Quiet there!" he rapped out, and withdrew his head again.

"Sssh, Ivy--haven't you heard?" Daisy Dawson said softly.

Ivy's own voice dropped. "What?" she asked quickly.

"About Mr. Jeffries."

"No--what?"

Mr. Stonor came in again--but not before Louie had heard Daisy whisper
the word "dead."

Suddenly she remembered the face of the liftman. She clutched Mr.
Stonor's arm. He looked at her. There was no need to ask.

Dead!

Slowly she walked to her own table behind the screen.

The place was at once busier and more hushed than usual. Presently Mr.
Whitlock passed. Mr. Whitlock was thirty-five; he looked fifty. Louie
only asked him a single question: "Is it in the papers?" He nodded and
passed on. She sought a messenger.

It was on the right-hand middle page. It had happened at one o'clock
in the morning; cerebral haemorrhage. That very evening he had given a
dinner-party; followed a short interview with Sir Peregrine Campbell,
one of the guests; but Mr. Robson, of the Board of Trade, had declined
to be seen. There would be no inquest. Heartfelt sympathy was extended
to his widow. Half-a-column of "career" closed the announcement. The
early edition of the evening paper for which she sent out had it all
over again.

Dead!

Another absence!

Slowly she turned the paper and began at the beginning again.

Jim dead!

       *       *       *       *       *

That night Louie fetched Jimmy from his cot into her own bed. It was
not, she felt, for comfort for herself; she had a strange feeling that
she ought to be comforting Jimmy. Jimmy slept, but, her eyes
alternately very widely open and very tightly closed in the dark, she
whispered to him.

"Well, we've got to look after ourselves now," she whispered to the
sleeping child. "I don't think we care to go and see him, do we? I
daresay she wouldn't refuse it, but we won't go. That was his wife,
who said she'd a little boy like you, and of course we're all very
sorry for her. She did give him all she had; she said she'd die for
him; but of course that's only a way people have of speaking when they
mean they love somebody very much. Nobody wants her to die for him
really; that would only be two dead instead of one; and she won't
actually die.... And she'd a sad thing happen once before. Nobody ever
knew about that really except me and him; she didn't know; if she did
she might die really then. People have to be careful, they say, when
they've once had a terrible shock. It's rather funny though, Jimmy,
that mother shouldn't feel very much of a shock. Of course I didn't
expect it, but as soon as it happened it seemed as if it had been
bound to happen. That's queer--and I don't know that I wouldn't have
preferred the shock."

She continued her curious consolation of the sleeping boy:

"Poor Jimmy--poor mother! He looked beaten yesterday--done--but I
didn't think.... One never does think till afterwards.... Ah, but
mother did, once, a long time ago! Mother danced with him once, and
knew then--and the next time she saw him Jimmy was quite a big boy. If
she could only have seen him a few times in between, she doesn't know
what she could have done, but she would have done something, and then
by-and-by he would have blessed her for it--she's sure, quite sure he
would.... And there she was, with some terrible people at a music
hall----"

She choked a little.

Even had it been proposed to her, she did not think she would have
gone to see Jim. That was another woman's affair; Louie's part in him
had nothing to do with what remained now. Not that she was so absurd
as to tell herself she had lost nothing; even when it is only yours to
look at, or perhaps to put your arms about just once, a body counts
for something; but the other woman had had nothing but that. "Nothing
but" was perhaps a queer way of putting it; for that "nothing but"
Louie might perhaps have given all the rest; but all the same it was
not very much her business now. Her business now, like the other
woman's, was to jog on just the same, the one in her empty mansion,
the other one it didn't much matter where. Again she whispered to
Jimmy.

"How thankful I am that I didn't tell her--something! Oh, I don't
think I could bear her to die for him as she said she would! And I do
hope he's not been so foolish as to--leave anything about; anything
that might tell her, I mean; she can't bear what I can bear. But he
wouldn't. He wouldn't cover it all up so cleverly to go and uncover it
himself. I always knew it would happen if that insect got in his way;
Jim wouldn't think twice about it, except how to make himself safe....
Was it Kitty Windus who told me that about him--about his father
having been an English merchant captain and his mother a Corsican
woman he found dancing in a sailors' cafe in Marseilles? If it wasn't
Kitty I dreamed it; mother's done a most foolish lot of dreaming; but
it must have been Kitty. They say they do that kind of thing in
Corsica. I shall never know.... Well, it doesn't matter.... Poor
little Jimmy...."

She deliberately tried herself, to see whether she was capable of
emotion about him. She seemed to be quite incapable. "I'm simply
callous," she thought.... She tried several days later, on the day of
his funeral; the words she repeated to herself had no meaning for her;
"gone," was merely a thing of four letters, "never" one of five. The
word "absence" she quite failed to understand. She heard that Mrs.
Jeffries was prostrated, but quite as well as could be expected in the
circumstances. Perhaps Mrs. Jeffries too was repeating the words
"gone" and "never." Louie wondered whether she would marry again. It
would not surprise her.

Well, if Evie Jeffries could live, Louie could live.

A piece of news, however, which she had from Billy Izzard one
night--this was three weeks later, but her stony insensibility had not
changed--filled her, she could not have told why, with a quite
different disquietude. It appeared that Billy had felt himself
permitted to call on Mrs. Jeffries, and had found her (so he told
Louie) busy with her husband's private papers. Sir Julius also had
been there, to advise if advice was necessary; and Sir Julius had been
of opinion that the painful task would be more quickly over if Mrs.
Jeffries would have a number of papers that were written in shorthand
transcribed by a clerk, if a trustworthy one could be found. "In fact,
he mentioned your name," said Billy. But it appeared that Mrs.
Jeffries knew some shorthand, had other reasons, and so forth. She had
refused to have the papers transcribed. Naturally they had not said
much with Billy there, who, indeed, had not stayed many minutes; but
he had gathered that the papers formed some sort of a journal.

Louie felt her flesh grow queerly crisp. This, by the way, was in a
little restaurant not far from the Palace Theatre. Louie had had three
consecutive nights at home, and felt that a fourth would kill her. She
and Billy were going to the Palace afterwards.

"A journal?" she said slowly.

"Well, Pepper rather thought a novel of some sort; I'd a talk with him
afterwards; but I suppose he only knows what Mrs. Jeffries tells him.
It wouldn't surprise me in the least that poor old Jeff dabbled a bit
in that sort of thing. I'm quite sure he'd have made a painter. One of
the big sort he was, the Titian, Leonardo, Cellini sort--the big men,
who can take an art or so in their stride."

"What made Sir Julius think it might be a novel?" Louie hoped that her
new agitation did not show.

"My dear girl, you know as much about it as I do."

"And it was in shorthand?" she demanded.

"Yes."

"His own?"

"I'm sure I can't say. It was in his desk though. Why?"

"And you say Mrs. Jeffries is reading it herself?"

"Well, when Pepper suggested you--and a Miss Levey, I remember,
whoever she is----"

"Miriam Levey? Yes?" Louie said, with a jerk.

Billy looked hard at her. "What's the matter?" he said abruptly.
"You're as queer as Mrs. Jeffries herself was about it."

"She was queer? How, queer?"

"Oh, I don't know. How can one describe things like that--just
impressions one gets?"

"Did she strike you as queer because she'd perhaps read some of it?"

"Well, I understand it was private----"

"You mean she _must_ have read some of it to find that out?"

"I suppose so."

Again Louie had that curious crawling of her flesh. She hesitated for
a moment; then, slowly:

"What sort of terms are you on with Mrs. Jeffries, Billy?"

Billy stared. "Oh, quite all right--I don't understand----"

"Have you any influence over her?"

"What sort of influence?"

Louie hesitated again. After all, it might be only a fear. She went
on. "Say influence enough to advise her about reading that journal, or
novel, or whatever it is?"

"Lord, no!" said Billy. "I was his friend, hardly hers, you see."

"Well, if it could be put as a matter of friendship with him?" Louie
was speaking almost feverishly now.

"I wish I knew exactly what you meant," said Billy.

"Order me another cup of coffee. That's what I can't tell you, because
I don't know myself. But let me ask another question. Do you happen to
know whether there are any real names in this thing, whatever it is?"

"Really, I----"

"Just a moment. I'll tell you why I asked. If this is a journal, and
has names of people in it, the chances are mine's there."

Billy was quick enough. He nodded. "I see; at least I think I see. You
mean about his coming in that night and Mrs. Jeffries possibly not
liking it? Well, to tell the truth I don't think she did much. I could
have bitten my tongue out when I'd told her; but I suppose everybody
doesn't look on these things quite as we do. You mean in a
word--excuse me for putting it rather stupidly--that she's jealous and
thinks she can find out the truth? Supposing there was any 'truth' to
find out, I mean?"

"That's the idea. Of course there was no 'truth.'"

"Well? Why not let her discover that and make her happy, poor thing?
You see, he was her husband."

Louie winced, but continued. "That's all right as far as it goes; but
if there's one name there are probably others."

Billy looked sharply at her. "Other women? Jeffries? Don't you believe
it!"

"I didn't say women."

"What then?"

"I can't tell you. And perhaps I'm altogether wrong. But if I'm not
wrong, Billy," she said earnestly, "and you've any interest in Mrs.
Jeffries at all--say interest enough to want to spare her a shock--she
oughtn't to be allowed to read that journal--always supposing it is a
journal."

Billy gave a short laugh. "Really, Louie! Is this the Surrey or
Sadlers Wells?... You're not serious, are you? Of course it's bound to
be painful for her at the best, but she's getting on very well--better
than we could have hoped."

Louie made a little despairing gesture. "Well, I can't tell you any
more."

"Well, if it's as important as all that, why don't _you_ tell her?"

"I couldn't do that either. Look here, Billy, couldn't you find out
about this for me?"

"Oh, dash it all--how can I?"

The saucer of Louie's coffee cup was full of ashes; she added another
butt and reached for Billy's case. She looked Billy full in the eyes
as he struck a match for her.

"Do you go much to Iddlesleigh Gate?"

"Well, just at present, you see----"

"I mean, _could_ you go? Where does all this take place? In that
library? (Yes, I've been once.)"

"Yes. At least that's where we were that night."

Still Louie looked steadily into his eyes. "Now this really _is_
Surrey and Sadlers Wells," she said. "Could you get those papers out
of her way--anyhow--so that she doesn't read them?"

Billy twinkled a little. "It takes a woman to do these things, Louie."

"Suppose without asking any questions, if you did I'd--marry Roy?"
After all, to marry Roy would be no worse than anything else now.

The twinkle disappeared. Billy was grave again.

"I'd like you to marry Roy, Louie."

"Well ... is it a bet?"

But Billy only shook his head. This was all very well at the Surrey
and Sadlers Wells, but----

"It's a physical impossibility," he said. "And if it wasn't, I
wouldn't."

"That's final?" said Louie, looking into his eyes for the last time.

"My dear girl----"

Louie rose. "All right. Then we may as well get across to the Palace
and see Marie Lloyd."

Could she have said more? She did not see that she could. The chance
loomed tremendously large now that Jim _had_ been fool enough to write
things after all, and perhaps his wife was reading that journal, if it
was a journal, even then----

Louie could not stop her--no power on earth could stop her. What Jim
had evidently not told her during his life she would read for herself
now that he had gone.

He would have done better to tell her.

But there: perhaps it was not a journal----




ENVOI


"Er--Miss Causton," Sir Julius called--"can you stay for an hour or
so? No, a private affair; I hope it's not inconvenient; thanks."

He was sickly white and tired-looking; Louie's feet dragged, and her
brain was as stupid as clay. She was sorry for Sir Julius; _he_ had
had no preparation; as for Louie, it seemed to her now that she had
been passing from preparation to preparation for such things for the
whole of her life. This of the morning paper was only the latest of
her fulfilments. The prophets, she thought dully, must have been very
weary men.... But on second thoughts perhaps Sir Julius ought to have
been sorry for _her_. Even shock is better than foreknowledge.

For of course Sir Julius wanted her to stay in connection with this of
Mrs. Jeffries.

She had put on her hat and coat for departure; as if she walked in her
sleep, she passed out of Sir Julius's room and removed them again. She
bathed her face, but felt little fresher; then she returned.

It was about Mrs. Jeffries. It was about them both. Then Louie seemed
to remember that Sir Julius had said something about an article on his
deceased colleague for a Review. She supposed that was why he wanted
her to take down his words in shorthand. Unless it was for the
inquest. Gas-taps turned on, doors and windows sealed, and so forth
usually meant an inquest; and they would not have far to look for her
motive--suicide through natural grief. It was only that morning, but
it seemed an old, old story already.

"'_Tragic Death of a Lady_,'" Sir Julius read out from a newspaper....

Well, he wouldn't want that part taken down; indeed, if he had only
known what Louie knew, he would not have asked her to take anything
down at all. But her notebook was on her knee and her pencil
sharpened, and when Sir Julius had finished reading her hand began to
write, purely functionally, of itself. It was no trouble to Louie
whatever; nay, her hand was hardly called upon more than her mind; the
pencil itself did it. After all, foreseeing minds could be put to
better uses than the mere recording of things after the event.... "Sad
business, sad business," Sir Julius was saying; and "Sad business, sad
business," the obedient pencil wrote. But Louie wondered whether it
was so sad after all. Evie Jeffries had had a sort of foreknowledge
too; "I could die for him; you couldn't do more," Louie remembered she
had once said; yet it was doubtful whether she had died for love of
him after all. Call it gas-taps, or the shock of discovering that Jim
had been her lover's executioner....

Still, she had died, from whatever reason, and she had been quite
right in saying that Louie could have done no more.

It was strange the way the pencil wrote of itself. "A page of notes in
her husband's shorthand has been found under one of the pillars of the
writing-table," it wrote, and it omitted, as if it had been endowed
with Louie's own intelligence, Sir Julius's interpolated remark, "I've
got that page of notes, by the way." Mr. Whitlock had described to
Louie one day a contrivance called a tele-writer; a pen dipped itself
into a bottle of ink and wrote, unassisted, a telegraphed message;
they were new, and they hadn't got them at the Consolidation yet; but
they were putting them into some of the post offices, Mr. Whitlock had
said. Her pencil moved like the pen of a tele-writer. She watched it,
fascinated. It was writing as Sir Julius talked, about Jim now.

"--lived an intense crowded life too. I should say at a guess there
weren't many things he hadn't done at one time and another, short of a
murder or a matrimonial infidelity. Don't think he could have been
tempted to do that. One woman could do anything she liked with him,
but the others wouldn't have much chance----"

Very little chance, Louie thought. That, in a sense, had been the
tragedy of it all. Louie knew more about that than Sir Julius; Louie
had once said, "Come, come!" to him, in tones that might have brought
angels from above and devils from below running for love, but it had
not made a ha'p'orth of difference to Jim. Sir Julius seemed to be
praising him for it; Louie was not sure that she could exactly do
that; she could almost as soon have mocked him for it; but you neither
mock nor praise a blind man merely because he is blind. It was funny
that Sir Julius, with not very much to boast about himself, should set
up an idol of faithfulness; and not just for somebody else to worship
either; that was the funny part; men did that kind of thing; sinned,
and yet worshipped, and called it "the maintenance of an ideal." They
honoured Joseph, and winked when his back was turned. Perhaps they
made much of him because of his rarity. Well, it was all the same to
Potiphar's wife....

But all at once something seemed to have happened to the pencil. It
was tele-writing very furiously. Sir Julius was reading from another
piece of paper; Louie fancied, somehow, that it might be the piece
that had got wafted under the pillar of Jim's desk.

   "_--show him that red thing on the floor and that curved thing on
   the door._"

   _But now Archie in his turn seemed to have become divided. He had
   turned suddenly white. But an habitual pertness still persisted
   in his tongue. I don't think this had any relation whatever to
   the physical peril he seemed at last to have realised he was in.
   I stood over him huge and black as Fate.... "Spare him if you
   can," that generous bloodthirsty devil in me muttered
   quickly...._

   "_Merridew," I said heavily, "you'll disappear to-morrow
   morning--or----_"

   "_Shall I?" he bragged falteringly...._

He seemed to have hanged him, then; "that curved thing on the door"
evidently meant a hook. That was rather revolting; these were the
things about murder that Louie had not wanted to know.

"Sort of grim tale he would write," said Sir Julius to the pencil;
"and of course--_de mortuis_ and so on--but he did marry the wrong
woman. I suppose they're together again now."

Suddenly Louie put down her notebook and pencil. Her voice, too, as
she spoke, seemed to her a sort of tele-voice.

"Will you excuse me just a moment?" she said. "I'm thirsty."

She went out. When she returned, three or four minutes later, Sir
Julius sniffed once or twice and asked her if she had a toothache. She
took up the pencil and notebook again. Sir Julius resumed.

"What was I saying? Oh yes, about his marrying the wrong woman.... But
he was a mass of contradictions, and one of 'em was that he merely
idealised her. Pretty, of course, but poor Jeffries could have done
better for himself than that. She never could bear me...."

Louie felt no difference yet; she did not know how long these things
took. For a moment she wondered what would happen after ... and then
it struck her as foolish to wonder about a thing she would know so
soon. She fastened her eyes on the pencil again. It went on writing,
and Louie was thinking of her loved little Jimmy now.... She could not
have done very much for him; he might even have grown up to bear her
some sort of a grudge; Roy would adopt him; he would be far, far
better with Roy. There was a pony out at grass for him now; he would
ride and shoot and fish, and his father would send him into the army;
and perhaps there was already a baby girl somewhere in the world who
would one day be his wife--the right wife. "Was die Mutter traeumt, das
vollbringt der Sohn...."

It was far, far better....

"Well," the pencil wrote, "there's nothing to be said now, poor
creatures.... Funny smell in here, Miss Causton; I'll smoke if you
don't mind."

Sir Julius lighted a cigar. Its penetrating odour mingled with that of
the sweet, releasing stuff.

Ah! It was coming! The pencil wrote no less quickly, but it looked a
little smaller and farther away.

"But sometimes it made me almost angry that he hadn't married the
woman he ought...."

Louie felt her head sinking.... Yes, the woman he ought....

That had been the real fatality....

Her lids dropped for a moment, and then heavily lifted again; but she
could still see the pencil--mistily--dreamily--as if endued with a
life not her own--flying on.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Louie, by Oliver Onions

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF LOUIE ***

***** This file should be named 37838.txt or 37838.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/8/3/37838/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa McDaniel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
