The Project Gutenberg EBook of English Society, by George Du Maurier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: English Society

Author: George Du Maurier

Release Date: November 23, 2011 [EBook #38111]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENGLISH SOCIETY ***




Produced by Judith Wirawan, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







[Illustration: George Du Maurier]




  ENGLISH SOCIETY


  SKETCHED BY

  GEORGE DU MAURIER


  [Illustration: Logo]


  NEW YORK

  HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS

  1897


  Copyright, 1886, 1887, 1888, 1889, 1890, 1891, 1892, 1893, 1894,
  1895, and 1896, by HARPER & BROTHERS.

  _All rights reserved._




GEORGE DU MAURIER


I was thinking, with a pang, just before I put my pen to the paper, that
the death of George du Maurier must be a fact of stale interest to the
reader already, and that it would be staler yet by the time my words
reached him. So swiftly does the revolving world carry our sorrow into
the sun, our mirth into the shade, that it is as if the speed of the
planet had caught something of the impatience of age, and it were
hurried round upon its axis with the quickened pulses of senility. But
perhaps this is a delusion of ours who dwell in the vicissitude of
events, and there are still spots on the earth's whirling surface,
lurking-places of quiet, where it seems not to move, and there is time
to remember and to regret; where it is no astonishing thing that a king
should be a whole month dead, and yet not forgotten. At any rate, it is
in the hope, if not quite the faith, of this that I venture some belated
lines concerning a man whom we have lost just when he seemed beginning
to reveal himself.


I.

It was my good fortune to have the courage to write to Du Maurier when
_Trilby_ was only half printed, and to tell him how much I liked the
gay, sad story. In every way it was well that I did not wait for the
end, for the last third of it seemed to me so altogether forced in its
conclusions that I could not have offered my praises with a whole heart,
nor he accepted them with any, if the disgust with its preposterous
popularity, which he so frankly, so humorously expressed, had then begun
in him. But the liking which its readers felt had not yet become
loathsome to the author, and he wrote me back a charming note, promising
me the mystery, and enough of it, which I had hoped for, because of my
pleasure in the true-dreaming in _Peter Ibbetson_; and speaking briefly,
most modestly and fitly, of his commencing novelist at sixty, and his
relative misgivings and surprises.

It was indeed one of the most extraordinary things in the history of
literature, and without a parallel, at least to my ignorance. He might
have commenced and failed; that would have been infinitely less amazing
than his most amazing success; but it was very amazing that he should
have commenced at all. It is useless to say that he had commenced long
before, and in the literary property of his work he had always been an
author. This theory will not justify itself to any critical judgment;
one might as well say, if some great novelist distinguished for his
sense of color took to painting, that he had always been an artist. The
wonder of Du Maurier's essay, the astounding spectacle of his success,
cannot be diminished by any such explanation of it. He commenced
novelist in _Peter Ibbetson_, and so far as literature was concerned he
succeeded in even greater fulness than he has succeeded since. He had
perfect reason to be surprised; he had attempted an experiment, and he
had performed a miracle.

As for the nature, or the quality, of his miracle, that is another
question. I myself think that in all essentials it was fine. The result
was not less gold because there was some dross of the transmuted metals
hanging about the precious ingot, and the evidences of the process were
present, though the secret was as occult as ever. He won the heart, he
kindled the fancy, he bewitched the reason; and no one can say just how
he did it. His literary attitude was not altogether new; he perfected an
attitude recognizable first in Fielding, next in Sterne, then in Heine,
afterwards in Thackeray: the attitude which I once called confidential,
and shook three realms beyond seas, and their colonial dependencies
here, with the word. It is an attitude which I find swaggering in
Fielding, insincere in Sterne, mocking in Heine, and inartistic in
Thackeray; but Du Maurier made it lovable. His whole story was a
confidence; whatever illusion there was resided in that fact; you had to
grant it in the beginning, and he made you grant it gladly. A trick?
Yes; but none of your vulgar ones; a species of legerdemain, exquisite
as that of the Eastern juggler who plants his ladder on the ground,
climbs it, and pulls it up after him into the empty air. It wants
seriousness, it wants the last respect for the reader's intelligence, it
wants critical justification; it wants whatever is the very greatest
thing in the very greatest novelists; the thing that convinces in
Hawthorne, George Eliot, Tourguenief, Tolstoy. But short of this supreme
truth, it has every grace, every beauty, every charm. It touches, it
appeals, it consoles; and it flatters, too; if it turns the head, if it
intoxicates, well, it is better to own the fact that it leaves one in
not quite the condition for judging it. I made my tacit protest against
it after following Trilby, poor soul, to her apotheosis at the hands of
the world and the church; but I fell a prey to it again in the first
chapters of _The Martian_, and I expect to continue in that sweet
bondage to the end.


II.

If I venture to say that sentimentality is the dominant of the Du
Maurier music, it is because his art has made sentimentality beautiful;
I had almost said real, and I am ready to say different from what it was
before. It is a very manly sentimentality; we need not be ashamed of
sharing it; one should rather be ashamed of disowning its emotions. It
is in its sweetness, as well as its manliness, that I find the chief
analogy between Du Maurier's literature and his art. In all the long
course of his dealing with the life of English society, I can think of
but two or three instances of ungentleness. The humor which shone upon
every rank, and every variety of character, never abashed the lowly,
never insulted women, never betrayed the trust which reposed in its
traditions of decency and generosity. If we think of any other
caricaturist's art, how bitter it is apt to be, how brutal, how base!
The cruelties that often pass for wit, even in the best of our own
society satires, never tempted him to their ignoble exploitation; and
as for the filthy drolleries of French wit, forever amusing itself with
one commandment, how far they all are from him! His pictures are full of
the dearest children, lovely young girls, honest young fellows; snobs
who are as compassionable as they are despicable, bores who have their
reason for being, hypocrites who are not beyond redemption. It is in his
tolerance, his final pity of all life, that Du Maurier takes his place
with the great talents; and it is in his sympathy for weakness, for the
abased and outcast, that he classes himself with the foremost novelists
of the age, not one of whom is recreant to the high office of teaching
by parable that we may not profitably despise one another. Not even
Svengali was beyond the pale of his mercy, and how well within it some
other sorts of sinners were, the grief of very respectable people
testified.

I will own myself that I like heroes and heroines to be born in wedlock
when they conveniently can, and to keep true to it; but if an author
wishes to suppose them otherwise I cannot proscribe them except for
subsequent misbehavior in his hands. The trouble with Trilby was not
that she was what she was imagined, but that finally the world could not
imaginably act with regard to her as the author feigned. Such as she
are to be forgiven, when they sin no more; not exalted and bowed down
to by all manner of elect personages. But I fancy Du Maurier did not
mean her to be an example. She had to be done something with, and after
all she had suffered, it was not in the heart of poetic justice to deny
her a little moriturary triumph.

Du Maurier was not a censor of morals, but of manners, which indeed are
or ought to be the flower of morals, but not their root, and his
deflections from the straight line in the destiny of his creations must
not be too seriously regarded. I take it that the very highest fiction
is that which treats itself as fact, and never once allows itself to be
otherwise. This is the kind that the reader may well hold to the
strictest accountability in all respects. But there is another kind
capable of expressing an engaging beauty, and bewitchingly portraying
many phases of life, which comes smiling to you or (in vulgar keeping)
nudging you, and asking you to a game of make-believe. I do not object
to that kind either, but I should not judge it on such high grounds as
the other. I think it reached its perfect effect in Du Maurier's hands,
and that this novelist, who wrote no fiction till nigh sixty, is the
greatest master in that sort who ever lived, and I do not forget either
Sterne or Thackeray when I say so.


III.

When I first spoke, long ago, of the confidential attitude of Thackeray,
I said that now we would not endure it. But I was wrong, if I meant that
more than the very small number who judge novels critically would be
impatient of it. No sooner were those fearful words printed than I began
to find, to my vast surprise, that the confidential attitude in
Thackeray was what most pleased the greatest number of his readers. This
gave me an ill opinion of their taste, but I could not deny the fact;
and the obstreperous triumph of _Trilby_, which was one long confidence,
has since contributed to render my defeat overwhelming. Du Maurier's use
of the method, as he perfected it, was so charming that I am not sure
but I began to be a little in love with it myself, though ordinarily
superior to its blandishments. It was all very well to have Thackeray
weep upon your neck over the fortunes of his characters, but if he had
just been telling you they were puppets, it was not so gratifying; and
as for poor Sterne, his sighs were so frankly insincere you could not
believe anything he said. But Du Maurier came with another eye for life,
with a faith of his own which you could share, and with a spirit which
endeared him from the first. He had prodigious novelties in store:
true-dreaming, hypnotism, and now (one does not know quite what yet)
intelligence from the neighborly little planet Mars. He had the gift of
persuading you that all his wonders were true, and his flattering
familiarity of manner heightened the effect of his wonders, like that of
the prestidigitator, who passes round in his audience, chatting
pleasantly, while he pours twenty different liquors out of one magical
bottle.

I would not count his beautiful talent at less than its rare worth, and
if this figure belittles that, it does him wrong. Not before in our
literature has anything more distinct, more individual, made itself
felt. I have assumed to trace its descent, from this writer to that; but
it was only partly so descended; in what made it surprising and
captivating, it was heaven-descended. We shall be the lonelier and the
poorer hereafter for the silence which is to be where George du Maurier
might have been.

                                                        W. D. HOWELLS.




ENGLISH SOCIETY


[Illustration: POST-PRANDIAL STUDIES

FAIR HOSTESS (_passing the wine_).--"I hope you admire this decanter,
Admiral?"

GALLANT ADMIRAL.--"Ah! it's not the vessel I am admiring...."

FAIR HOSTESS.--"I suppose it's the _port_?"

GALLANT ADMIRAL.--"Oh, no; it's the pilot."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HAMPERED WITH A CONSCIENCE

TOMMY (_home from an afternoon party_).--"Mamma, darling, I've got a
great favor to ask of you.... _Please_ don't ask me _how I behaved_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FELINE AMENITIES

OLD LADY (_to fashionable beauty, who has recently married the
General_).--"And so that white-haired old darling is your husband! What
a good-looking couple you must once have been!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TAKING THE CHANCES

THE GENERAL.--"I've brought you a new book, Aunt Emily, by the new
French Academician. I'm told it's very good; but I've not read it
myself, so I'm not sure it's quite--a--quite correct, you know."

AUNT EMILY.--"My dear boy, I'm ninety-six, and I'll _risk_ it!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TRIALS OF A PAINTER'S WIFE

SIR BINKS (_who always piques himself on saying just the right
thing_).--"A--what I like so much about the milkmaid, dontcherknow, is
that your husband hasn't fallen into the usual mistake of painting a
lady dressed up in milkmaid's clothes! She's so unmistakably a milkmaid
and nothing else, dontcherknow!"

THE PAINTER'S WIFE.--"I'm _so_ glad you think so.... He painted her from
_me_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: LADIES OF FASHION AND THEIR DOCTORS

(SCENE: The Waiting-Room of a Fashionable Physician.)

FAIR PATIENT (_just ushered in_).--"What--_you_ here, Lizzie? Why, ain't
you _well_?"

SECOND DITTO.--"Perfectly, thanks! But what's the matter with _you_,
dear?"

FIRST DITTO.--"Oh, nothing whatever! I'm as right as possible,
dearest...!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "BONJOUR, SUZON!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: RIVAL SMALL AND EARLIES]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MOTHER'S DARLINGS]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DAYLIGHT WISDOM

ELDER SISTER.--"Oh! he proposed after supper, did he--after dancing with
you all night--and you refused him? Quite right! My dear child, never
believe in _any_ proposal until the young man calls at eleven in the
morning and asks you to be his wife!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN UNAPPRECIATED COMPLIMENT

"Good-night, Miss Maud!"

"I'm _not_ Miss Maud."

"Miss _Ethel_, I mean. Won't you shake hands with me? How ungrateful of
you! and just after I've been taking you for your lovely sister,
too."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: LE MONDE OU L'ON S'ENNUIE

"I see a tent. I wonder what's going on inside? Let's go and see...."

"What's the good of our going in there?"

"What's the good of our stopping out here?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE TABLES TURNED

TIRED DAUGHTERS.--"Don't you think we might _go_ now, mamma? It's three
o'clock."

FESTIVE MAMMA.--"Oh, that's not so _very_ late, darlings.... Mayn't I
have _one_ more dance?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A SLEEPY HOLLOW IN THE OLD COUNTRY

(The Common Room at St. Morpheus, Oxbridge.)

FIRST TUTOR (_waking up, and languidly helping himself to his modest
glass of claret_).--"Ah! I like a little sleep after dinner.... It makes
one ready for one's wine!"

SECOND TUTOR.--"Well, _I_ like a little sleep _before_ dinner best!"

THE MASTER.--"Pooh! Talk to me of the after-breakfast sleep in
term-time! That's what _I_ enjoy!!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TAKING ONE TOO MUCH AT ONE'S WORD

HOSTESS.--"Won't you play us something, Mr. Spinks?"

MUSICAL AMATEUR (_who thinks a good deal of himself, in spite of his
modesty_).--"Oh, don't ask me--you are all such first-rate performers
here--and you play such good music, too."

HOSTESS.--"Well, but we like a little _variety_, you know."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE ENGLISH TAKE THEIR PLEASURES SADLY]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A DAUGHTER OF HETH

LIONEL.--"Oh, I _say_, Benjamin! how splendid your wife is looking!
_She_ pays for dressing, if you _like_!"

BENJAMIN.--"_Does_ she, my boy? I only wish she _did_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A QUESTION OF AGE

TEDDY.--"How old are you, Aunt Milly?"

AUNT MILLY (_who owns to 35_).--"Oh, Teddy, almost a hundred!"

TEDDY.--"Auntie, I can't believe you! I'd believe you if you'd said
fifty!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BREAKFAST AT BONNEBOUCHE HALL

"A southerly wind and a cloudy sky proclaim a hunting morning."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BUSINESS

SIR BEDIVERE DE VERE.--"Oh, I say. How you do chaff! You never take me
seriously!"

AMERICAN BELLE.--"You never asked me!" (_No cards._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DOMESTIC ECONOMY

MATER.--"Papa, dear, do you know a halfpenny weekly paper called
_Flipbutts_?"

PATER.--"Never heard of it in my life!"

MATER.--"Well, it offers ninepence a column for answering questions, and
they _are_ so difficult, and we _do_ so want to make a little money! Do
leave off your novel and help us a little." (_Pater can only write two
novels a year, but gets L10,000 for each of them._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WHAT INDUCED HIM TO MARRY HER?

HE.--"Look! Here comes young Brummell Washington, with his bride. I
wonder what on earth induced him to marry her?"

SHE.--"Oh, probably somebody bet him he wouldn't!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A CLAIM TO SOCIAL PRECEDENCE

HOSTESS.--"You must give your arm to Miss Malecho, William, and put her
on your right, and make yourself as agreeable as you possibly can!"

HOST.--"Why, she's a person of no consequence whatever!"

HOSTESS.--"Oh, yes, she is! She's very ill-natured, and tells the most
horrid lies about people if they don't pay her the very greatest
attention!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN INTRODUCTION

"Auntie, darling, this is my new friend, Georgie Jones. He _is_ nice.
And isn't it funny, my birthday is the ninth of January, and his is the
tenth, so you see we only just escaped being twins!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BANJONALITIES

(The Freemasonry of Art.)

HE.--"I beg your pardon--but--er would you be so kind as to give me the
'G'?"

SHE.--"Oh, certainly." (_Gives it._)

HE.--"Thanks, awfully!" (_Bows and proceeds on his way._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TEUTONIC SATIRE

HOSTESS.--"Oh, _pray_ don't leave off, Herr Rosencranz. That was a
lovely song you just began!"

EMINENT BARYTONE.--"Yes, matame, bot it tit not harmonise viz de
cheneral gonferzation. It is in _B vlat_, and you and all your vrents
are talking in _G_. I haf a zong in _F_ and a zong in _A sharp_, bot I
haf no zong in _G_!"

ACCOMPANIST.--"Ach! Berhaps, to opliche matame, I could dransbose de
aggombaniments--ja?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: REASONING FROM INDUCTION

"Look, Geoffrey! That's Lady Emily Tomlinson. Isn't she pretty?"

"Yes. And I s'pose that's _Lord_ Emily walking with her!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THOSE INFELICITOUS SPEECHES

PROFESSOR BOREHAM.--"What! alone, Mrs. Highflyer? Your husband is not
ill, I trust!"

MRS. HIGHFLYER (_innocently_).--"Oh no; but he was afraid he might be,
if he came here!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SOCIAL PERSEVERANCE

MRS. ONSLOW-PUSHINGTON.--"What a very singular woman Lady Masham _is_,
Professor! I have called on her every Wednesday this month, and the
footman (who knows me perfectly) always said she was out, though
Wednesday's her day at home, and there were lots of carriages at the
door! She never calls on me--never! And when I bow to her, as I always
do, she always looks another way, as she did just now. I must really
call again next Wednesday."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE LAST STRAW!

"What's the matter, dearest? You look sad...."

"Oh, everything's going wrong. The children are ill in bed, and nurse
has got the influenza, and my husband declares that ruin is staring us
in the face, and I've got an unbecoming frock, and altogether I'm
thoroughly depressed...."

                                                    (_Breaks down._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: JUST IN TIME FOR A CUP OF TEA]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FELINE AMENITIES

THE MISSES TIPTYLTE.--"Such fun! We're going to Mrs. Masham's fancy ball
as Cinderella's ugly sisters--with false noses, you know!"

MISS AQUILA SHARPE.--"What a capital idea! But why false noses?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NEIGHBORLY COMPLIMENTS

"Tell me, Mrs. Jones, who's that young Adonis your married daughter is
looking up to so eagerly?"

"Her _husband_, Mrs. Snarley!"

"Dear me, you don't say so! I congratulate you.... Now I understand how
you come to have such good-looking grandchildren."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GENTLE TERRORISM

THE PROFESSOR.--"Will you give me a kiss, my dear?"

EFFIE (_an habitually naughty girl_).--"Oh, mammie.... I'll be _good_,
I'll be _good_.... I promise!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN UNPLEASANT SOCIAL DUTY

HOSTESS.--"Geoffrey, I want you to dance with that little girl!"

GEOFFREY.--"Oh, well, if I must, I _must_...!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: STREET DIALECTICS

BROWN (_who was all but run over_).--"Why didn't you call out _sooner_,
you stupid ass?"

CABBY.--"I _did_, sir!"

BROWN.--"Why didn't you call out _louder_, then?"

CABBY.--"I _did_, sir!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: EQUAL TO THE OCCASION

MRS. GUSHINGTON.--"Oh! oh! what a lovely, _lovely_ picture! So true,
so...."

OUR ARTIST.--"Wait a bit, Mrs. Gushington--it's wrong side up.... Let me
put it right first...!" (_Does so._)

MRS. GUSHINGTON (_unabashed_).--"Oh! oh! oh! Why, _that_ way it's even
more lovely still!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PRECEDENCE AT BONNEBOUCHE HALL DURING THE HOLIDAYS

Grandpapa takes the bride in to dinner, and the rest follow anyhow.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HISTRIONIC EGOTISM

OUR PET ACTOR (_just arrived_).--"By Jove--these good people all seem to
know me very well--nodding and smiling"--(_nods and smiles himself,
right and left_)--"uncommonly flattering, I'm sure--considering I've
never set foot in the town before!"

OUR PET ARTIST (_his chum_).--"I'm afraid it's _me_ they're nodding and
smiling at, old man! I come every year, you know--and know every soul in
the place!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A STATELY STAIRCASE WINDS AROUND A LARGE HALL]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HOW REPUTATIONS OF DISTINGUISHED AMATEURS ARE SOMETIMES
MADE

HERR SILBERMUND (the Great Pianist) TO MRS. TATTLER.--"Ach, Lady
Creichton has for _bainting_ der most remarrgaple chenius. Look at
_dis_! It is eqval to Felasquez!"

M. LANGUEDOR (the Famous Painter) TO MISS GUSHINGTON.--"Ah! For ze
music, Miladi Cretonne has a talent kvite exceptionnel. Listen to _zat_!
It surpass Madame Schumann!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: EOTHEN

COOK'S TOURIST (_female_).--"What's that jagged white line on the
horizon, I wonder?"

COOK'S TOURIST (_male_).--"_Snow_, probably!"

COOK'S TOURIST (_female_).--"Ah! that's much more likely! I heard the
captain saying it was _Greece_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE DANCING MAN OF THE PERIOD

"Been dancin' at all?"

"Dancin'? Not I! Catch me dancin' in a house where there ain't a
smokin'-room! I'm off, directly!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: UNCONSCIOUS CYNICISM

SHE.--"It's such years since we met that perhaps you never heard of my
marriage?"

HE.--"No, indeed! Is it--er--recent enough for congratulations?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: UNLUCKY SPEECHES

SHE.--"What a disagreeable thing that insomnia must be! Very trying, I
think! Do _you_ ever suffer from it, Captain Spinks?"

HE.--"Oh, dear, no. I can sleep anywhere, at any time! Could go off
_this moment_, I assure you...!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FIN DE SIECLE

"That's where poor Mrs. Wilkins used to live!"

"Why '_poor_' Mrs. Wilkins?"

"Well, her husband was killed in that horrid railway accident, don't you
remember?"

"Oh, but that was _months_ ago!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A CUP OF TEA AND A QUIET CIGARETTE AFTER LUNCH]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PRECEDENCE IN VANITY FAIR

The lady guests go in to dinner with the host and young Sir John and
young Sir James and the Hon. Dick Swiveller, while the hostess naturally
takes the arm of her nephew, Lord Goslin (_just from Eton_), so that, as
the party is just two ladies short, Dr. Jones, the great historian, and
Professor Brown, the famous philologist (_whose wives have not been
asked_), bring up the rear together.

THE DOCTOR.--"Well, Professor, we may be of less _consequence_ than the
rest, but at all events we're the _oldest_ and the most renowned!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THINGS ONE COULD WISH TO HAVE EXPRESSED OTHERWISE

PUZZLED HOSTESS.--"I beg your pardon, Lord Bovril, but _will_ you tell
me whether I ought to take _your_ arm, or Prince Sulkytoff's, or the
Duke's?"

LORD BOVRIL (Lord-Lieutenant of the County).--"Well--a--since you ask
me, I must tell you that--a--as her Majesty's representative, _I_ am
bound to claim the honor! But I hope you won't for a moment suppose that
I'm fool enough--a--to care _personally_ one rap about that sort of
thing!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DANCING MEN]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ILL-CONSIDERED UTTERANCES

WELL-PRESERVED ELDERLY COQUETTE.--"Ah! Admiral, _what_ a good time we
had there, junketing and dancing and flirting! It all seems like
yesterday! Do you remember the Carew girls, and your old flame Lucy
Masters, and that poor boy Jack Lushington, who was so desperately in
love with _me_?"

THE ADMIRAL.--"Indeed I do, dear Lady Maria! And to think of their all
dying ... years ago!... _And of old age, too!_"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN EQUIVOCAL COMPLIMENT

LADY PRATTLER (_a confirmed first-nighter, to actor-manager_).--"I
congratulate you on your success last night, Mr. McStamp!... How good
you were! It was all charmin'--so light, so bright, so well put on the
stage!... And oh! _such nice long entr'actes_, you know!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PROFESSIONAL BEAUTIES OF THE PAST

HOUSEKEEPER (_showing visitors over historic mansion_).--"This is the
portrait of Queen Catherine of Medici--sister to the _Venus_ of that
name...."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GONDOLETTE]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A FESTIVE PROCESSION

Meet of the Four-in-Hand Club, Hyde Park, London.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE JOYS OF HOSPITALITY

JENKINS.--"Good heavens! Why, there's that brute Tomkins! The skunk! I
wonder you can ask such a man to your house! I hope you haven't put him
near me at dinner, because I shall cut him dead."

HOSTESS.--"Oh, it's all right. He told me all about you before you came
in."

JENKINS.--"Did he? What did he say about _me_, the ruffian?"

HOSTESS.--"Oh, nothing much--merely what you've just been saying about
_him_."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TOO KIND BY HALF

HE.--"Oh, I've long given up dancing for my _own_ sake. I only dance now
with those unlucky girls that don't get partners. Who's that young lady
behind you?"

SHE.--"My daughter."

HE.--"Pray, introduce me!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN INFELICITOUS SPEECH

"Why, you're looking better already, Sir Ronald!"

"Yes, thanks to your delightful hospitality, I've had everything my
doctor ordered me: 'Fresh air, good food, agreeable society, and
cheerful conversation that involves no strain on the intellect!'"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DISAPPOINTMENTS OF LION-HUNTING

GUARDSMAN (_gazing at the motley throng_).--"Any great literary or
scientific celebrities here to-night, Lady Circe?"

LADY CIRCE (_who has taken to hunting Lions_).--"No, Sir Charles. The
worst of celebrities in these democratic days is that they won't come
unless you ask their wives and families, too! So I ask the wives and
families, and the wives and families come in their thousands, if you
please, and the celebrities stay at home and go to bed."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TWO ON A TOWER

JONES (_a rising young British architect_).--"Yes; it's a charming old
castle you've bought, Mrs. Prynne, and I heartily congratulate you on
being its possessor!"

FAIR CALIFORNIA WIDOW (_just settled in the old country_).--"Thanks. And
now you must find me a _legend_ for it, Mr. Jones!"

JONES.--"I'm afraid I can't manage _that_; but I could add a _story_, if
that will do as well!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AT THE ZOO

TOMMY.--"Why don't they have little shut-up houses? Why do they have
open bars?"

DOROTHY (_who knows everything_).--"Oh! that's for them to see the
people, of course!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NATURE _VERSUS_ ART

Just as Stodge is about to explain the recondite subtleties of his
picture to a select circle of deeply interested and delightfully
sympathetic women, his wife comes in with the _baby_, confound it!]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A NEW READING OF A FAMOUS PICTURE

"Oh, look, grandpapa! Poor things ... they're burying the baby!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ANTE-POSTHUMOUS JEALOUSY

"_Isn't_ Emily Firkinson a darling, Reginald?"

"A--ahem--no doubt. I can't say much for her _singing_, you know!"

"Ah! but she's so good and true--a perfect angel! I've known her all my
life. I want you to _promise_ me something, Reginald."

"Certainly, my love!"

"If I should die young, and you should ever marry again, promise, oh!
promise me that it shall be Emily Firkinson!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DISTINGUISHED PROFESSIONALS

HOSTESS (_to host, after dinner_).--"George, dear, how about asking
Signor Robsonio and Signora Smithorelli to sing? They'll be mortally
_offended_ if we _do_, and they'll be mortally _offended_ if we
_don't_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SOCIAL AGONIES

MRS. BLOKER.--"Oh, I'm sorry to disturb you at breakfast, but I wanted
to make _sure_ of you. Mr. and Mrs. Dedleigh Boreham are stopping with
me for a few days, and I want you to come and dine to-morrow, or, if you
are engaged, Wednesday; or Thursday will do, or Friday or Saturday; or
_any_ day next week!"

(_Mrs. Brown feebly tries to invent that they have some thoughts of
sailing to Honolulu this afternoon, and that they have just lost a
relative, but breaks down ignominiously._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TRUE BLUE

"But doesn't hearing those brilliant speeches sometimes make you change
your mind?"

"My _mind_? Oh, often! But my _vote_, _NEVER_!!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NOUS AVONS CHANGE TOUT CELA

THE OLD MARQUIS OF CARABAS.--"What, madam! There's your lovely but
penniless daughter positively dying to marry me; and here I am, willing
to settle L20,000 a year on her, and give her one of the oldest titles
in England, _and you refuse your consent_!!!! By George, madam, in _my_
young days it wasn't the mothers who objected to men of my sort. It was
the _daughters themselves_!!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SPEECHES ONE HAS TO LIVE DOWN

HOSTESS.--"So sorry to have kept you waiting, Mr. Green."

VISITOR.--"Oh, don't mention it. The anticipation, you know, is always
so much brighter than the reality."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TOO CONSIDERATE

MRS. BROWN.--"Oh, Mrs. Smith, _do_ have that sweet baby of yours brought
down to show my husband. He's never seen it."

MR. BROWN.--"Oh, pray, don't trouble on _my_ account."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THINGS ONE WOULD HAVE EXPRESSED DIFFERENTLY

GENIAL HOSTESS.--"What, going already, Professor?... And _must_ you take
your wife away with you?"

THE PROFESSOR (_with grave politeness_).--"Indeed, madam, _I am sorry to
say I MUST_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HAPPY THOUGHT]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FLUNKYANA

(A Visit to the Portrait-Gallery of Brabazon Towers.)

"Pardon me! But you have passed over that picture in the corner. An old
Dutch master, I think."

"Oh, _that_! 'The Burgermaster' it's called By Rembrank, I b'lieve. It
ain't nothing much. Only a work of hart. _Not one of the family, you
know!_"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "OH, DON'T YOU REMEMBER SWEET ALICE, BEN BOLT?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A WINDOW STUDY

THE MAIDEN.--"Good-morning, Mr. Jones! How do you like my hyacinths?"

THE CURATE.--"Well, they prevent me from seeing _you_! I should prefer
_Lower_ cinths!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SO _ENGLISH_, YOU KNOW!

The Miss Browns (_of "a good" Bayswater family_) playing "Buffalo Gals,"
with variations, on two American banjoes and an American
parlor-grand.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SOCIAL TARRADIDDLES

MRS. GUSHINGTON (_aside to her husband_).--"What a long, tiresome piece
of music that was! Who's it by, I wonder?"

MR. GUSHINGTON.--"Beethoven, my love."

MRS. GUSHINGTON (_to hostess_).--"My _dear_ Mrs. Brown, what _heavenly_
music! How in every _bar_ one feels the stamp of the greatest genius the
world has ever known!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: LOVE'S LABOR LOST

"Oh, papa, we've all quite made up our minds _never to marry_, now we've
got this beautiful house and garden!" (_Papa has taken this beautiful
house and garden solely with the view of tempting eligible young men to
come and play lawn-tennis, etc., etc._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE MARCH OF PROGRESS

SHE.--"After all, there's nothing better than the wing of a chicken!
_Is_ there, General?"

HE.--"I never tasted the wing of a chicken. I only know the _legs_! When
I was _young_, you know, my _parents_ always ate the wings, and _now_,
my _children_ always do!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN INFELICITOUS QUESTION

AESTHETIC YOUTH.--"I hope by degrees to have this room filled with
nothing but the most perfectly beautiful things...."

SIMPLE-MINDED GUARDSMAN.--"And what are you going to do with _these_,
then?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: I MUST HAVE THIS TOOTH OUT!

"I must have this tooth out, it hurts so!"

"Oh, _please_ don't, or _I_ shall have to wear it, as I do _all_ of your
left-off things!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NEMESIS

MRS. CONSTANTIA (_to old adorer, who has married for money_).--"And
these are your children, Ronald? Oh!... how like their mother!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TOO LATE

HE.--"What! You haven't got a dance left?"

SHE.--"No. It's past two o'clock! Why didn't you come earlier?"

HE.--"Well, a feller must _dine_, you know!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FEMININE PERVERSITY

SHE-GOSSIP (_alluding to newly-wedded pair_).--"There go 'Beauty and the
Beast,' as they are called! She _would_ marry him. Her parents strongly
opposed the match, as you may imagine."

HE-GOSSIP (_who flatters himself that he understands the sex_).--"By
George! The parental opposition must have been strong to make her marry
such a ruffian as that!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: CONSOLATION

DE SNOOKKE.--"There goes Mrs. _Gatherum_! She never asks _me_ to her
parties! I suppose I am not _swell_ enough!"

SYMPATHETIC LADY-FRIEND.--"Oh, it can't be _that_! One meets the most
rowdy people in London there."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: CAPTAIN LELONGBOW

CAPTAIN LELONGBOW (_a fascinating but most inveterate romancer about his
own exploits_).--"Who's your favorite hero in _fiction_, Miss Vera?"

MISS VERA.--"_You_ are!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AESTHETICS

MRS. VAN TROMP.--"Oh, Sir Charles! Modern English male attire is _too_
hideous. Just look round ... there are only two decently dressed men in
the room!"

SIR CHARLES.--"Indeed! And which are _they_, may I ask?"

MRS. VAN TROMP.--"Well, I don't know _who_ they are, exactly; but just
now one seems to be offering the other a cup of tea."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN ACCOMMODATION

VOCALIST (_to fair Stranger_).--"A--I'm going to sing '_Fain would I
clasp thee closer, love_!' May I look at you while I am singing?"

FAIR STRANGER.-"Oh, certainly! Or at my grandmother."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "SVENGALI!... SVENGALI!... SVENGALI!"]

       *       *       *       *       *




BOOKS WRITTEN AND ILLUSTRATED

BY

GEORGE DU MAURIER


                       { Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental             $1 50
PETER IBBETSON         { Three-Quarter Calf                       3 25
                       { Three-Quarter Levant                     4 25

                       { Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental              1 75
TRILBY                 { Three-Quarter Calf                       3 50
                       { Three-Quarter Levant                     4 50

THE MARTIAN (_Mr. Du Maurier's last work, now running as a serial in
"Harper's Magazine," began in the number for October, 1896_).

TRILBY SOUVENIR. Photogravures in Portfolio          8vo            50

IN BOHEMIA WITH DU MAURIER. By Moscheles             8vo          2 50


Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be mailed by the publishers on
receipt of price._




Transcriber's Notes:

Words surrounded by _ are italicized.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Pg 2, word "indefinitely" changed to "infinitely" (infinitely less
amazing).

Caption for illustration A DAUGHTER OF HETH, name "BENJAMIM" changed to
"BENJAMIN."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of English Society, by George Du Maurier

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENGLISH SOCIETY ***

***** This file should be named 38111.txt or 38111.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/1/1/38111/

Produced by Judith Wirawan, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
