The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Rainbow, After the Thunder-Storm, by
Anonymous


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Rainbow, After the Thunder-Storm


Author: Anonymous



Release Date: December 5, 2011  [eBook #38227]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAINBOW, AFTER THE
THUNDER-STORM***


E-text prepared by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (http://www.archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 38227-h.htm or 38227-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/38227/38227-h/38227-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/38227/38227-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/rainbowafterthun00ladyiala





THE RAINBOW, AFTER THE THUNDER-STORM.

by

A LADY.

[Illustration]







London:
Printed for Francis Westley,
Stationers'-Court, Ludgate-Hill.
1823.

T. C. Hansard, Printer,
Peterboro'-court, Fleet-street, London.




THE RAINBOW, AFTER THE THUNDER-STORM.


JULIA and her mamma resided chiefly in London. Owing to indisposition
the family were a little way from home for the benefit of the air. In
consequence of that, Julia and her mamma were frequently walking out.
One summer's evening they had extended their walk to an unusual length,
when suddenly the clouds gathered, and distant thunder indicated an
approaching storm. They were a great way from any house, but hurried to
the nearest one for shelter. It was a large brick-built house, with a
court-yard, inclosed by a high wall. At the iron gate was a servant,
with a pitcher in her hand, taking some milk of a man who stood by.
Julia's mamma went up to her, and said, "Will you be so obliging as to
let us have a shelter from the storm? It appears likely to be very
severe." The servant replied, "I am very sorry, ma'am, but it is not in
my power; my master and mistress are not at home, and they have given me
orders not to admit any stranger."

There was no time to hesitate; immediately they proceeded to an
unfinished house they recollected to have seen; it was a quarter of a
mile distant. Almost breathless with fatigue, they arrived; the
wash-house door was standing open, they entered, and thought themselves
happy in having so good a shelter. "Oh," said Julia, "how cruel it was
in that young woman to refuse to let us go into the house! I would not
have done so." "Then," replied her mamma, "you would have done wrong;
however painful it must have been to her, to refuse was no more than her
duty as a faithful servant."

Every minute the lightning became more vivid, and the thunder appeared
to be bursting over their heads. "Oh, mamma," said Julia, "how awful
this is!" "Yes, it is indeed, my dear," said her mamma; "God thundereth
marvellously with his voice; great wonders doeth he, which we cannot
comprehend." "This is a storm," remarked Julia, "such as I never
remember before. Hark! how it thunders. Oh, what a dreadful flash of
lightning! Oh, the thunder! It gets worse; how shall I bear it! Hide me,
hide me, my dear mamma; let me get into some dark place." "My dear
love," said her mamma, "you surprise me to see you so alarmed; it is
what I did not expect; don't give way to fear; _I_ cannot hide you from
this storm any more than I can hide you from the presence of God; and
that you are sure I cannot do. Be composed, my love, and let each of us
say--

    'Hide me, O my Saviour, hide,
      Till the storm of life is past;
    Safe into the haven guide,
      O receive my soul at last!'

Our father sits at the helm; he will guide the storm, and I shall say to
you as our Lord said to his disciples when _they_ were in a storm, and
as he says to us now in his word, "Why are ye so fearful, have ye no
faith?" Let us put our trust in _him_, and look for our protection from
_him_. How much tenderness was there in our Lord's words! He did not
blame them much for their fears, but kindly reminded them that it was
their duty to trust in God. You are not like your little brother when
_he_ was about four years old. I was out with him when it thundered, and
he said, 'Don't be afraid mamma; if we love God, nothing can hurt us.'"

"It makes me tremble so much," said Julia. "If a storm like this is so
awful, my dear," said her mamma, "what must the second coming of Christ
be, when the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and
all the works that are therein shall he burned up! How will the sinner
tremble, and call to the mountains and rocks, 'Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of
the lamb!' Now we need not try to hide ourselves, but if we love the
Saviour, may say--

    'This awful God is ours,
    Our father, and our love.'

[Illustration]

"I think the thunder is more distant," continued her mamma, "and does
not succeed the lightning so soon." "Does that make any difference?"
asked Julia. "It proves, my dear," answered her mamma, "that the cloud
is going from us; but I observed you were more afraid of the thunder
than of the lightning; when you hear the thunder, the danger is over. It
is only the _lightning_ that is fatal. When we have seen the lightning,
but have not been touched by it, and when the thunder does not come
immediately after it, it is foolish to turn pale and tremble at a sound
which is not dangerous. After the flash of lightning is over, we may
securely wait for the clap of thunder; it is as harmless as the sound of
a cannon. The thunder tells us we have escaped the danger, and at the
same time informs us at what distance; for the greater space of time
there has been between the flash of lightning and the thunder, the more
distant the storm."

Julia's mamma proceeded, "I heard a poor woman once say she thought God
was angry with the people, and had sent a storm to punish them. That is,
however, a very ignorant way of talking. Storms are a blessing, and we
ought to be thankful for them; and though we know they sometimes do
hurt, and a few lives are lost, yet how few compared with what might be
expected! Out of seven hundred and fifty thousand persons who died in
the space of thirty years in London, there were only two killed by
lightning. Probably if there were no storms, the air would be so impure,
that men and other living creatures would perish by millions. Let us, my
dear, lift up our hearts in gratitude to the Almighty, who, though he
sometimes shows us his grandeur and his glory in this manner, yet always
displays more of _mercy_ than of _judgment_. After all, God has more
glory and greatness than he shows to us; what, then, will be the
manifestations of them, when in another world we see him face to face!
Yet what we shall behold of him there will fill us with _delight_, and
not _terror_, as I heard you singing the other day, my dear--

    'Millions of years my wond'ring eyes
      Shall o'er thy beauties rove,
    And endless ages I'll adore
      The glories of thy love.

    Sweet Jesus! ev'ry smile of thine
      Shall fresh endearments bring,
    And thousand tastes of new delight
      From all thy graces spring.'

May we be prepared for that period, and enjoy all that blessedness
described in those beautiful lines! There, my dear, will be no storms,
and we shall have no fear." "I thank you, my dear mamma, for talking so
to me," said Julia; "I have not felt so much fear since you began."

The rain had nearly ceased, and the storm was gone. Julia and her mamma
were glad to prepare for going home. As soon as they entered the field
leading to their home, Julia remarked how refreshed every thing
appeared. "Yes," said her mamma, "nature never appears more lovely than
after a Thunder-storm. The herbage of the field is revived, and what
before was fading is refreshed. All animals seem to rejoice; birds are
coming from their shelter, and are singing delightfully, though it is
nearly their time for rest; and the cattle share in the general
pleasure. See those two lambs, how prettily they are playing!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




THE RAINBOW.


It was at this moment Julia looked around to admire the scenery, and
beheld a Rainbow. "Look, look!" she said, "mamma, what a beautiful
Rainbow! How wide it spreads! How many colours are there? Let me count
them. One, two, three, four, five--" "My dear," said her mamma, "there
are seven, and in the following order: _red_, _orange_, _yellow_,
_green_, _blue_, _purple_, and _violet_. These colours appear so much
the more lively, according as the cloud behind is darker, and the drops
of rain fall the closer. The Rainbow can last only while the rain
continues. The sun must be behind us, and the rain opposite to us. The
sun and rain must appear at the same time in order to form a Rainbow. It
is caused by the rays of the sun reflected on drops of water, and is a
picture the most beautifully coloured of any the Creator has given to
us. The nearer the sun is to setting, the wider the arch extends. When
the sun is at its greatest height, the bow appears the smallest.

"Where do we read, my dear, in the Bible about the Rainbow?" asked
Julia's mamma. "I think, mamma," replied Julia, "it was to Noah as a
sign the world should not again be destroyed by water, and we read so in
the book of Genesis." "Yes," answered her mamma, "my dear, you are
right. How very fearful would Noah and his family have been whenever
they saw dark clouds arise and an appearance of much rain, if God had
not kindly said what he intended by the Rainbow! But he explained it by
saying, 'I do set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be for a token of a
covenant between me and the earth. And the bow shall be in the cloud;
and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant
between me and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the
earth!'

"A bow bespeaks terror; but this has neither string nor arrow; it is an
emblem of peace. If it had not been said that it was a token to all
generations, even _we_ should have feared a deluge whenever a storm
approached. How must Noah have felt when he and his family left the ark,
and not a vestige of any thing remained they had seen before! For the
waters had covered the highest mountains, and had risen fifteen cubits
higher; that is, seven yards and a half; so that in vain would salvation
have been hoped for from the hills and mountains. What was Noah's
conduct on leaving the ark? He did not forget (as many do) the mercies
of God which he had received. The first thing he did was to build an
altar for the worship of God. One would have thought, so dreary as every
thing must have appeared, his first care would have been to build a
house for himself and family, warm and sheltered as they had been in the
ark. But no; Noah _feared_ God, and therefore his first care was to
_serve_ him.

"May it be so, my dear, with _you_," continued Julia's mamma. "May _you_
seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other
things shall be added unto you! Noah's worship was accepted, and
immediately God said unto him, I will no more destroy the world with a
flood. What kindness is here shown! I think, my love, it is time we
hastened home."

[Illustration]

When they arrived at their abode, as Julia's papa was not expected that
night, her mamma, according to her usual practice in his absence, rang
the bell for the servants to attend family worship; and a large family
bible being laid on the table, her mamma, with great solemnity, read the
twenty-ninth Psalm, which being done, all kneeled, and she, in a sweet,
feeling manner, approached the throne of Mercy. When prayer was over,
all rose from their knees; Julia kissed her mamma, and took her leave of
her for the night. "Good night, my dear," said her mamma; "don't forget
to pray in secret before you close your eyes for sleep. Adieu! dear
Julia;

      'May angels guard thy head,
    And through the hours of darkness keep
      Their watch around thy bed!'"

I hope, my dear young reader, you will consider what Julia's mamma said
to her for _her_ instructions and comfort about the Storm and the
Rainbow is here mentioned for _your_ instruction and comfort too on such
occasions. Only fear God, and you need not fear any thing else.

    How dreadful to hear in the sky
      The thunder so long and so loud!
    To witness the fork'd lightnings fly,
      Discharged from yonder black cloud!
    Lord, mercy on me do bestow,
    And show me the peaceful Rainbow!

    In vain to shelters do I run,
      If I find no shelter in Thee;
    No threat'ning dangers can I shun,
      But as Thou art gracious to me.
    Thou can'st hush my fears I well know,
    By showing the peaceful Rainbow.

    That tells me the storm shall soon end,
      The earth shall be delug'd no more,
    That God is my father and friend,
      Whose love is great as his power.
    His signal to creatures below
    Is the peaceful, lovely Rainbow.

    This bow is not bent by a string,
      Because the anger is all fled;
    Nor has it an arrow to fling,
      So that I have nothing to dread.
    And God now would have me to know,
    All is _mercy_ in the Rainbow.

    In future, then, when I'm afraid,
      And darkness and storms fill the air,
    I will think that God who them made,
      Views me as a child of his care;
    That storms will soon cease from below,
    And the sky display the Rainbow.


FINIS.


    T. C. Hansard, Printer,
    Peterboro'-court, Fleet-street, London.




_New and Approved Reward Books_,

JUST PUBLISHED BY

FRANCIS WESTLEY,

10, STATIONERS'-COURT, AND AVE-MARIA-LANE.


1. THE WASHERWOMAN. By a Lady. Neatly printed, with Four Wood Cuts,
32mo. Price 1_d._

2. HENRY'S SERMON to his Servant, when he was only Eight Years Old. By a
Lady. Embellished with Four Wood Cuts, and neatly sewed in stiff
Wrappers. Price 1_d._

3. THE VILLAGER'S DAUGHTER. Embellished with Four Wood Cuts, and neatly
sewed in stiff Wrappers. Price 1_d._

4. THE YOUNG LOITERER. Neatly printed, 32mo. Price 1_d._

5. THE SNOW DROP. Neatly printed, 32mo. Price 1_d._

6. THE YOUNG MECHANIC. Neatly printed, 32mo. Price 1_d._

7. THE LITTLE ARTIST; or, The History of Francis Thomas. Second Edition.
32mo. Neatly printed. Price 1_d._

8. A MOTHER'S NARRATIVE. 32mo. Neatly printed. Price 1_d._

9. No. 1. GEMS OF SACRED POETRY, selected for Sunday Scholars.
Illustrated with 15 Wood Cuts, 32mo. Price 1_d._

10. No. 2. Ditto. Ditto.

11. No. 3. Ditto. Ditto.

12. ARITHMETICAL TABLES for the use of Schools. Neatly printed, 32mo.
Price 1_d._




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Obvious punctuation errors were corrected.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAINBOW, AFTER THE
THUNDER-STORM***


******* This file should be named 38227.txt or 38227.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/8/2/2/38227



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

