The Project Gutenberg EBook of Annals of the Bodleian Library, Oxford,
A.D. 1598-A.D. 1867, by William Dunn Macray

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Annals of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, A.D. 1598-A.D. 1867
       With a Preliminary Notice of the earlier Library founded
       in the Fourteenth Century

Author: William Dunn Macray

Release Date: December 16, 2011 [EBook #38317]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNALS OF THE BODLEIAN ***




Produced by Simon Gardner, Adrian Mastronardi and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)





Transcriber's Notes

Variant spellings (and some apparent typographical errors) have
generally been retained (e.g. "caligraphy" for "calligraphy"),
especially in quoted documents. Where changes to the text have been made
these are listed at the end of the book.

Minor punctuation and format changes have been made without special
comment.

This plain text version uses the ASCII and Latin-1 character sets only.
Italic typeface is represented by _underscores_. Small caps typeface is
represented by UPPER CASE. Superscripted characters are preceded by the
caret symbol (^).

Greek script is transliterated and identified by "[Grk: ...]." Hebrew
script is transliterated and identified by "[Heb: ...]." Old English
text is identified by "[OE: ...]" with the following substitutions for
non-Latin symbols and diacritics:

  [=A], [=e], [=m], [=rs], [=u]  macron over A, e, m, rs and u
  [-b], [-bb], [-þ]              bar through upright of b, bb and thorn
  [&]                            Tironian sign et

Additional symbols and diacritics in the text are rendered as follows:

  [=a], [=c], [=o]  macron over a, c, e, m and o
  [C]               apostrophic C in Roman numeral dates
  ['m]              acute accent over m
  [oe]              oe-ligature
  [~u]              tilde over u
  [)u]              breve over u

Footnotes have been grouped together at the end of each dated section or
after each Appendix.

       *       *       *       *       *

                             ANNALS
                             OF THE
                       BODLEIAN LIBRARY,
                             OXFORD,
                     A.D. 1598-A.D. 1867;

    With a Preliminary Notice of the earlier Library founded
                   in the Fourteenth Century.

             BY THE REV. WILLIAM DUNN MACRAY, M.A.
  CHAPLAIN OF ST. MARY MAGDALENE AND ST. MARY WINTON COLLEGES;
        EDITOR OF "CHRONICON ABBATIAE EVESHAMENSIS," &c.

                           RIVINGTONS
                 London, Oxford, and Cambridge
                              1868




PREFACE.


This volume is an attempt to tell a tale which has not been told with
any particularity and fulness since the days of Anthony a Wood, and yet
a tale which, since those days, has been continually growing in
interest, and engaging in fresh scenes the attention and admiration of
successive generations. Fragments of the tale, it is true, have been
told at times; latest of all, an abstract, brief but accurate, has been
given in Mr. Edwards' valuable _Memoirs of Libraries_. But the present
narrative, while it embraces a wider range, is, at the same time,
independent throughout of all that have preceded it, being largely
compiled from sources available only to those who are familiar with the
stores of the Library and habituated to their use, as well as from
private accounts and papers, for access to which, as for other kind
assistance, the writer is indebted to the Librarian. Yet it is only as
an _attempt_ that the volume asks to be received and judged; for a work
of this kind cannot at once attain completeness. Its very size will show
to those who are acquainted with its subject, that minuteness in detail
cannot be expected. The difficulty has been, out of the abundance of
materials, to compile an epitome which should at once be concise and
yet not, through conciseness, be deprived of interest. To point out all
the special treasures in each branch in which the Library is rich, as it
would occupy the extent of several volumes, so it would require the
combined knowledge of several students, each in his several sphere.
While, therefore, no portion of the Library has been unnoticed, it will,
the writer trusts, be readily pardoned, should those portions with which
he is specially acquainted, and in the direction of which his own line
of work specially leads, seem to any to occupy more prominence than
others of equal importance. It is worthy of notice that, in tracing the
growth and history of the Library, the fact of its older divisions
having undergone comparatively little change in arrangement, greatly
facilitates examination, and, at the same time, often imparts an
interest of its own to well-nigh each successive shelf of books; for
each tier has thus its own record of successive benefactions and
successive purchases to display, and leads us on step by step from one
year to another.

'_Bowers of Paradise!_' Thus it was that an enthusiastic Hebrew student,
writing of the Bodleian but a few years ago, apostrophized the little
cells and curtained cages wherein readers sit, while hedged in and
canopied with all the wisdom and learning of bygone generations, which
here bloom their blossoms and yield up their fruits. And, as if
answering in actual living type to the parable which the Eastern
metaphor suggests, these cells from year to year have been and (though
of late more infrequently) still are, the resort of grand and grave old
bees, majestic in size and deportment, of sonorous sound, and covered
with the dust, as it were, of ages. Just as a solemn rookery befits an
ancestral mansion, so these Bees of the Bodleian form a fitting
accompaniment to the place of their choice. And while the Metaphor well
describes the character of that place whither men resort for refreshment
amidst the work of the world and for the recruiting of mental strength
for the doing of such work, so the Type well describes those who from
the bowers gather sweetness and wealth, first for their own enriching
and next for the enriching of others. Long then in these bowers may
there be found busy hives of men; above all, those that gather thence,
abundantly, such Wisdom as is _prae melle ori_.

  BODLEIAN LIBRARY,
    _May_ 30, 1868.




CONTENTS.


                                                          PAGE.

  ANNALS                                                     1

  APPENDIX A. ACCOUNT OF A 'TARTAR LAMBSKIN' CLOAK         307

      "    B. VELLUM-PRINTED BOOKS, ADDED SINCE 1830       310

      "    C. LIST OF MSS. FROM MONASTIC AND OTHER
                LIBRARIES                                  313

      "    D. MSS. AND MISCELLANEOUS CURIOSITIES
                EXHIBITED IN THE LIBRARY AND PICTURE
                GALLERY                                    319

      "    E. NUMISMATIC COLLECTION                        339

      "    F. PAST AND PRESENT OFFICERS OF THE LIBRARY     341

      "    G. RULES OF THE LIBRARY                         344

       *       *       *       *       *

  LITHOGRAPH OF SHAKESPEARE-AUTOGRAPH, _to face page_      301




                   ANNALS OF THE BODLEIAN LIBRARY.


In the north-east corner of St. Mary's Church, a church full of nooks
little known to ordinary visitors, is a dark vaulted chamber (dark,
because its windows have been built up), whose doors, when opened, only
now reveal the abiding-place of the University fire-engines. Here of old
sat the Chancellor of the University, surrounded by the Doctors and
Masters of the Great Congregation, in a fashion which was formerly
depicted in the great west window of St. Mary's Church, and is still
represented on the University seal, and which, in the early part of the
last century, was adopted by Dr. Richard Rawlinson as his book-plate,
being engraved from the impression attached to his own diploma in Civil
Law. Above this chamber there is another, lighted by four windows,
containing forty-five feet in length and twenty in breadth, and now
assigned as the lecture-room of the Professor of Law. Here was begun
about 1367, and finally established and furnished in 1409, the first
actual University Library, called after Bishop Thomas Cobham, of
Worcester, who about 1320 (seven years before his death) had commenced
preparations for the building of the room and the making provision for
its contents[1]. Wood tells us that before this time there were indeed
some books kept in chests in St. Mary's Church, which were to be lent
out under pledges, as well as some chained to desks, which were only to
be read _in situ_; but _this_ University chest soon gave way to the
formal Library, as, at a later period, another University chest was lost
in funded investments and a banker's balance[2]. Another precursor of
the general Library was found in the collection bequeathed to Durham
College (on the site of which now stands Trinity College) in 1345 by one
of its founders, the earnest lover and preserver of books, Philip of
Bury; he of that charming book, that 'tractatus vere pulcherrimus,' the
_Philobiblion_. He,--who apostrophizes books as the masters who teach
without flogging or fleecing, without punishment or payment; as ears of
corn, full of grain, to be rubbed only by apostolic hands; as golden
pots of manna; as Noah's ark and Jacob's ladder, and Joshua's stones of
testimony and Gideon's lamps and David's scrip, and who says that in the
noblest monasteries of England he found precious volumes defiled and
injured by mice and worms, and abandoned to moths,--gave strict
injunctions for the care of the large collection, gathered from all
quarters, with which he enriched his College[3]. It was to be free for
purposes of study to all scholars, who might have the loan of any work
of which there was a duplicate, provided they left a pledge exceeding
it in value, but for purposes of transcription no volume was to go
beyond the walls of the house. A register was to be kept, and a yearly
visitation was to be held[4]. Some of these books, on the dissolution of
the College by Henry VIII, are said to have been transferred to Duke
Humphrey's Library, and some to Balliol College.

The Librarian of Cobham's Library was also entitled Chaplain to the
University, and as such was ordered, in 1412, to offer masses yearly for
those who were benefactors of the University and Library, and was
endowed with half a mark yearly, as well as with L5 issuing from the
assize of bread and ale, which had been granted to the University by
King Henry IV, who was also a principal contributor to the completion of
the Library, and is therefore to this day duly remembered in the
Bidding-Prayer at all the academic 'Commemorationes Solenniores.' But no
trace remains of the devotional and sacred duties once attaching to the
office, and laymen have been eligible to it from the time of Bodley's
re-foundation. The old regal stipend, however, amounting at last to L6
13_s._ 4_d._, continued to be paid to the Librarian, until in 1856, by
the revised code of statutes, various small payments were consolidated;
it is found entered in the annual printed accounts up to that year.

But not a score of years had passed after Cobham's Library had been
actually completed and opened before the building of a room more worthy
of the University was commenced. In 1426 the University began to erect
the present noble Divinity School for the exercises in that faculty; but
as their own means soon failed they betook themselves to all likely
quarters to procure help. And Duke Humphrey of Gloucester, the patron of
all learning[5], and the fosterer of the New School of theological
thought, the protector of Pecock, responded so liberally to the petition
of the University for aid to the fabric of their Material School, that
he is styled (says Wood) in the Bedell's Book its Founder, while the
roof to this day perpetuates his memory among the shields of arms of
benefactors with which its graceful pendants terminate. His gifts of
money for the School were quickly followed by still larger gifts of
books for the Library. Between the years 1439 and 1446 he appears to
have forwarded about 600 MSS., which were for the time deposited in
chests in Cobham's Library. The first donation, consisting of 129
volumes, was forwarded in November, 1439. The letter of thanks from
Convocation is dated the 25th of that month, and on the same day a
letter was sent to the House of Commons, to the 'ryght worshypfull
syres, the Speker, knyghtes, and burges (_sic_) of the worshepfull
parlament,' informing them that the Duke had magnified the University
'with a thousand pounds worth and more of preciose bokes,' and therefore
beseeching their 'sage discrecions to considere the gloriose gifts of
the graciose prince ... for the comyn profyte and worshyp of the Reme,
to thanke hym hertyly, and also prey Godde to thanke hym in tyme comyng
wher goode dedys ben rewarded.' Statutes for the regulation of the gift
were made on the same day, prayers appointed, and provision made for
the observance of the Duke's obit[6]. A catalogue of 364 of the MSS. is
printed, from the lists preserved in the University Register, p. 758,
vol. ii. of Rev. H. Anstey's _Documents Illustrative of Social and
Academic Life at Oxford_, published in the series of Chronicles issued
by the Master of the Rolls. The extent of these gifts rendered the room
at St. Mary's quite insufficient for the purpose to which it was
assigned, and the University therefore, in a letter to the Duke, dated
July 14, 1444, informed him of their intention to erect a more suitable
building, of which (as a delicate way, probably, of bespeaking his aid
towards the cost, as well as of testifying their gratitude for past
benefactions) they formally offered him the title of Founder. In the
subjoined note is given an extract from this letter (copied from the
Register of Convocation), which is interesting from its description of
the inconveniences of the old room, and the advantages of the new
site[7]. And this new building, first contemplated in A.D. 1444 and
finished about 1480, forms now the central portion of the great
Reading-Room, still retaining its old advantages of convenience and of
seclusion 'a strepitu saeculari.'

The Duke's MSS. were, as became the object of his gift, very varied in
character. With works in Divinity are mingled in the catalogue a large
number in Medicine and Science, together with some in lighter
literature, amongst which latter are found no less than seven MSS. of
Petrarch and three of Boccaccio. Some additional MSS., being 'all the
Latyn bokes that he had,' together with L100 towards the completion of
the 'Divyne Scoles,' which the Duke had intended to bequeath, but the
formal bequest of which was prevented by his dying intestate in 1447,
were subsequently procured, although with considerable difficulty[8].
But only three out of the whole number of his MSS. are now known to
exist in the present Library. One of these is a fine copy of books
iv.-ix. of Valerius Maximus, with the commentary by D. de Burgo, and
with an index by John de Whethamstede, Abbot of St. Alban's (now marked,
Auctarium, F. infra, i. 1[9]); the second is a translation by L. Aretine
of the Politics of Aristotle (marked, Auct. F. v. 27); and the third,
the Epistles of Pliny (Auct. F. ii. 23). The first bears the Duke's
arms; the second has an original dedication to him by the translator;
the last (which was restored to the University by Dr. Robert Master,
Oct. 30, 1620) contains his own autograph. Six MSS. now in the British
Museum, which formerly belonged to the Duke, are described in Sir H.
Ellis' _Letters of Eminent Literary Men_, (printed by the Camden
Society,) pp. 357-8. Two of these appear in the List of Humphrey's
benefaction to Oxford; for Harl. 1705, which is a translation of Plato's
Politics by Peter Candidus, or White, who gave it to the Duke, is
doubtless the book entered at the end of the List as 'Item, novam
traductionem totius Politeiae Platonicae;' while Cotton, Nero. D. v., the
Acts of the Council of Constance, appears at fol. 67. Another of these
six MSS., Harl. 988, is an anonymous commentary on the Canticles[10],
which formerly belonged to Sir Robert Cotton, and which contains an
inscription by him intended to commemorate his returning it to the
University Library in 1602. It came into Harley's possession amongst
Bishop Stillingfleet's MSS., all of which were bought by him. A letter
from Wanley to Hearne, in which the book is mentioned, is preserved in
the Bodleian in a Rawlinson MS. (Letters xvii.) under date of Oct. 13,
1714, Hearne's reply to which is printed by Sir H. Ellis, _ubi supra_;
while Wanley's rejoinder is also found in the above MS, dated Oct. 27,
in which he says, 'As for my Lord's MS. of the Canticles, designed for
the Bodleyan Library by Sir Robert Cotton, I know not how you find it to
have once belonged to Humphrey, duke of Gloucester. My Lord has indeed
two of his books, which we know to have been his, for certain; because
one of them (which was given to his Lordship) hath a note therein of his
hand-writing, and the other hath his armes and stile on the outside, as
also his library-mark. This last (which was bought of Sir Simonds
D'Ewes), together with the Cotton MS. of the Canticles, I besought his
Lordship to give to the University for your Library, and I hope his
Lordship will do so in a little time.' Another of the Duke's books,
being Capgrave's Commentary on Genesis, which occurs in the second list
of those given to the University, is now in the library of Oriel
College. One volume, containing, among other philosophical treatises,
Plato's _Phaedo_, _Timaeus_, &c., with the Duke's autograph, 'Cest livre a
moy Homfrey duc de Gloucestre' (given to him by an Abbot of St. Alban's)
is in Corpus Christi College, 243. And a copy of Wickliffe's Bible, in
two volumes, which bears Humphrey's arms, is amongst the Egerton MSS.
(617-8), Brit. Mus.

The large increase of treasures which these benefactions brought to the
University probably caused the first institution of a formal Visitation.
On Nov. 29, 1449, we find that Visitors were appointed by Congregation
for the purpose of receiving from the Chaplain an account of the books
contained in the Library[11].

Duke Humphrey was followed in the good work of the Divinity School and
Library by another whose name still retains its place in the formal list
of benefactors, Bishop Thomas Kempe, of London, who, besides
contributing very largely in money towards the completion of the former,
sent some books to the latter in 1487, some seven years after the new
room had been finally completed and opened for use. But Antony Wood (in
whose pages records of other benefactors may be found) tells us that
very few years passed before the Library began to lose some of its
newly-acquired treasures; for Scholars borrowed books upon petty and
insufficient pledges, and so chose to forfeit the latter rather than
return the former[12], while tradition reported that Polydore Virgil,
the historian, being at length refused any further opportunities of
abstraction, obtained a special licence from Henry VIII for the taking
out any MS. for his use! From this traditionary report Sir H. Ellis, in
his introduction to a translation of Virgil's history, printed for the
Camden Society in 1844, endeavours to vindicate his author's reputation,
but more by conjecture than evidence. In 1513 a Chaplain and Librarian
was elected, named Adam Kirkebote[13]. The new Librarian, soon after,
supplicated Congregation that on Festival Days he should not be bound to
open the Library before twelve o'clock; a practice which, commencing at
that day, does still unto this (the Library on Holy Days during Term
being now not opened until the conclusion of the University sermon, at
eleven o'clock) witness to the religious spirit which pervades all the
old institutions of Oxford. In 1527, when one Flecher was Chaplain, it
is recorded[14] that 'Magister' Claymond (doubtless the President of
Corpus Christi College, of that name) was permitted by vote of
Congregation to take Pliny's Natural History out of the Library. In 1543
Humphrey Burnford was elected Chaplain on Oct. 31, in the room of --
Whytt, deceased[15]. It was probably during his tenure of office that
the Library was destroyed. For in 1550 the Commissioners deputed by
Edward VI for reformation of the University visited the Libraries in the
spirit of John Knox, destroying, without examination, all MSS.
ornamented by illuminations or rubricated initials as being eminently
Popish, and leaving the rest exposed to any chance of injury and
robbery. The traditions which Wood has recorded as having been learned
at the mouths of aged men who had in their turn received them from those
who were contemporaneous with the Visitation, are abundantly confirmed
by the well-known descriptions of Leland and Bale of what went on in
other places, and therefore, although no direct documentary evidence of
the proceedings of the spoilers is known to exist, we may believe that
Wood's account of pillage and waste, of MSS. burned, and sold to tailors
for their measures, to bookbinders for covers, and the like, until not
one remained _in situ_, is not a whit exaggerated. One solitary entry
there is, however, in the University Register (I. fol. 157^a), which,
while it records the completion of the catastrophe, sufficiently thereby
corroborates the story of all that preceded, viz. the entry which tells
that in Convocation on Jan. 25, 1555-6, 'electi sunt hii venerabiles
viri, Vice-cancellarius et Procuratores, Magister Morwent, praeses
Corporis Christi, et Magister Wright, ad vendenda subsellia librorum in
publica Academiae bibliotheca, ipsius Universitatis nomine.' The books of
the 'public' library had all disappeared; what need then to retain the
shelves and stalls, when no one thought of replacing their contents, and
when the University could turn an honest penny by their sale? and so the
_venerabiles viri_ made a timber-yard of Duke Humphrey's treasure-house.

       *       *       *       *       *

But four years after the final despoiling of the Library there was an
undergraduate entered at Magdalen College, who, by the good Providence
which always out of evil brings somewhat to counterpoise and correct,
was to be moved by the sight of the ruin and desolation to restore what
his seniors had destroyed, and to reconstruct the old Plantagenet's
Library on such a basis, and with such means for carrying on its
re-edification, that the glory of the latter house should soon eclipse
that of the former. All around him he doubtless found traces of the
recent destruction; his stationer may have sold him books bound in
fragments of those MSS. for which the University but a century before
had consecrated the memory of the donors in her solemn prayers; the
tailor who measured him for his sad-coloured doublet, may have done it
with a strip of parchment brilliant with gold, that had consequently
been condemned as Popish, or covered with strange symbols of an old
heathen Greek's devising, that probably passed for magical and unlawful
incantations. And the soul of the young student must have burned with
shame and indignation at the apathy which had not merely tolerated this
destruction by strangers, but had contentedly assisted in carrying it
out to its thorough completion. Himself a successful student, he became
eager to help others to whom thus the advantages of a library were
denied; and, for a while without fee or reward, undertook a public Greek
lecture in the Hall of Merton College, to which college he had been
elected in 1563[16]. And when, after years thus spent in academic
pursuits, THOMAS BODLEY betook himself to diplomatic service abroad, he
still, amidst all the distractions of foreign and domestic politics,
preserved his affection for the scenes and the studies of his early
familiarity. So, when the days came wherein statecraft began to weary
him and Courts ceased to charm, his thoughts reverted to the place
where, free from these, he might still, although in a more private
capacity, labour for the good of the commonwealth; he remembered the
room once precious to students, 'scientiarum sedes,' as the University
had called it of old, but now destitute alike both of science and of
seats. 'And thus,' says he himself, 'I concluded at the last to set up
my staff at the Library-door in Oxon; being thoroughly persuaded that,
in my solitude and surcease from the commonwealth-affairs, I could not
busy myself to better purpose than by reducing that place (which then in
every part lay ruined and waste) to the publick use of students[17].' So
therefore, on Feb. 23, 1597-8, he wrote a letter to the Vice-Chancellor,
offering that whereas 'there hath bin heretofore a publike library in
Oxford, which, you know, is apparant by the roome itself remayning, and
by your statute records, I will take the charge and cost upon me, to
reduce it again to his former use,' first by fitting it up with shelves
and seats, next by procuring benefactions of books, and lastly by
endowing it with an annual rent[18]. This offer being accepted with
great gratitude, other letters followed from him in March, in which he
desired that delegates should be chosen to consider the best mode of
fitting up the room, and mentioned an offer on the part of his own
College, Merton, to provide timber for the purpose. Two years were spent
in the carrying out of this work and in the preliminary arrangements.
Amongst these preparations was the putting up the beautiful roof which
to this day is such an object of deserved admiration. It is divided into
square compartments, on each of which are painted the arms of the
University, being the open Bible, with seven seals[19], between three
ducal crowns, on the open pages of which are the words (so truly fitting
for a Christian School) 'DOMINUS Illuminatio mea[20];' while on bosses
that intervene between each compartment are painted the arms of Bodley
himself, being five martlets with a crescent for difference, quartered
with the arms of Hone (his mother's family), two bars wavy between three
billets; on a chief the three ducal crowns of the University shield,
'quarum merito gloriam ab Academia derivavit.' (Wake, _Rex Platon_. p.
12.) The striking motto 'Quarta perennis erit' was assigned to Bodley at
the same time with this academic augmentation[21]. When, in 1610, the
eastern wing of the Library was erected, a similar roof was added, as
was also done to the Picture Gallery (built between 1613-1619); in the
latter room the roof, having become decayed and out of repair, was
unhappily altogether removed in the year 1831, and a plaster ceiling,
divided into compartments, substituted. A few of the panels of this roof
have been preserved, one bearing the figures of two cats, which used to
be an object of interest to juvenile visitors, and a series bearing the
letters which compose Sir Thomas Bodley's name, together with a portrait
of him upon a centre panel. A high-backed arm-chair, the Librarian's
seat of office in the Library, was formed out of oak from the roof, and
an engraving hangs in the Gallery which represents the room before its
change for the worse.

On June 25, 1600, Bodley wrote to the Vice-Chancellor, mentioning that,
as the mechanical work was now brought to a good pass, he had begun to
busy himself in the gathering of books, and had provided a Register for
the enrolment of the names of all benefactors, with particulars of their
gifts. This Register (formerly, like all the books in folio, chained to
its desk), consisting of two large folio volumes, on vellum, now lies on
a table in the great room, and is an object of notice by most visitors.
The volumes are ornamented exteriorly with silver-gilt bosses on their
massy covers, on which are engraved the arms of Bodley and those of the
University, and interiorly in many places with the donors' coats of arms
painted in their proper colours, and with various devices. Vol. i.
extends from 1600 to 1688, containing 428 pages in double columns; and
commences with a printed record of the gifts for the first four years,
on pp. 1-90. The following printed title is prefixed: 'Munificentissimis
atque optimis cujusvis ordinis, dignitatis, sexus, qui Bibliothecam hanc
libris, aut pecuniis numeratis ad libros coemendos, aliove quovis genere
ampliarunt, Thomas Bodleius, eques auratus, honorarium hoc volumen, in
quod hujuscemodi donationes, simulque nomina donantium singillatim
referuntur, pietatis, memoriae, virtutisque causa, dedit, dedicavit.' A
paragraph follows, which mentions Bodley's own work of refitting and
endowing, and notes that his own large gifts are not entered because he
hopes throughout his life to make continually large additions. The whole
of this title is printed in the preface to James' first Catalogue,
issued in 1605, who was probably part-writer of it[22]. Wake (_Rex
Platonicus_, p. 120) speaks of the Register, 'aureis umbilicis
fibulisque fulgidum,' as always lying 'eminentissimo loco,' a prominent
object of notice to all who entered the Library. Vol. ii. extends from
1692 to 1795, ending in the middle of the volume, on p. 216; but there
is reason to fear that there are many omissions in the later portion of
its period. Each volume has an index of names. The gifts of the
principal donors, as recorded in this Register up to its close, are
printed in Gutch's edition of _Wood's History_, vol. ii. part ii. pp.
920-950. It will not be necessary, therefore, to mention here the names
of many, but of such only as are 'e principibus principes.' From the
year 1796 inclusive, when the gifts of donors began to be entered in the
annual printed catalogues of purchases and statements of accounts, this
MS. Register ceased to be used.

Among the first and largest benefactors in the year 1600 occur Lord
Buckhurst (afterwards Earl of Dorset), the Earl of Essex, Lords Hunsdon,
Montacute, [editions of the Fathers], Lisle (afterwards Leicester),
Lumley[23], and William Gent, who gave a large collection of books,
chiefly medical.

Many volumes were given about this time by Bodley, which had been
collected in Italy by Bill, the London bookseller, who was employed by
Sir Thomas to travel on the Continent as his agent for this purpose.

The famous copy of the French _Romance of Alexander_ (now numbered Bodl.
264) must have been one of the MSS. given by Bodley himself at the
commencement of his work, as it is found entered in the printed
Catalogue of 1605, but does not occur in the Benefactors' Register. It
is decorated with a large number of beautiful paintings on a chequered
background of gold and colour; but its special interest lies in the
illustrations at the foot of about half the pages, which exhibit the
most quaint and grotesque representations of customs, trades,
amusements, dress, &c., of the time. Some of these were engraved by
Strutt; and four specimens, together with one of the larger miniatures
illustrating the text, are given by Dibdin in his _Bibl. Decam._ vol.
i., where, at pp. 198-201, he discourses, in his own peculiar fashion,
on the merits of the volume. A notice of the book may also be found in
Warton's _Hist. of Engl. Poetry_, edit. 1840, vol. i. p. 142. At f. 208
is the following colophon, which is of much interest, as affording
evidence that the work of the painter occupied upwards of five years:--

    'Che define li romans du boin roi Alixandre,
    Et les veus du pavon, les accomplissemens,
    Le Restor du pavon et le pris, qui fu perescript
    Le xviii^e ior de Decembre, lan M.ccc.xxxviii.
    Explicit iste liber, scriptor sit crimine liber,
    Xpristus scriptorem custodiat ac det honorem.

    (_In gold letters._) 'Che liure fu perfais de le enluminure au
    xviii^e jour dauryl. Per Jehan de grise, Lan de grace, M.ccc.xliij.'

This is followed by a continuation (of later date) of the romance, in
Northern-English verse, on seven leaves[24]; and lastly, by a French
Romance of the 'grant kaan a la graunt cite de Tambaluc.' A scribe's
name is given in the following lines on f. 208, but in a hand apparently
not that of any part of the book:--

    'Laus tibi sit Christe, quoniam liber explicit iste.
    Nomen scriptoris est Thomas Plenus Amoris[25].'

The earliest owner's name occurring in the volume is that of 'Richart
de Widevelle, seigneur de Rivieres,' recorded in an inscription on the
cover at the end, which proceeds to say that 'le dist Seigneur acetast
le dist liure lan de grace mille cccclxvi. le premier jour de lan a
Londres.' Rivers' own autograph follows ('Ryverys'), with some words in
French, written in a perfectly frantic scrawl. Subsequent owners were
'Gyles Strangwayes' and 'Jaspere Ffylolle' (whose signatures are
engraved by Dibdin, _ubi supra_), and 'Thomas Smythe[26].'

[1] When Duke Humphrey's Library was completed, and the books were
removed thither, this upper room took the place of that beneath it as
the Convocation House, 'in which upper room,' says Hearne, 'was brave
painted glass containing the arms of the benefactors, which painted
glass continued till the times of the late rebellion.' (Bliss, _Reliquiae
Hearnianae_, ii. 693.)

[2] The original treasure-chest, from which all academic money-grants
are still said to be made, is preserved in the Bursary of Corpus Christi
College, in which college it was kept in accordance with the statutes of
the University, tit. xx. Sec. 1.

[3] The Bishop's Bibliomania is thus noticed by a contemporary, W. de
Chambre, in his _Continuatio Hist. Dunelm._ (_Hist. Dunelm. Scriptt.
tres_; Surtees Society, 1839, p. 130):--'Iste summe delectabatur in
multitudine librorum. Plures enim libros habuit, sicut passim dicebatur,
quam omnes Pontifices Angliae. Et praeter eos quos habuit in diversis
maneriis suis, repositos separatim, ubicunque cum sua familia residebat,
tot libri jacebant sparsim in camera qua dormivit, quod ingredientes vix
stare poterant vel incedere nisi librum aliquem pedibus conculcarent.'
The bedroom of the late centenarian President of Magdalene College, Dr.
Routh, was in this respect just like Bishop Bury's; and as the latter
sent his library from Durham to be in some sort a nucleus for an
University Library at Oxford, so the former bequeathed his to Durham
that it might assist the development of the University Library there.

[4] _Philobiblion_, cap. xix.

[5] His love of literature was evinced by the motto which, according to
Leland, was frequently written by him in his books: 'Moun bien mondain.'
(Hearne's _MS. Diary_, xxxvi. 199.) Hearne, in his esteem for the memory
of this 'religious, good, and learned Prince,' quaintly says that he
used, whenever he saw his handwriting in the Bodleian Library (where it
occurs several times), 'to show a sort of particular respect' to it.
(_Preface to Langtoft_, p. xx.) Was this 'sort of respect' a reverential
kiss, such as that with which (as Warton in his _Companion to the Guide_
tells us) he saluted the pavement of sheeps' trotters, supposed by him
to be a Roman tesselated floor?

[6] Register of Convoc. F., ff. 53^b, 54^b. The subsequent gifts are
entered in the same Register as follows:--

    1. Last day of Feb., 1440. A letter to thank the Duke for 126
      volumes brought by John Kyrkeby. (f. 57^b.)

    2. Nov. 10, 1441. Letter acknowledging ten books (Treatises of
      Augustine, Rabanus, &c.,) received through Will. Say, proctor, and
      John Kyrkeby. (ff. 59^b-60.)

    3. Jan. 25, 1443. Letter of thanks for 139 volumes. (f. 63.)

    4. Oct. 1443. Letter for another gift, number of volumes not
      specified. (f. 66.)

    5. Feb. 25, 1443 (-4?). Catalogue of 135 volumes. (ff. 67-68^b.)

    6. Feb. 1446. Letter of thanks for another gift, not specified. (f.
      75^b.)

[7] 'Nemo illos [libros] sine admiratione conspicit, cunctis una voce
testantibus, se nunquam libros tanta claritate conspicuos, tanta
gravitate refertos vidisse.... Et uc per hoc, si quid maximo addi
possit, tantae munificentiae gloria fiat illustrior, optamus sacram et
celebrem scientiarum sedem reparari, ubi honorificentius et ad
utilitatem studentium multo commodius libri vestri, ab aliis segregati,
collocentur. Jam enim si quis, ut fit, uni libro inhaereat, aliis studere
volentibus ad tres vel quatuor pro vicinitate colligationis praecludit
accessum. Itaque locus huic rei nobis maxime videtur idoneus ubi
venerabilis vir, modo Cancellarius noster, semper reverendus pater
amantissimus Magister Thomas Chace, spectabilem novarum Scolarum
fabricam ad caetera suae virtutis testimonia insigni mensura ab humo
erexit, quam nos cito, quoad exigua suppetebat facultas, promovimus. Hic
locus, propterea quod a strepitu saeculari removetur, Bibliotecae admodum
videtur conveniens, cujus fundationis titulum, si Magnanimitati vestrae
acceptabilis fuerit, cum omni devotione offerrimus.' Register F. ff.
71^b, 72. We find from an entry on the latter page that on January 13,
1444 (-5), 'liber Platonis in Phedro' (_sic_) was lent by Convocation to
the Duke.

[8] They were not received by August, 1450, on the 28th of which month a
letter was written from Convocation to Thomas Bokelonde, Esq., and John
Summerset, M.D., on the subject. (Register F. ff. 88^b-9.)

[9] It contains inscriptions recording its gift by Whethamstede 'ad usum
scolarium studencium Oxoniae,' with anathemas upon those who should
alienate it, or destroy, were it but its title: 'Si quis rapiat, raptim
titulumve retractet, vel Judae laqueum vel furcas sensiat.'

[10] Two treatises on the Canticles, by Gilbert Porret and Musca, were
contained in the Duke's first gift to Oxford. (Anstey, vol. ii. p. 759.)

[11] Wood MS. F. 27. (Bodl. Libr.)

[12] A sale of a collection of (apparently) these forfeited pledges, or
else of books deposited as securities for loans of money, took place in
the year 1546. On Jan. 18, 1545-6, the following decree passed
Convocation: 'Decretum est authoritate Convocationis Magnae ut cistae in
domo inferiori sub domo Congregationis, et omnes libri pro pignoribus
jacentes, aut etiam alii in eadem domo inventi, venderentur, secundum
arbitrium quinque in eadem Convocatione eligendorum. Electi itaque sunt
et a Vice-Cancellario admissi ibidem, Doctor Standishe, Mr. Parret,
procurator, Mr. Slythers, Mr. Symonds, et Mr. Wattsone.' Reg. I. 107^b.

[13] Wood MS. F. 27.

[14] Ibid.

[15] Ibid. fol. 94^a.

[16] Bodley appears to have been altogether an accomplished linguist.
James, in the preface to the first Catalogue of 1605, after speaking of
his proficiency in the classical languages, adds, 'Linguas vero
exoticas, veluti Italicam, Gallicam, Hispanicam, Hebraeam praecipue,
caeterarum omnium parentem, tam perfecte callet, ut illo neminem fere
scientiorem invenies.' And in one of four letters addressed to him on
the interpretation of passages in the Old Testament, which are printed
among the Epistles of J. Drusius, _De Quaesitis_ (1595, p. 40), Drusius
says, 'Vere dicam, Bodlaee, et intelligis optime litteras Hebraeas, et
amas unice earum peritos.' The same volume contains also one letter to
his brothers, Laurence, Miles, and Josias, on the _Pastor_ of Hermas.

[17] _Reliquiae Bodleianae_, p. 14.

[18] This letter (with the subsequent correspondence) is printed by
Hearne, at the end of the Chronicle of John of Glastonbury, vol. ii. p.
612, from the Reg. of Convoc. M^a. f. 31^a.

[19] Most probably intended to refer to the Apocalyptic book (Rev. v.
1.), and to signify the unsealing of Divine Revelation, the fountain of
all wisdom, by our Blessed Lord. Sir J. Wake prefers to take the seven
seals as representing the seven liberal arts.

[20] The motto appears to have varied. It is sometimes given in titles
of books printed at Oxford about the time of James I, as 'Sapientiae et
Felicitatis;' and in an heraldic MS. of the seventeenth century as 'XX.
Exod. Decem ... Omnipotens mandata. Verbum Dei manet in eternum. Amen.'
(Rawl. B. xl. f. 81.) Others [have] this, 'Veritas liberabit, Bonitas
regnabit;' and others this, 'In principio erat Verbum,' &c. (Hearne, in
Rawl. MS. C. 876, f. 51.)

[21] Wake notices it as a singular coincidence that the Library was
first opened on the day of the 'Quatuor coronati Martyres,' Nov. 8,
whom, by mistake, he calls 'Tres.'

[22] See _Reliquiae Bodleianae_, p. 158.

[23] One of the books given by Lord Lumley has the autograph of Cranmer,
'Thomas Cantuarien.,' on the title-page. The book, appositely enough,
bears the title of _Sicbardi Antidotum contra diversas omnium fere
saeculorum baereses_, fol. Bas. 1528.

[24] Printed by Rev. J. Stevenson at the end of the _Romance of
Alexander_, edited by him for the Roxburghe Club in 1849, from Ashmole
MS. 44.

[25] _Plenus-Amoris_, or _Fullalove_, seems to have been the name of a
family of scribes. But the expression seems often also to have been used
for the mere sake of rhyme. In the colophon of a translation of Alan
Chartier in Rawl. A. 338, are these lines:--

        'Nomen scriptoris,
    Dei gracia, Plenus Amoris:
        Careat meroris
    Deus det sibi omnibus horis.'

Peter Plenus-Amoris was the scribe of Fairfax 6; Thomas, of Univ. Coll.
MS. 142; William, of All Souls' 51; Geoffrey, of Sloane 513 (Brit. Mus.)
In the following instances the name appears to be used only
rhythmically:--

  'Nomen scriptoris est Jhon Wilde plenus amoris.'--(_Rawlinson B._ 214.)

  'Nomen scriptoris Jon. semper plenus amoris,
  Esteby cognomen, cui semper det Deus homen' (_sic_).--(_Bodl._ 643.)

[26] Probably this book is the 'large liure en fraunceis tresbien
esluminez de le Rymance de Alexandre,' once in the library of Tho. of
Woodstock, Duke of Glouc. See Mr. Coxe's pref. to Gower's _Vox Clam._
(Roxb. Club, 1850,) p. 50.


A.D. 1601.

It is from this date that our notes on the history of the Library can
begin to assume an annalistic form. A gift of L20 from Herbert
Westphaling, Bishop of Hereford, was expended in the purchase of books
with great success; no fewer than thirty were obtained, and amongst them
were, 'Evangelia quatuor Saxonica, lingua et charactere vetustiss.,'
being the MS. from which John Foxe had taken the text of the Saxon
Gospels in the edition published at the expense of Archbishop Parker in
1571, and which was subsequently re-edited by Junius. It is now
numbered, Bodl. MS. 441. An early edition (qu. _editio princeps?_) of
the Gospels in the Russian language (now placed among the Bodley MSS.
213) appears among some books given by Sir Henry Savile[27], whose
brother-historian and antiquary, William Camden, is also registered as
the donor of a few MSS. and printed books. Thomas Allen, M.A., of
Gloucester Hall, the astrologer, gave twenty MSS[28]; the rest of his
collection came subsequently to the Library, included in that of Sir
Kenelm Digby, to whom Allen had bequeathed it. One of the twenty now
given was an extremely curious volume, chiefly written in the ninth
century (marked Auctarium F. iv. 32), including in its contents an
original drawing (engraved in Hickes' _Thesaurus_, p. 144) by St.
Dunstan of himself as prostrate at the feet of the throned Christ[29], a
grammatical tract by Eutychius (or Eutex, as the scribe calls him, while
professing doubt as to the right form), with Welsh glosses (noticed by
Lhuyd in his _Archaeol. Brit._ p. 226); the first book of Ovid _De Arte
amandi_, with similar glosses[30]; and lections in Greek and Latin from
the Prophets and Pentateuch, amongst which is one from Hosea containing,
in the Latin version, a line or two unlike any known early version,
(although faithful to the Hebrew), but found also in a quotation in
Gildas[31]. Capt. Josias Bodley[32] gave an astronomical sphere and
other instruments in brass, which now stand in the south window
adjoining the entrance to the Library. But the great benefactor of the
year was the newly-appointed Librarian, Thomas James, who gave various
MSS., chiefly patristic (which, however, Wood says, 'he had taken out of
several College libraries'), and sixty printed volumes. From the first
preparation of the new foundation Bodley had fixed upon James, then a
Fellow of New College, as his Library-Keeper. The volume of letters
published by Hearne (from Bodl. MS. 699) in 1703, under the title of
_Reliquiae Bodleianae_, consists chiefly of those which the Founder
addressed to James while his collection of books was in process of
formation, but unfortunately they have no dates of years, and Hearne
printed them simply as they came into his hands, without any attempt to
determine their order of sequence. We learn from these that James'
salary at the outset was L5 13_s._ 4_d._ quarterly; but almost at once
he threatened to 'strike' unless it were raised to an annual stipend of
L30 or L40, while at the same time he demanded permission to marry. This
latter requisition appeared particularly grievous to Bodley, who had
made celibacy a stringent condition in his Statutes, and he forthwith
expostulated strongly with his Librarian on these his 'unseasonable and
unreasonable motions' (p. 52). The upshot, however, was that Bodley,
very unwillingly, consented to become the 'first breaker' of his own
institution, (which 'hereafter,' he says, 'I purpose to become
inviolable,') and, for the love he bore to James, allowed him to
marry[33]. But it was not until the year 1813 that the Statute was
altered and the Librarian released from his obligation of perpetual
celibacy, and even then, by a singular and unmeaning compromise, it was
ordered that he, as well as the Under-Librarians, should be unmarried
_at the time of election_. The whole restriction was, however, finally
removed on the revision of the Statutes in 1856. But its infringement
appears to have been again tolerated, in one instance, at least, during
the last century, viz. in the case of Dr. Hudson. Hearne[34] enters the
following 'memorandum' of uncharitable hearsay gossip respecting his
quondam chief and friend: 'Dr. Hudson was married when he was elected
Librarian. His first wife was one Biesley. That he hath now is his
second. It is said that he was married to this Biesley when he was
Taberder of Queen's. The Dr. hath been of a loose, profligate, and
irreligious life, as I have often heard. The family of the Harrisons he
is married into now is good for just nothing, being as stingy (if it can
be) as himself.'

[27] Savile's benefactions were continued in the years 1609 and 1614,
and in 1620 he sent a large number of Greek and Latin MSS.

[28] In the year 1604 he appears again as the donor of some printed
books. A notice of one of his MSS. (now Bodl. 198), which once belonged
to Bishop Grosteste, was by him given to the Friars Minor at Oxford, and
by them, about 1433, to Gascoigne, who presented it to Durham College,
is to be found in Warton's _Life of Sir T. Pope_, 1772, pp. 392-3. The
volume contains MS. notes by both Grosteste and Gascoigne.

[29] Another relic of Dunstan is preserved among the Hatton MSS. No. 30
of that collection. 'Expositio Augustini in Apocalypsin,' written in
Anglo-Saxon characters, has the following inscription in large letters
on the last leaf: 'Dunstan abbas hunc libellum scribere jussit.'

[30] These glosses, together with an 'Alphabetum Nemnivi' in Runic
characters, (of which a facsimile is given in Hickes' _Thesaurus_, p.
168), and some Welsh and Latin notes on weights and measures, are
printed, with copious notes, by Zeuss in his _Grammatica Celtica_, 8vo.
Leipz. 1853, vol. ii. pp. 1076-96. The MS. is described also in Wanley's
Catalogue, p. 63, and the latest account of it, together with a
facsimile from the tract by Eutychius, is to be found in Villemarque's
_Notice des principaux MSS. des anciens Bretons_, 8vo. Par. 1856. And
the Alphabet of Nemnivus, together with another, and somewhat later,
Runic Alphabet (of the 'winged' form), found in Bodl. MS. 572, is
printed at pp. 10-12 of the _Ancient Welsh Grammar of Edeyrn_, edited
for the Welsh MSS. Soc. in 1856 by Rev. John Williams, ab Ithel.

[31] This reading was pointed out to the author by Rev. A. W. Haddan,
B.D.

[32] Afterwards Sir Josias, a younger brother of Sir Thomas, and
Governor of Duncannon in Ireland, author of a humorous Latin tour in
Lecale (a barony in the county of Down), which, although not
unfrequently met with in MS, has never yet been printed.

[33] _Reliquiae Bodl._ p. 162. See also p. 183.

[34] _Diary_, vol. lviii. p. 157.


A.D. 1602.

The largest pecuniary donor of this year was Blount, Lord Mountjoy
(afterwards Earl of Devon), who forwarded L100 to Sir T. Bodley from
Waterford; which were expended upon books in most classes of literature,
including music. Among various gifts of MSS. were some Russian volumes
from Lancelot Browne, M.D., and (together with Persian, Finnish, &c.)
from Sir Rich. Lee, ambassador in Muscovy. Lord Cobham gave L50 in
money, with the promise of 'divers MSS. out of St. Augustin's library in
Canterbury[35].' 'Biblia Latina pulcherrima,' 2 vols. fol. was given by
George Rives, Warden of New College. This is probably a huge and
magnificent specimen of twelfth-century work, now numbered Auctarium, E.
infra, 1, 2[36]. But the year was specially marked by the donation of 47
MSS. (including some early English volumes) from Walter (afterwards Sir
Walter) Cope; and above all, by the gift, from the Dean and Chapter of
Exeter to their fellow-countryman Bodley, of 81 Latin MSS. from their
Chapter Library. By what right they thus alienated their corporate
property no one probably cared to enquire; but, from the tokens of
neglect still visible upon the books, we may conclude that only by this
alienation were they in all likelihood saved from ultimate destruction:
for they nearly all bear more or less sign of having been exposed to
great damp, which in several instances has well-nigh destroyed the
initial and final leaves. Most of them are beautiful specimens of early
penmanship, ranging chiefly from the eleventh century to the thirteenth;
and amongst them is that precious relic of English Church offices, the
Service-book given to Exeter Cathedral by Bishop Leofric in the reign of
Edward Conf., described in the 'Registrum Benefactorum' simply as
'Missale antiquissimum.' This is happily perfect; in size a small and
thick quarto volume, written on very stout vellum, and containing 377
leaves. Four other volumes (possibly more) were also gifts of Leofric to
his Church; they are now numbered Auct. D. II. 16 (the four Gospels),
Auct. F. I. 15 (Boethius and Persius), Auct. F. III. 6 (Prudentius), and
Bodley MS. 708 (Gregory's _Pastorale_.) They each contain an inscription
in Latin and Anglo-Saxon, varying in expression, but all to the
following effect (as in the last-mentioned volume): 'Hunc librum dat
Leofricus episcopus ecclesiae Sancti Petri Apostoli in Exonia ad sedem
suam episcopalem, pro remedio animae suae, ad utilitatem successorum
suorum. Siquis autem illum inde abstulerit, perpetuae maledictioni
subjaceat. Fiat. [OE: Ethas boc gef leofric [-b]. into Sc[=e] petres
minstre on exancestre þaer his biscopstol is. his aefterfiligend[=u] to
nittweorethnisse. [&] gif hig hwa ut aetbrede haebbe he ece genietherunge mid
eall[=u] deoflum.] [=A][=m].' To the MS. of the Gospels are prefixed
very curious lists in Anglo-Saxon of the lands, vestments, books, &c.,
given by Leofric to his Church, and of relics given by King Athelstan
(of which another copy is preserved in the Missal); these lists are
printed in the Monasticon, and the titles of the books are given in
Wanley's Catalogue (p. 80).

The Library being now supplied with upwards of 2000 volumes, it was
solemnly opened on Nov. 8 (the day appointed for the annual visitation,)
by the Vice-Chancellor, with a procession of doctors and delegates.
Meeting them at the door of the room, the Librarian hastily extemporized
a short speech in honour of the occasion, 'in qua,' as the University
Register records, 'tribus ferme versibus amplexus est omnia.'

[35] _Reliquiae Bodl._ p. 92.

[36] See _ibid._ pp. 137 and 219.


A.D. 1603.

Sir Walter Raleigh appears in this year as a donor of L50. He is
sometimes said to have procured for Oxford the library of Hieron.
Osorius, which was carried off from Faro in Portugal (of which place
Osorius had been bishop), when that town was captured by the English
fleet under the Earl of Essex in 1598. Raleigh was a captain in the
squadron, and probably influenced the disposal of the books; but no
direct mention has been found of his name in relation to them. Sir
William Monson, in the account of the expedition given in his _Naval
Tracts_, only says that the library 'was brought into England by us, and
many of the books bestowed upon the new erected library of Oxford.'
Eleven MSS. were given by Sir Rob. Cotton, of which the list in the
Register is printed in Sir H. Ellis' _Letters of Eminent Literary Men_,
issued by the Camden Society in 1843 (p. 103). One of these (Auct. D.
II. 14) is the MS. of the Gospels, traditionally believed to be one of
those two copies of the old Italic version sent by St. Gregory to St.
Augustine in Britain, which were preserved in St. Augustine's Abbey,
Canterbury[37]; of which the other now exists among Archbp. Parker's
MSS. in Corp. Chr. Coll. Cambr., No. 286. They are both written in
quarto, in uncial letters and double columns. Their date may possibly be
somewhat later than that which is traditionally assigned; but at any
rate they are certainly among what the historian Elmham calls 'primitiae
librorum totius ecclesiae Anglicanae.' On the last fly-leaf of the Bodley
MS. is the following list of English Priests' libraries. [OE: 'Þas bocas
haueeth Salomon p[=rs]t. [-þ]is þecodspel t{r}aht. [&] þemarty{r}luia
[&] þe (_erased_) [&] þe aeglisce salte{r}e [&] þe c{r}ranc [&] ethe
tropere [&] wulf mer cild þeatteleuaui ('Ad Te levavi.') [&] pistelari
[&] þe] (_erased_) [&] ethe imnere. [&] ethe capitelari. (_word erased_)
[&] þe spel boc. [&] Siga{r} p[=rs]t. þelece boc [&] Blakehad boc.
[&] AEilmer ethe grete Sater. [&] ethe litle t{r}opere fo{r}beande. [&] ethe
Donatum. XV bocas Ealfric AEilwine. Godric. [&] Bealdewuine a[-bb] [&]
Freoden [&] hu-- (_torn_) [&] ethuregise.'] Several leaves are wanting
at the beginning and one at the end; the book commences at S. Matt. iv.
14, and ends in S. John xxi. 16. It now numbers 172 leaves, besides the
fly-leaf, and contains 29 lines in a column; the Cambridge MS. has 25
lines.

Two Russian MSS. were given in this year by John Mericke, English Consul
in Russia, and a collection of Italian books by Sir Michael Dormer.

[37] Wanley, p. 172. Elmham's _Hist. Mon. S. Aug._ 1858, pp. 97, 8.


A.D. 1604.

On June 20, letters patent were granted by James I, styling the library
by the founder's name, and licensing the University to hold lands, &c.,
in mortmain for its maintenance, to an amount not exceeding 200 marks
_per annum_[38].

In the list of donors occur Sir Christopher Heydon, Sir Jerome Horsey
(whose gift includes a MS. of the Gospels in Russian, and rolls
containing forms of letters, &c., in the autograph of the Czar Ivan
Basilides), Sir Ralph Winwood (17 Greek MSS.), Robert Barker the
printer, and Sir Henry Wotton (a MS. of the Koran).

[38] Wood MS. F. 27.


A.D. 1605.

The bust of Bodley, which is seen in the large room, was sent by
Sackville, Earl of Dorset, the Chancellor of the University. It
attracted the notice of King James upon his entering the Library on the
fourth day of his visit to Oxford in August of this year, who, upon
reading its inscription, indulged in the very mild pun that the Founder
should rather be called Sir Thomas Godly than Bodly[39]. And, looking on
the well-filled cases, he said he had often had proof from the
University of the fruits of talent and ability, but had never before
seen the garden where those fruits grew and whence they were gathered.
He examined various MSS. of the Holy Scriptures, and especially of the
old English version, as well as of the Ethiopic, on the authority of
which, 'more suo, summo cum judicio disceptavit.' Then, taking up
Gaguinus' treatise _De Puritate Conceptionis Virg. Mar._, printed at
Paris in 1498, he remarked that the author had so written about purity
as if he wished that it should only be found on the title of his book;
and said it had often been his desire that such objectionable writings
(especially on religious subjects) could be altogether suppressed rather
than be tolerated to the corruption of minds and manners. He admitted,
however, that probably there was no disadvantage from their being stored
up in collections of this kind. Moved to a wonderful temper of
liberality, the king then offered to present from all the libraries of
the royal palaces whatsoever precious and rare books Sir T. Bodley, on
examination, might choose to carry away; and promised that the grant
should be made under seal, lest any hindrance should arise. It
appears[40] that this (somewhat hasty) grant was actually passed under
the Privy Seal about the beginning of November in the same year, and
that Bodley expected to carry off a great many MSS. from Whitehall.
Probably the full execution of his intentions was hindered, as he
himself appears to have suspected might happen; at any rate, there is
very little in the Library that tells of having come from the royal
collections, except a few folio editions of the Fathers which once were
in the possession of Hen. VIII, as his arms stamped upon the covers
testify[41], and three or four MSS. which bear like evidence of having
belonged to James I. Upon leaving the room, after spending considerable
time in its examination, the king exclaimed that were he not King James
he would be an University man; and that, were it his fate at any time to
be a captive, he would wish to be shut up, could he but have the choice,
in this place as his prison, to be bound with its chains, and to consume
his days amongst its books as his fellows in captivity[42].

In this year appeared the first Catalogue of the Library, compiled by
Thomas James. It is a quarto volume, published by Joseph Barnes at
Oxford, consisting of 425 pages, with an Appendix of 230 more; the
Preface is dated June 27. The book is dedicated to Henry, Prince of
Wales[43]. It includes both printed books and MSS. arranged
alphabetically under the four classes of Theology, Medicine, Law, and
Arts, with lists of expositors of Holy Scripture, commentators on
Aristotle, Hippocrates, and Galen, and in Civil and Canon Law. The legal
and medical lists were added at Bodley's special desire[44]. A
continuation of this classified index, embracing writers on Arts and
Sciences, Geography and History, is to be found in Rawlinson MS.
_Miscell._ 730. It was drawn up by James, after his quitting the
Library, for the use of young students in the faculty of Arts, in order
to show his continued interest in them and in the place of his old
occupation. In the preface he thus describes the arrangement of his
book: 'Exhibeo, primo, libros distributos secundum facultates suas;
secundo, dissectos in minutissimas portiones vel sectiones, idque
alphabetice; tertio, habetis cognitos et exploratos auctores singulos
qui de singulis subjectis vel generatim vel speciatim scripserunt
libros, tractatus, epistolas; postremo, ne quid desit, habetis editiones
certas, et maxime ex parte ex pluribus selectas et meliores, cito
parabiles, digitos ad pluteos et pluteorum sectiones intendendo.' This
volume came into Rawlinson's possession from Hearne, who notes in it:
'This MS. came out of the study of Dr. Anthony Hall, of Queen's College,
Oxford, who married the widow of Dr. John Hudson, to whom this book once
belong'd.'

[39] This would-be witticism is made the subject of a quatrain in the
_Justa Funebria Bodlei_, p. 108.

[40] _Reliquiae Bodl._ pp. 205, 339.

[41] His arms also occur in several places in a Greek MS. now numbered
Auct. E. I. 15. And there is one volume among Selden's books (8^o. A.
24, Art. Seld.) which appears to possess considerable interest as having
come from the library of the many-wived king. It is a fine copy of AEsop,
with the _Batrachomyomachia_, &c., printed by Froben in 1518, which may
be conjectured, from the binding, to have been a gift from Henry to Anne
Boleyn. The cover is of embossed calf; on one side is the Tudor rose
supported by angels, with the sun, moon, and four stars above, encircled
by the lines:--

    'Hec rosa virtutis de celo missa sereno,
    Eternum florens regia sceptra feret.'

Below are the initials A. H., conjoined with a knot. On the other side
is a representation of the Annunciation, with the same initials
repeated.

[42] The account of the king's visit is given in Sir J. Wake's _Rex
Platonicus_, pp. 116-123.

[43] At the suggestion of Bodley, who thought that more reward was to be
gained from the prince than from the king. (_Reliquiae Bodl._ 206.)

[44] _Reliquiae Bodl._ pp. 195, 256.


A.D. 1606.

Chinese literature began to make its appearance even at this early date.
Among the books bought with L20 given by Lady Kath. Sandys were, 'Octo
volumina lingua Chinensi,' while two others, '_Excusa_ in regno et
lingua Chinensi,' were bought, together with the donor's own 'Historie
of Great Britaine,' with a gift of L5 from John Clapham.


A.D. 1610.

The books having some time since begun to crowd the room provided for
them, so that James, in his Preface to the Catalogue of 1605, said there
already seemed to be more need of a Library for the books than books for
the Library, the Founder commenced in this year an extension of his
building. On July 16 the first stone was laid of the eastern wing, and
of the Proscholium, or vestibule of the Divinity School, beneath; which
were completed by 1612, as in that year several donations were placed in
the new room[45]. An inscription in gold letters, in the front of this
building, commemorates Bodley's work; having become barely legible, it
has recently been restored to its pristine lustre by the care of the
present Librarian. The noble east window contains some very curious and
interesting relics in stained glass which were presented to the Library
(with numerous other fragments, which adorn some of the other windows in
the Library and partly fill two of those in the Picture Gallery[46]), in
1797, by Alderman William Fletcher of Oxford, a zealous local antiquary
and Churchman of the good old school. The three principal fragments
represent: 1. Henry II, stripped naked, and suffering flagellation with
birch rods, at the hands of two monks, before the shrine of Thomas a
Becket. 2. The marriage (as supposed) of Henry VI with Margaret of
Anjou, representing, says Dr. Rock[47], that portion of the ceremony
which took place at the Church door; formerly in a window of Rollright
Church, Oxfordshire. There is no evidence, however, to connect this
representation with Henry VI, and it has been conjectured to describe
his marriage chiefly from its corresponding in some very small degree to
a representation of that event, formerly at Strawberry Hill, and
described and engraved in Walpole's _Anecdotes of Painting_, i. 36. It
is probably of an earlier date. 3. The doing homage by William, King of
Scotland, with his abbots and barons, to Henry II in York Minster in
1171. Of the first of these, two coloured engravings, and of the second,
one, are found in a copy of Gutch's Wood, which came to the Library from
the same donor, Alderman Fletcher, in 1818, illustrated with very
numerous and curious engravings and drawings, as well as enriched with
some MS. notes, and bound in seven large quarto volumes[48].

The large coats of arms appear to have been inserted in 1716, as in the
accounts for that year we find, 'For paynted armes in the Library
window, L5.' But one coat of arms was put up in the year 1771, (_q. v._)

It was in this year that the Library began to be enlarged with the gift
of copies of all works published by the members of the Stationers'
Company, in pursuance of an agreement made with them by Bodley, which
became the precursor of the obligations of the Copyright Acts. On Dec.
12 the Company made a grant of one perfect copy of every book printed by
them, on condition that they should have liberty to borrow the books
thus given, if needed for reprinting, and also to examine, collate, and
copy the books which were given by others. An order of the Star-Chamber
was made July 11, 1637, in confirmation of this grant[49]. The proposal
of such an agreement emanated from the Librarian James; but in the
effecting it Bodley says that he met with 'many rubs and delays[50].'
Ayliffe say[51] that the agreement was very well observed until about
1640. He should rather have said 'about 1630,' for in that year, in a
paper of notes made by the Librarian for the use of Archbishop Laud, as
Chancellor of the University (in which the mention of a gift of books by
Fetherston, a London bookseller, fixes the date), complaint is made that
the Company were very negligent in sending their books, and it is
suggested that a message from the Chancellor might quickly remedy that
neglect[52]. In 1642, Verneuil, the Sub-Libraria[53], complained in the
Preface to his _Nomenclator, &c_, of the neglect which had then begun;
mentioning the names of several benefactors, he adds: 'These have beene
more courteous than the Stationers of London, who by indenture are bound
to give the Library a copy of every booke they print.' In the Visitation
Order-Book, under the year 1695, is the following 'memorandum' by Hyde,
then Head Librarian: 'That in November, 1695, a copy of the indenture
between Sir Thomas Bodley and the Company of Stationers, as also a copy
of their By-Law to inforce their particular members to complyance, was
sent up to the Master of the Company to be communicated and publicly
read to the Company once every year, as is in the indenture expressed.
The originall was also some years agon carryed up and shewed to the
Master and Wardens, because some of them used to raile at the unjustness
of the Act of Parliament in forcing them to give a copy of each book to
the Bodleian Library; and therefore we shewed them that we had also
another antecedent right to a copy of each book printed by any member in
their Company. The Indenture mentions only the giving of books new
printed, but the By-law mentions books both new-printed and also
reprinted with additions[54]. We have been told that Sir Thomas Bodley
gave to the Company 50 pounds worth of plate when they entred into this
Indenture. But its not mentioned in our counter-part. Every book is to
be delivered to the junior Warden within 10 dayes after its off from the
press, and we are to appoint somebody to demand them of him. The
obligation is upon every printer to give books; it were to be wished it
had been upon every proprietor; for the proprietor must give them to
us.'

[45] It is probably to aid given for the erection of this structure that
the following passage refers: 'To the building Bodley's Library at
Oxford a considerable sum was contributed by the Bishop of London, being
his share of the moneys paid into court for commutation of penance.'
Archd. Hale's Notes to the _Register of Worcester_ (Camden Soc. 1855),
p. cxxviii. Aid was also given by the Crown, for on May 3, 1611, an
order was issued by the Lord Treasurer to the officers of the woods at
Stow, Shotover, &c., near Oxford, to deliver to Sir T. Bodley, for
enlarging the Library, the timber which was to have been employed for
making the Thames navigable to Oxford, a work which did not proceed.
(_Calendar of State Papers_, Dom. Series, 1611-18, p. 28.)

[46] See also under 1818.

[47] _Church of our Fathers_, i. 421.

[48] Mr. Fletcher died in 1826, at the age of eighty-seven, and was
buried (in a stone coffin traditionally said to be that of Fair
Rosamond) in the church of the village where he was born, Yarnton, near
Oxford. His tomb is remarkable as exhibiting, before Architectural and
Ecclesiological societies had been thought of, an anticipation of better
days in monumental design than had yet appeared; a brass, upon a high
altar-tomb, represents him clad in his aldermanic gown, with his hands
clasped in prayer. A bust of him is in the Picture Gallery.

[49] Rushworth, iii. 315.

[50] _Reliquiae Bodl._ p. 350.

[51] _Univ. of Oxford_, i. 460.

[52] _Calendar of State Papers_, 1635-6, p. 65.

[53] See _sub anno_ 1647.

[54] See _sub anno_ 1612.


A.D. 1611.

The permanent endowment of the Library was commenced by the Founder in
this year, by the purchase, from Lord Norreys, of the manor of Hendons
by Maidenhead, worth annually L91 10s.; to which he added 'certain
tenements in London,' producing an annual rent of L40. From the former,
now called Hindhay farm, in the parishes of Bray and Cookham, Berks, the
Library receives an annual rent, at the present time, of about L220; the
latter, which consisted of houses situated in Distaff Lane, were sold in
1853, and the produce invested in L3455 10_s._ 3 per cent. Consols.

The first book which came from the Stationers' Company, in pursuance of
the Indenture made in Dec. 1610, was an anonymous catechetical work
printed in this year by Felix Kingston for Thomas Man, entitled,
'Christian Religion substantially, methodicallie, plainlie, and
profitablie treatised.' It is now numbered 4^o R. 34 Th., and a note in
Bodley's own handwriting records its presentation.

Twenty Arabic, Persian, and other MSS., were presented by -- Pindar,
Consul at Aleppo of the Company of English Merchants, whom Bodley three
years previously had requested to procure such books[55].

Among other minor matters which called forth the care of Bodley, was the
providing a bell for the purpose of giving notice when the Library was
about to be closed. After it had been placed in the Library some
accident appears to have happened to it, since we read in one of his
letters to James[56], 'As touching the bell, I would have it cast again,
and if my friends think it good, made somewhat better.' In 1655 a
bell-rope was bought at the price of 1_s._ 4_d._ Of late years, however,
the Founder's bell had altogether disappeared, and the fact of its very
existence was unknown, while a small hand-bell, suggestive of a
muffin-man, and, more recently, a hand-bell taken from a Chinese temple
at Tien-tsin, and presented by Col. Rigaud, supplied its place. But in
July, 1866, in the course of moving some boxes and rubbish buried under
some stairs, a mouldy bell of considerable size was dragged to light,
which proved to be the missing bell of the Founder. It was immediately
put by the Librarian into the hands of Messrs. White, of Appleton,
Berks, who fitted it with a frame and wheel; and now, restored to a
conspicuous place in the great room, it daily thunders forth an
unmistakeable signal for departure. Around it, in gold letters, runs the
inscription:--'Sir Thomas Bodley gave this bell, 1611.' The
bell-founder's initials, W. S., are accompanied by the device of a crown
between three bells.

Another relic of Bodley's furniture is a massy iron chest, fastened with
three locks, two of which are enormous padlocks, for the preservation of
the moneys of the Library, of which the keys used to be in the custody
of the Vice-Chancellor and Proctors. This is now exhibited in the
Picture Gallery, on account of the extreme beauty of the ironwork of
the locks, which covers in its intricate ramifications the whole of the
inside of the lid. On the outside are painted the arms of the University
(with the older motto 'Sapientiae et Faelicitatis') and of Bodley.

[55] Hearne's _Job. Glaston._ ii. 637.

[56] _Reliquiae Bodl._ p. 314.


A.D. 1612.

Two large donations of MSS. were received during this year; the one from
the Dean and Chapter of Windsor (in imitation of their brethren of
Exeter), of 159 volumes, chiefly theological; and the other of a large
collection of scientific treatises, chiefly astronomical and medical,
about 120 in number, from Thomas Twine, M.D., of Lewes.

The agreement that was entered into by the Stationers' Company in 1610
having probably been found in some degree inoperative from the absence
of any penalty upon non-fulfilment, the Company at the commencement of
this year passed the following ordinance, which made it obligatory on
every one of their members to forward their books to the Library. It is
here printed (for the first time) from the original, preserved in the
University Archives, marked A. 27[57].

    '_Vicesimo octavo Januarii 1611 nono regni regis Jacobi, at
      Staconers Hall, in Ave Mary Lane in London. Present, the Masters,
      Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of Staconers._

    'Forasmuch as this Companye out of their zeale to the advancement of
    learninge, and at the request of the right worshipfull Sir Thomas
    Bodley, Knight, founder of the presente publique library of the
    University of Oxford, beinge readye to manifeste their willinge
    desires to a worck of so great pietye and benifitt to the generall
    state of the Realme, did by their Indenture under their common seale
    dated the twelveth daye of December in the eight yeare of his
    Maj.^ts raigne of England, Fraunce and Ireland, and the foure and
    fortith yere of his raigne of Scotland, for them and their
    successors, graunte and confirme vnto the Chauncellor, Maisters, and
    Schollers of the Universitie of Oxford, and to their successors for
    ever, That of all bookes after that from tyme to tyme to be printed
    in the said Company of Staconers, beinge newe books and coppies
    never printed before, or thoughe formerly printed yet newly
    augmented or enlarged, there should be freelie given one perfect
    Booke of every such booke (in quyers) of the first ympression
    thereof, towardes the furnishinge and increase of the said Library;
    Nowe therefore, to the intent the said graunte maie take due effect
    in the orderlie performance and execucon thereof, and that so good
    and godlie a worck and purpose maie not bee disappointed or defeated
    by any meanes, It is ordayned by this Company, that all and every
    printer and printers that from tyme to tyme hereafter shall either
    for hym- or themselves, or for any other, printe or cause to be
    printed any newe booke or coppie never printed before, or although
    formerly printed yet newly augmented or enlarged, shall within ten
    daies next after the finishinge of the first ympression thereof and
    the puttinge of the same to sale, bringe and deliver to the yonger
    warden of the said Company of Staconers for the tyme beinge one
    perfect booke thereof to be delivered over by the same Warden to the
    recited use to the handes of such person or persons as shalbe
    appoincted by the said Chauncellour, Maisters and Schollers for the
    tyme beinge to receive the same; And it is alsoe ordayned that every
    printer that at any tyme or tymes hereafter shall make default in
    performance hereof, shall for every such default forfeite and paie
    to the use of this Company treble the value of every booke that he
    shall leave undelivered contrarie to this ordenance; Out of the
    which forfeiture, upon the levyinge and payment thereof, there
    shalbe provided for the use of the said Librarye that booke for the
    not delivery whereof the said forfeiture shalbe had and paid. And to
    the intent all printers and others of this Company whome it shall
    concerne maie take notice of this ordenance, and that any of them
    shall not pretend ignorance thereof, It is ordeyned that once in
    every yere at some generall assemblie and meetinge of the said
    Company upon some of their usuall quarter daies, or some other tyme
    in the yere at their discretion, this presente ordinance shalbe
    publiquely read in their Hall, as other their ordenances are
    accustomed to be read there

    'John Haryson
    'John Norton, Mr.
    'Richard Field    } Wardens
    'Humphrey Lownes  }
    'Edward White
    'Humfry Hooper
    'Simon Waterson
    'William Leake
    'Robert Barker
    'Thomas Mane
    'Thomas Dawson
    'John Standishe
    'Thomas Adames
    'John Haryson[58]
    'Ri. Collins, Clerk of the Companie.

    'Havinge lately byn entreated, as well by the said Sir Thomas
    Bodley, Knight, as by the Maister, Wardens, and Assistants of the
    foresaid Company of Staconers, to take some spetiall notice of this
    their publique acte and graunte, and (in regard of our beinge of his
    Maiestyes highe Comission in ecclesiasticall causes) to testifie
    under our handes with what allowance and good likinge we have
    thought it meete to be received, Wee doe not onlie as of merrit
    comend it to posteritie for a singuler token of the fervent zeale of
    that Company to the furtherance of good learninge and for an
    exemplarie guift and graunt to the Schollers and Studients of the
    Universitye of Oxford, But withall we doe promise by subscribinge
    unto it, that if at any tyme hereafter occasion shall require that
    we should help to maynteyne the due and perpetuall execucon of the
    same, Wee will be readie to performe it, as farre as either of our
    selves thoroughe our present authoritie or by any whatsoeuer our
    further endeavours it maie be fitlye procured.

    'G. Cant.
    'Jo. London
    'Jo. Benet
    'Tho. Ridley
    'Tho. Edwardes
    'G. Newmane
    'John Spenser
    'Richard Moket
    'R. Cov. & Lich.
    'Jhon Boys
    'Char. Fotherbye
    'Martin Fotherby
    'John Layfeilds
    'Jo. Roffens
    'George Montaigne (_sic_)
    'Rob^t. Abbott
    'Henr. Hickman
    'John Dix
    'Willm. FFerrand.'

[57] For the use of this document the author is indebted to the Keeper
of the Archives, Rev. J. Griffiths, M.A.

[58] Probably the son of the John Haryson who signs above.


A.D. 1613.

The death of the Founder occurred on Jan. 28, after long suffering from
stone, dropsy, and scurvy, for which he is said to have been mis-treated
by a Dr. Hen. Atkins[59]. Two volumes of elegiac verses were thereupon
issued by the University, of which one (_Bodleiomnema_) was written
entirely by members of Merton College; the other (_Justa Funebria
Ptolemaei Oxoniensis_) by members of the University in general. In the
latter collection are Latin verses by Laud, then President of St.
John's, and Greek verses by Isaac Casaubon. Bodley was buried (according
to his desire in his will) in the chapel of his old College, Merton, on
March 29, with all the state of a public funeral. He bequeathed the
greater part of his property for the building of the east wing of the
Library and the completion of the Schools, appointing Sir John Bennett
and Mr. William Hakewill his executors. The former, however, proved in
some measure an unfaithful steward. When prosecuted in Parliament in
1621, for gross bribery in his office as Judge of the Prerogative Court,
some of Bodley's money was still remaining in his hands, and was
mentioned in the charges brought against him. For the due payment of a
portion of this, by annual instalments of L150, the University, on June
28, 1624, accepted four bonds from him, witnessed by Thomas Coventreye,
Matthew Bennet, and Henry Wigmore; only one of these appears to have
been paid off, leaving an unpaid deficit of L450[60]. The entry of this
debt is carried on, together with the loan made to King Charles I in
1642, in the Library accounts[61], from year to year up to 1782, when
by order of the Curators the entries were discontinued. In the notice of
the Library contributed (as it is said) by Dr. Hudson to Ayliffe's
_Ancient and Present State of Oxford_ (vol. i. p. 460), it is stated
that the Library estate falls miserably short by reason of 'the fraud of
his [Bodley's] executor, the loan of a great sum of money to Charles I
in his distress, and by the fire of London,' that event, doubtless,
necessitating the rebuilding of the houses in Distaff Lane.

Bodley was charged by some of his contemporaries, and apparently with
some justice, with sacrificing in his will the claims of relatives and
friends too much to the interests of the Library. One Mr. John
Chamberlain, a friend of Bodley, whose gossiping letters to Sir Dudley
Carleton, Alice Carleton, and others, are preserved in the State Paper
Office, does not spare his accusations on this head. In a letter dated
Feb. 4, 1613, he says that Bodley has left legacies to great people,
L7000 to the Library, and L200 to Merton College, but little to his
brothers, his old servants, his friends, or the children of his wife, by
whom he had all his wealth[62]. In another, dated June 23, 1613, he
remarks that the executors cannot excuse Bodley of unthankfulness to
many of his relatives and friends, he being 'so drunk with the applause
and vanitie of his librarie that he made no conscience to rob Peter to
pay Paul[63].' Some inferential corroboration of this is afforded by the
following curious paper preserved among Rawlinson's gatherings (now in a
vol. numbered Rawl. MS. Miscell., 1203), being no other than a petition
for relief addressed by the grand-nephew and grand-niece of Bodley in
the year 1712 (as appears from the Library accounts) to the Heads of
Houses and Curators of the Library, who appear both officially and
individually to have been very parsimonious in their response:--

    'To the Worshipful Mr. Vice-Chancellor and to all heads and
      governors of Colleges and Halls within the famous University of
      Oxon.

    'The humble petition of William Snoshill of East Lockinge in the
      county of Berks, labourer, and of Jane the wife of Thomas Hatton
      of Childrey in the county aforesaid, labourer, sister of the
      said William Snoshill,

    'Humbly sheweth,

    'That your Petitioners being the grand-children of the sister of Sir
    Thomas Bodley, the munificent founder of the Bodleian Library in
    your University, being now reduc'd to a poor and low estate, do with
    all humility make bold to represent their distrest condition to your
    consideration, hoping that out of your tender pity and
    commiseration, and that regard you have for the pious memory of so
    great a benefactor to your University, to whom your poor Petitioners
    are so nearly allied, you will be pleas'd to consider them as real
    objects of your charity and compassion, and thereby you will lay an
    eternal obligation on them of praying for your present and future
    happiness.

    'William Snoshill
    'Jane Hatton.

    'We, whose names are subscribed to this Petition, are well satisfied
    of the truth thereof.

    'Thomas Paris, rector of Childrey
    'John Holmes
    'John Bell, vic. of Sparsholt
    'John Aldworth, rector of East Lockinge
    'Ralph Kedden, M.A., vicar of Denchworth, Berks.

    '(_Mem._) The Curators gave the Petitioners the sum of four pounds
    out of Sir Thomas Bodley's chest. Dr. Altham, Hebrew professor, and
    Dr. Hudson, Library-keeper, gave, each of them, ten shillings.'

An alphabetical catalogue was prepared in this year by James, but was
not printed. The MS, in two small hand-books, remains in the Library. It
was ordered by the Curators, at the Visitation on Nov. 13, that 6_s._
8_d._ be paid quarterly to the Bedel of the Stationers' Company as a
gratuity for his trouble. MSS. were received from Edw. James, B.D., who
had been a contributor already in the year 1601.

[59] _Calendar of State Papers_, 1611-18, p. 137.

[60] A full account of Bennet's defalcations is given by B. Twyne, from
the University Registers, in vol. vi. (pp. 120-4) of his _Collectanea_,
now in the Univ. Archives. See also _Parliam. Hist._ vol. v. p. 462.

[61] These accounts, as now preserved, unfortunately only commence at
the year 1653, and there is a hiatus from 1661 to 1676, both inclusive.

[62] _Calendar of State Papers_, 1611-18, p. 169.

[63] _Ibid._ p. 187.


A.D. 1614.

Various orders were made by the Curators at the Visitation on Nov. 10,
which are prefixed to the small MS. 'hand-catalogues' made at that time
for the use of those authorities. They resolve that the catalogues of
newly-published works issued at Frankfort in each spring and summer
shall be examined by them within one week after their arrival. They make
an attempt to obtain possession of a gift of the Founder's giving, which
had never yet reached the place of its intended deposit. In 1609 it had
been reported to Convocation that there was about to be sent to the
Library by Sir T. Bodley 'toga ex lana agni Tartarici [Grk: zoophyton],
magni quidam valoris, ei data (ut in publica Bibliotheca conservetur) ab
Richardo Lee, milite, qui eandem dono recepit ab augustissimo Imperatore
Muscoviae[64].' But the precious cloak had never yet arrived; the
Curators therefore resolve 'quod literae scribantur ad exequutores domini
Fundatoris pro illo pretioso pallio ex zoophyto confecto, et legato ad
nos per Ric. Leigh, militem, olim legatum apud Imperatorem Russiae, et
quod in cista ex ligno bene olenti, ad eam finem comparanda, reponatur
in archivis, munita sera affabre facta; clavis permaneat semper apud
Vice-Cancellarium vel ejus deputatum, nec cuiquam illud inspiciendi vel
contrectandi potestas esto, nisi in praesentia eorundem.' At this
Visitation Joseph Barnes, the Oxford printer, appeared and promised to
give a copy of every book which he might print. Complaint was made that
the London Stationers had already begun to fail in the fulfilment of
their agreement.

On Aug. 29 the King visited the Library on his way to Woodstock, and,
asking for Fulke's _Annotations on the Rhemish New Test._, pointed out
the remarks at Rom. x. 15, on the calling of ministers; 'deprehendit
calumnias et imposturas quorundam pontificiorum de ordine et vocatione
ministrorum[65].' In 1620 the editions of 1601 and 1617 of these
_Annotations_ were both in the Library, as appears from the Catalogue of
that year, but in Hyde's Catalogue, published in 1674, only the edition
of 1633 is found. This is one out of various instances which prove that,
by a great miscalculation of literary value, later editions of a
writer's works were thought to supersede so entirely the earlier, that
the latter could be advantageously parted with. The Library has,
however, since become re-possessed of the earlier editions, that of 1601
having been presented in 1824, and that of 1617 having been bought more
recently. But the most remarkable example of this mistaken alienation of
books occurs with reference to the first folio edition of Shakespeare.
In the Supplemental Catalogue of 1635, the folio of 1623 duly appears;
but in the Catalogue of 1674 we find only the third edition, that of
1664, which doubtless had been thought to be sufficient as well as best;
upon its arrival, therefore, from Stationers' Hall, the precious volume
of 1623 was probably regarded as little more than waste-paper. Nor was
it until the year 1821, when Malone's collection was received, that a
copy was again possessed by the Library[66].

[64] 'Reg. Conv. K. f. 43,' MS. note by Dr. P. Bliss. Bodley mentions in
a letter to James his expectation of exhibiting the 'lamb's-wool-gown'
to the King. _Reliqq. Bodl._ 173. An account of this marvellous garment
will be found in the Appendix.

[65] Wood's _Hist._ vol. ii. p. 319.

[66] The extraordinary _fancy_ prices sometimes given for books, and
their variations, are particularly exemplified in the case of the first
folio Shakespeare. In 1778 Stevens said it was 'usually valued at seven
or eight' guineas. (_Shakespeare_, second edit. vol. i. p. 239.) At the
Roxburghe sale (a sufficiently bibliomaniacal one) in 1812 a copy was
sold for L100; in 1864 Miss Burdett Coutts gave for Mr. G. Daniel's
specially fine copy, L716 2_s._; while in July, 1867, a copy belonging
to a Mr. -- Smith was sold for L410. In Dec. 1867 another copy was on
sale at Mr. Beet's, the bookseller, to which the owner very discreetly
attached in his catalogue no specific sum.


A.D. 1615.

Richard Connock, auditor and solicitor to Prince Henry of Wales, gave a
MS. book of _Horae_[67], which had formerly belonged to Mary I, and
afterwards to Prince Henry. The donor, in a note prefixed, records that
he gives the volume, 'not for the religion it contains, but for the
pictures and former royall owners' sake.' It is a volume of the early
part of the fifteenth century, in small quarto, containing 224 leaves,
and ornamented with very beautiful illuminated borders and exquisite
drawings in _camaieu gris_. Among these is one of the martyrdom of
Becket, which, doubtless in consequence of the book being in the
possession of the Princess Mary, has entirely escaped the defacement and
obliteration ordered by her father to be made in all Service-books where
the office for S. Thomas of Canterbury occurred. The following
inscription (nearly effaced at its close by over-much handling in former
years), addressed by Mary to one of her ladies, whose name does not
appear, to whom probably she presented the book, occurs in the blank
portion of one of the leaves:--

    'Geate you such riches as when the shype is broken, may swyme away
    wythe the Master. For dyverse chances take away the goods of
    fortune; but the goods of the soule whyche bee only the trewe goods,
    nother fyer nor water can take away. Yf you take labour and payne to
    doo a vertuous thyng, the labour goeth away, and the vertue
    remaynethe. Yf through pleasure you do any vicious thyng, the
    pleasure goeth away and the vice remaynethe. Good Madame, for my
    sake remembre thys.

                                'Your lovyng mystres,
                                          'Marye Princesse.'

This inscription (which does so much credit to its writer) was first
printed by Hearne at the end of _Titi Livii Forojulien. Vita Hen. V._
(p. 228) and last, in Bliss' _Reliquiae Hearn._ i. 105. Mr. Coxe has
noted (from _Alstedii Systema Mnemonicum_, 1610, i. 705) that the latter
part is taken directly and literally from Musonius, while indirectly it
comes from an oration by Cato[68]. Probably the first part may be traced
to some similar source.

Another autograph inscription by Mary while Princess is found in a small
book (Laud MS. Miscell. i.) of private prayers in Latin and English,
which belonged to Jane Wriothesley, wife of Thomas Earl of Southampton,
and which she seems to have employed as a kind of album. At f. 45^a are
these lines, which appear to form a triplet, although not written in
metrical form by the Princess:--

    'Good Madame, I do desyer you most hartly to pray,
    That in prosperyte and adversyte I may
    Have grace to keep the trewe way.

                                'Your lovyng frend,
                                          to my ... [power?]'

Unfortunately the conclusion, with the signature, has been cut off. A
couplet, signed by Queen Katherine Parr, has an equal, and most regal,
disregard of the restraints of metrical rhythm (f. 8^b.):--

    'Madam, althowe I have differred writtyng in your booke,
    I am no lesse your frend than you do looke.

                                'Kateryn the Quene KP.'

Other inscriptions are inserted by Margaret Queen of Scotland, Mary
Countess of Lennox and mother of Lord Darnley, and by the Countess of
Southampton's daughters, Elizabeth, Mary, and Anne.

James Button, Esq., of the county of Worcester, gave, on March 28, a
curious relic of the ancient language of Cornwall, being three
Miracle-Plays of the Creation, the Passion, and the Resurrection, in
Cornish, contained in a MS. on vellum, small folio, eighty-three leaves,
written in the fifteenth century; now numbered Bodl. 791. A copy on
paper of the Play of the Creation, written by John Jordan in 1611, is
also in the Library, numbered Bodl. 219, which appears to have come from
the library of King James I, having the royal crown stamped on the
parchment cover, with the initials I.K. A second modern copy has also
been recently presented (in 1849) by Edwin Ley, Esq., of Bosahan,
Cornwall, which is accompanied by a translation by John Keigwyn, made in
1695. The dramas were printed in two volumes at the University Press,
with a translation, notes, and glossary, by Mr. Edwin Norris, in 1859.

Some MSS. were given about this time by the three sons of Rich. Colf,
D.D., and in 1618 twenty Greek volumes by Cecil, Earl of Exeter.

[67] The gift is omitted in the Benefaction-Register, apparently because
it was a rule not to record donations of single volumes [_Reliquiae
Bodl._ pp. 91, 283]; consequently several books of the greatest value
are omitted.

[68] George Herbert expresses the same idea at the end of his _Church
Porch_:--

    'If thou do ill, the joy fades, not the pains;
    If well, the pain doth fade, the joy remains.'


A.D. 1620.

At the beginning of May, James resigned the office of Librarian, but not
as Wood says, on account of his promotion to the Subdeanery of Wells,
since that took place in the year 1614. His appointment to the rectory
of Mongeham, Kent (also mentioned by Wood), was in 1617. He continued,
however, to reside in Oxford, and dying there in August, 1629, was
buried in New College Chapel.

On the 9th of the same month of May, John Rouse, M.A., Fellow of Oriel,
was elected James' successor. No account of him is given by Wood,
possibly from dislike of his Puritanical principles, and of his
continuing to hold office during the usurpation. He appears to have
discharged his trust in the Library with faithfulness, and, at least, to
have deserved some mention at the historiographer's hands for the
Appendix to the Catalogue which he issued in the year 1635 (_q.v._)[69]
He is best known as the friend of Milton, who, on Rouse's application to
him for a copy of his _Poems both English and Latin_, published in 1645,
in the place of one previously given by Milton which had been lost, sent
the volume, together with a long autograph Latin Ode, dated Jan. 23,
1646 (-7), and bearing the following title: 'Ad Joannem Rousium,
Oxoniensis Academiae Bibliothecarium, de libro poematum amisso quem ille
sibi denuo mitti postulabat, ut cum aliis nostris in Bibliotheca publica
reponeret, Ode Joannis Miltonj[70].' The volume is now numbered 8^o. M.
168 Art. A facsimile of a considerable portion of the Ode (which Cowper
translated into English, and which is said to have been the last of
Milton's Latin poetical effusions) is given in plate xvii. of Sam. Leigh
Sotheby's sumptuous volume, entitled _Ramblings in the Elucidation of
the Autograph of Milton_, 4^o. Lond. 1861; and at p. 120 there is a
facsimile in full of Milton's inscription in another volume (4^o. F. 56
Th.) which contains a collection of the political and polemical
treatises published by him in the years 1641-5. This latter inscription,
which gives a list of the contents of the volume, is addressed as
follows: 'Doctissimo viro proboque librorum aestimatori Joanni Rousio,
Oxoniensis academiae Bibliothecario, gratum hoc sibi fore testanti,
Joannes Miltonius opuscula haec sua in Bibliothecam antiquissimam atque
celeberrimam adsciscenda libens tradit, tanquam in memoriae perpetuae
Fanum, emeritamque, uti sperat, invidiae calumniaeque vacationem; si
Veritati, Bonoque simul Eventui satis litatum sit.' Warton tells the
almost incredible story, in his edition of Milton's _Poems_, that about
the year 1720 these two volumes were thrown out into a heap of
duplicates, from which Nathaniel Crynes, who afterwards bequeathed his
own collection to the Library[71], was permitted to pick out what he
pleased for himself; fortunately, however, he was too good a royalist
and churchman to choose anything that bore the name of Milton, and so
the books, despised and rejected on both sides, by mere chance remained
in the place of their original deposit! Such an incident, if true, goes
far to justify the charges of ignorance and neglect of the Library which
Hearne in his Diary constantly brings against Hudson, the Librarian at
that time, and those whom he employed.

The second edition of the Catalogue was issued by James, shortly after
his resignation of his office, with a Dedication to Prince Charles, and
a Preface dated June 30. It consists of 539 quarto pages, in double
columns. It abandons the classified arrangement of the former Catalogue,
and adopts that (followed ever since) of one alphabet of names. James,
in his Preface, gives as his reason for this course, the frequent
difficulty (already experienced even in so small a collection) of
deciding to what class a book should be assigned, and the inconvenience
resulting from division of the works of the same author. He points out
the value of the Library to foreigners, who can there consult 16,000
volumes for six hours a day, excepting Sundays and holidays[72]. As
instances of the copiousness of its stores, he mentions that there are
to be found above 100 folio and quarto volumes on Military Art, in
Greek, Latin, and other languages; and that there are 3000 or 4000 books
in French, Italian, and Spanish. He notes that heretical and
schismatical books are not to be read without leave of the
Vice-Chancellor and Regius Professor of Divinity; and makes some remarks
on the method of keeping a Common-place-book. He gives as the reason for
his quitting his post, his severe sufferings from stone and
paralysis[73].

On June 4, King James presented the folio edition of his _Works_ as
edited by Bishop Montague. The book (now marked B. 14. 17. Theol.)
contains the following presentation inscription, written and signed by
Sir R. Naunton:--

'Jacobus Dei gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae et Hiberniae Rex, fidei
defensor, &c. Postquam decrevisset publici juris facere quae sibi erat
commentatus, ne videretur vel palam pudere literarum quas privatim
amaverat, vel eorum seu opinioni seu invidiae cedere qui Regis Majestatem
literis dictitabant imminui, vel Christiani Orbis et in eo Principum
judicia expavescere, quorum maxime intererat vera esse omnia quae
scripsit; circumspicere etiam c[oe]pit certum aliquod libro suo
domicilium, locum, si fieri possit, semotum a fato, aeternitati et paci
sacrum. Ecce commodum sua se obtulit Academia, illa paene orbi notior
quam Cantabrigiae, ubi exulibus Musis jam olim melius est quam in patria,
ubi a codicibus famae nuncupatis tineae absterrentur legentium manibus,
sycophantae scribentium ingeniis. In hoc immortali literarum sacrario,
inter monumenta clarorum virorum, quos quantum dilexit studiorum
participatione satis indicavit, in bibliotheca publica, lucubrationes
has suas Deo Opt. Max., Cui ab initio devotae erant, aeternum consecrat,
in venerando Almae Matris sinu, unde contra seculorum rubiginem fidam
illi custodiam promittit, et contra veritatis hostes stabile
patrocinium.'

The book, which was carried to Oxford by a special deputation,
consisting of Patrick Young, the Librarian at St. James's (to whom L20
was given by the University for his pains), and others, was received by
the University with great ceremony. A Convocation was held in St. Mary's
Church, on May 29, at which an oration was delivered by Rich. Gardiner,
the Deputy-Orator, and at which a letter of thanks was approved (which
is printed in Wood's _Annals_, ii. 336); from thence the
Vice-Chancellor, attended by 24 doctors in their scarlet robes, and a
mixed multitude of others, carried it in solemn procession to the
Library, where the keeper, Rouse, 'made a verie prettie speech,' says
Patrick Young, 'and placed it _in archivis_ ... with a great deale of
respect[74].' The King was greatly pleased with the formality and
flattery with which his works were received, and the more so 'because
Cambridge received them without extraordinary respect[75].'

Another gift in this year, presented by Thomas Nevile, K.B., eldest son
of Sir H. Nevile, Knt., is thus described in the Register:
'Elegantissimum libellum diversa scripturae genera continentem, manu
Esteris Anglicae, characteribus exquisitis conscriptum.' This is,
doubtless, the MS. of the Book of Proverbs, dated 1599, in which every
chapter, as well as the dedication to the Earl of Essex, is written in a
different style of caligraphy, which is now exhibited in the glass case
nearest the entrance to the Library. It is an extremely beautiful
specimen of the handiwork of Mrs. Esther Inglis, of whose skill the
Library possesses another and smaller specimen (Bodl. 987), consisting
of some French verses by Guy de Faur, Sieur de Pybrac, written for Dr.
Joseph Hall (afterwards the Bishop of Norwich), in 1617. These are
described in the account of Mrs. Inglis, in Ballard's _Memoirs of
British Ladies_. A third specimen of her work is in the Library of Ch.
Ch.: it is a Psalter in French, presented to Queen Elizabeth in 1599,
bound in embroidered crimson velvet, set with pearls[76].

The Douay Bible of 1609 was presented by Sir Rich. Anderson, and a
Persian MS. of the Liturgy of the Greek Church by Sir Thos. Roe. The
first architectural model also was given in this year; but unfortunately
it is not now extant. Its description is as follows: 'Clemens Edmonds,
eques auratus, consilio Regis ab epistolis, donavit egregium [Grk:
paradeigma] quinque columnarum, nunc primum inventum, secundum formam
rusticam, ex alabastrite singulari artificio confectum.'

[69] One fact to his credit is indeed mentioned by Wood in the _Fasti_,
under the year 1648, viz. that he prevented the then Vice-Chancellor,
Dr. Reynolds, and the Proctors from breaking open Bodley's chest in
search of money, by assuring them that there was nothing in it. Hearne
(_MS. Diary_, vol. xii. p. 13) says that Rouse inserted a portrait of
Sir Thos. Bodley, done at his own charge, in the window of the room
which he occupied on the west side of Oriel College.

[70] Cowley followed Milton's example by inserting an Ode, in this case
in English, in a folio copy of his _Poems_ (numbered C. 2. 21. Art.),
which he gave June 26, 1656. It is printed exactly from the original in
_Reliquiae Hearn._ ii. 921-3.

[71] See _sub anno_ 1745.

[72] At this time there were only two other public libraries in Europe,
both later in date than the Bodleian, viz. that of Angelo Rocca at Rome,
opened in 1604, and the Ambrosian at Milan, opened in 1609. The fourth
public library was that of Card. Mazarin at Paris, opened in 1643.
Evidence of the consequent appreciation by foreigners of the advantages
of the Bodleian Library is given under the year 1641.

[73] An Appendix to James' Catalogue was printed in 1635, _q. v._

[74] Nichols' _Progresses of James I_, vol. iii. p. 1105. Rouse's speech
(with the letter) is printed in Hearne's _Titus Liv. Forojul._ p. 198.

[75] Letter from J. Chamberlain to Sir D. Carleton, June 28, 1620:
_Calendar of State Papers, 1619-23_, p. 157.

[76] An account of Mrs. Esther Inglis, and of all her known existing
MSS., is preparing for publication by David Laing, Esq., LL.D., of
Edinburgh.


A.D. 1621.

A gift of L5 is noticeable as coming from the Girdlers' Company,
'Societas Zonariorum.' Sir Francis Bacon occurs as a donor of books.


A.D. 1623.

Delegates were appointed by Convocation to consider 'de modulo
frontispicii Bibliothecae publicae in parte occidentali versus collegium
Exon[77].'

[77] Reg. Conv. N. ff. 167, 169.


A.D. 1624.

'Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, and then Lord Chancellor of England, would
have borrowed Paulus Benius Eugubinus _De dirimend. Controvers. de Grat.
et Lib. Arb._, but was deny'd[78].'

The first theft of a book from the Library occurred in this year. An
account of it, with several others, will be found in a note to the year
1654.

[78] Barlow's MS. Arg. against lending books out of the Library; see
_post, sub anno_ 1659.


A.D. 1627.

Andrew James, of Newport, Isle of Wight, is recorded to have given 'duas
capsulas in quibus asservantur scripta vetustissima, exotici et ignoti
characteris, alia stylo, calamo alia, in corticibus exarata, ex
orientalis Indiae partibus allata[79].' An East India merchant, John
Jourdain, gave four Arabic MSS., and Bacon's _Works_ were presented by
Peter Ince, a bookseller at Chester. It appears from the Register that
Joseph Barnes, the Oxford printer and publisher, died in this year, as
he bequeathed a legacy of L5.

[79] At the end of the Barocci collection (numbered 245, 246, in the
Catalogue of 1697) are two Javanese MSS., written on palm-leaves: the
one written with a reed in the sacred or Pali character, preserved in a
box; the other written with a style in the common character, and having
the leaves tied together in the usual manner between two boards. As
there does not seem to be any evidence for supposing that Barocci's
collection included any Oriental MSS., it is possible that these were
the writings 'ignotis characteris' given two years previously by Andr.
James.


A.D. 1628.

Twenty-nine MSS., all of which, except three, are Greek, were given by
Sir Thomas Roe, who had previously been ambassador in Turkey, and who
afterwards sat, at the commencement of the Long Parliament, as Burgess
for the University, in company with Selden. One of the three exceptions
is an original copy of the Synodal Epistles of the Council of Basle,
with the leaden seal attached; and another, a valuable Arabic MS. of the
Apostolic Canons, &c., which is noticed at length by Selden in the second
book of his treatise, _De Synedriis Hebraeorum_. Roe proposed that his
books should be permitted to be lent out for purposes of printing, on
proper security being given; a proposition which was accepted by
Convocation[80]. Special licence of borrowing Lord Pembroke's (the
Barocci) and Roe's MSS. was granted by the donors themselves to Dr.
Lindsell (afterwards Bishop of Peterborough and Hereford) and Patrick
Young, the keeper of the King's Library at St. James's. The latter is
found, from the Register of Readers, to have used his privilege as late
as Feb. and March, 1647-8, various volumes of Pembroke's MSS. being then
lent to him, together with some marked 'Archbp.', which were doubtless
Laud's[81].

The copy of Bacon's _Essays_ (1625) which was presented by the author to
the Duke of Buckingham, was given to the Library by Lewis Roberts, a
merchant of London. It is now exhibited among the curiosities in the
first glass case, as a specimen of binding, being clad in green velvet,
embroidered with gold and silver thread, with the head of the duke
worked in silk. The same donor also presented the copy of Bishop
Williams' Funeral Sermon on James I, which had been given to the same
duke by the author. Several other specimens of embroidered bindings are
preserved in the Library, which are all, it is believed, comprehended in
the following list[82]:--

1. A part of L. Tomson's version of the New Test., printed by Barker, in
16^o (in 1578?), now marked MS. _e Musaeo_, 242. This belonged to Queen
Elizabeth, and is bound in a covering worked by herself, with various
mottos, _e.g._ 'Celum patria,' 'Scopus vitae Xp[~u]s,' &c. And on a
fly-leaf occurs this note in her handwriting: 'August[ine?]. I walke
manie times into the pleasant fieldes of the Holye Scriptures, where I
plucke up the goodlie greene herbes of sentences by pruning, eate them
by reading, chawe them by musing, and laie them up at length in the hie
seate of memorie by gathering them together; that so hauing tasted thy
sweetenes I may the lesse perceave the bitternes of this miserable
life[83].'

2. Another of Elizabeth's bibliopegic achievements is the cover of her
own translation from the French of _The Miroir or Glasse of the
synnefull Soule_, executed when only eleven years old. She says that she
translated it 'out of frenche ryme into englishe prose, joyning the
sentences together as well as the capacitie of my symple witte and small
lerning coulde extende themselves;' and prefixes a dedication, dated
'from Assherige, the laste daye of the yeare of our Lord God, 1544,' in
which, 'to our moste noble and vertuous quene Katherin, Elizabeth her
humble daughter wisheth perpetuall felicitie and everlasting ioye.' The
volume consists of 63 small quarto leaves, and has the queen's initials
K. P. embroidered within an ornamental border of gold and silver thread,
on a ground of blue corded silk. It is numbered Cherry MS. 38.

3. _Dialogue de la Vie et de la Mort_, trans. from the Italian by J.
Louveau, and printed in imitation of MS., second edit., 12^o. Lyon,
1558. Red velvet, embroidered with gold and silver thread. A French
inscription on a fly-leaf is in a handwriting resembling that of Queen
Elizabeth. Bodl. MS., 660.

4. A Testament in 16^o, printed by Norton and Bill in 1625. Very thick
and clumsy embroidery: on one side, David, in a flowing wig, playing on
the harp, with a dog, dragon-fly, &c; on the other, Abraham, in a
similar wig and with a falling collar, stopped in the sacrifice of his
son. There is a tradition that this formed part of a waistcoat of
Charles I; but it is not known on what evidence it rests, nor does the
material seem likely to have been so employed. In the Douce collection.
Exhibited in the glass case at the entrance of the Library.

5. Bible, 8^o Lond. 1639. Landscape, &c., worked in silk, with embroidery
in gold and silver thread. Arch Bodl. D subt. 75.

6. Prayer-book, New Test., and Metrical Psalms, 1630-1, bound by the
nuns of Little Gidding. Exhibited in the glass case. Bought in 1866 for
L10[84].

7. New Testament, printed at Cambridge in 1628, in 16^mo. This was the
first edition printed there of any portion of the Authorized Version,
and only the second of any English translation[85]. The binding of the
Library copy (which was bought, in 1859, for five guineas) is covered
with silver filigree work.

Among Dr. Rawlinson's multifarious collections is a volume of curious
early specimens of worked samplers, humorously lettered on the back,
'Works of Learned Ladies.'

[80] 'Reg. Conv. R. 1628. f. 6.' MS. note by Dr. P. Bliss.

[81] See _sub anno_ 1635.

[82] A lady, whose name is not mentioned, but who is graced with the
appellation of 'heroina,' is recorded to have given to the University
the Life of our Blessed Lord depicted in needle-work, 'byssina et aurata
textura,' which was duly presented in Convocation on July 9, 1636. [Reg.
Conv. R. 24.] It is not now preserved in the Library.

[83] This note is printed and the book described in Hearne's Appendix to
_Titi Livii Forojul. Vit. Hen. V_, and, from thence, in Ballard's
_Lives_; but not very correctly in either case. Also in Bliss' _Reliqq.
Hearn._ i. 104.

[84] In the life of Rich. Ferrar, junior, in Wordsworth's _Eccl. Biogr._
(third edit. vol. iv. p. 232) a note is quoted from a MS. stating that a
copy of Ferrar's _Whole Law of God_, bound by the nuns of Gidding in
green velvet, was given to the University Library by Archbp. Laud. This
is a mistake; the book in question was given by the Archbishop to the
library of his own college, St. John's, where it still remains.

[85] The first was the Genevan Version, printed in 1591.


A.D. 1629.

The extremely valuable series of Greek MSS., called from its collector
the Barocci Collection, comprising 242 volumes, was presented by Will.
Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, and Chancellor of the University. The manner
of its acquisition is recorded in Archbp. Usher's correspondence. In a
letter from Dublin of Jan. 22, 1628-9, Usher says: 'That famous library
of Giacomo Barocci, a gentleman of Venice, consisting of 242 manuscript
volumes, is now brought into England by Mr. Featherstone the
stationer[86].' He recommended that the King should buy it, and add to
it the collection of Arabic MSS. which the Duke of Buckingham had bought
of the heirs of Erpenius[87]. On April 13, 1629, Sir H. Bourgchier
writing to Usher, tells him that the Earl of Pembroke has bought the
collection, for the University of Oxford, at the price of L700, and that
it consists of 250 volumes[88]. It was forwarded to the University with
the following letter, which is here copied from the Convocation
Register, R. 24 (f. 9^b.):--

    'Good Mr. Vice-Chancelor,

    'Understanding of an excellent collection of Greke manuscripts
    brought from Venice, and thincking that they would bee of more use
    to the Church in being kept united in some publick Librarye then
    scattered in particular hands; remembring the obligation I had to my
    mother the Universitie, first for breeding mee, after for the honor
    they did mee in making mee their Chancelor, I was glad of this
    occasion to repay some part of that great debt I owe her. And
    therefore I sent you downe the collection entire, which I pray
    present with my beste love to the Convocation house. And I shall
    unfaynedly remaine,

                      'Your most assured freind,
                                          'PEMBROKE.
  'Greenewich, the 25th of May, 1629.'

The Earl was willing that the MSS. should, if necessary, be allowed to
be borrowed. And, in pursuance of this expressed wish, Patrick Young
had, in 1648, the use of various MSS. from this collection, as we find
from a memorandum at the end of the Register of Readers in 1648-9. But
one MS. suffered in consequence considerable injury[89]. A further
portion of the collection (consisting of 22 Greek MSS. and 2 Russian),
which had been retained by the Earl, was subsequently purchased by
Oliver Cromwell, and given by him to the Library in 1654. There they
still bear the Protector's name; but, strange to say, no entry of the
gift appears in the Benefaction Book[90]. These are all fully described
in the first volume of the general Catalogue of MSS., published by Rev.
H. O. Coxe in 1853. A Catalogue of the Barocci and Roe MSS., by Dr.
Peter Turner, of Merton College, beautifully written, filling 38 folio
leaves, is bound up among Selden's printed books, marked AA. 1. Med.
Seld.

On Aug. 27, the Library was visited for the first time by King Charles
and his Queen, little anticipating under what circumstances that visit
would be repeated. He was received with an oration by the Public Orator,
Strode, a copy of which is preserved in Smith MS. xxvi. 26, and which,
in the exaggerated style of the Court-adulation of the time, began with
words that sound blasphemously in our ears, '_Excellentissime
Vice-Deus_.' From the Library the King ascended to the leads of the
Schools; and there discussed the proposed removal of some mean houses in
Cat Street, which then intervened between the Schools and St. Mary's
Church. A plan of the ground and buildings was made at his desire, which
was sent up to him at London.

[86] In the following year Mr. Henry Featherstone, bookseller in London,
gave to the Library a number of Hebrew books.

[87] Parr's _Life of Usher_, Letters, p. 400.

[88] _Ibid._ Quoted in Sir H. Ellis' _Letters of Eminent Literary Men_,
Camden Soc., 1843. p. 130.

[89] See _sub anno_ 1654.

[90] Richard Cromwell proposed at one time to perpetuate his own name in
the Library, together with his father's, by sending a collection of the
addresses which had been made to him, in order to show the temper of the
nation, and the readiness of the greatest persons 'to compliment people
on purpose for secular interest.' _Reliquiae Hearn._ i. 263.


A.D. 1631.

Charles Robson, B.D., of Queen's College, who had been Chaplain to the
Merchants at Aleppo, gave a fine Syriac MS. of the Four Gospels, which
he had brought from the East; it is now numbered Bodl. Orient. 361.
Another MS. of his gift has been by some mistake placed amongst the
Thurston MSS., No. 13.


A.D. 1632.

William Burton, the historian of Leicestershire, gave the original MSS.
of Leland's _Itinerary_ (together with a transcript of some parts) and
of his _Collectanea_; the former filling seven volumes in quarto[91],
and the latter (including the book _De Scriptoribus Britannicis_) four
in folio. The _Collectanea_, after the death of Leland, had been in the
possession of Sir John Cheke, to whom Edward VI entrusted the custody of
Leland's papers; on his going into exile in the reign of Queen Mary, he
gave them to Humphrey Purefoy, Esq., whose son, Thomas Purefoy,
presented them to Burton in the year 1612. The _Itinerary_ was first
published by Hearne in 1710, in 9 vols.; the _Collectanea_ in 1715, in 6
vols.; the _De Scriptoribus_, by Ant. Hall, in 1709. The MS. of the
_Itinerary_ is much stained and injured by damp; but it is no longer in
the perishable condition described by Hearne. There are, besides, three
transcripts of it in the Library; one, of part of the book (Bodl. 470)
is a copy (mentioned above) which was made for Burton, and sent by him
to Rouse, with a letter dated 'Lindley, Leic. 17 July, 1632,' in which
he describes it as being 'written, though not with so fine a letter, yet
with a judicious hand.' He says that another part is 'now (as I heere)
in the hands of Doctor Burton, Archdeacon of Gloucester, which he
received by loane from a freind of mine, but never yet restored; the
which, I thinke, upon request he will impart unto you;' and adds, 'Some
more partes there were of this _Itinerary_, but through the negligence
of him to whom they were first lent, are embesiled and gone.' He
undertakes to send the three parts of the _Collectanea_ and the book _De
Scriptt. Angliae_, according to promise, as soon as he has done using
them. Another copy, made by Burton himself in 1628, was given to Dr. W.
Stukeley by Thomas Allen, Esq., lord of Finchley, in June, 1758, and
finally came to the Library with Gough's collection. It is now numbered
Gough, General Topog. 2. It is injured by damp at the beginning, but has
been repaired by Stukeley. The third copy is a later transcript, also in
Gough's collection, and numbered General Topog. 1.

[91] An eighth volume of the _Itinerary_ was given by Charles King, M.A.
of Ch. Ch. some time subsequently, having been lent by Burton and not
recovered at the time of his own gift.


A.D. 1633.

A singular motto stamped upon the binding of two books, and it may be of
more, within a border of cornucopiae, &c., attracts the attention of the
reader. The books are, vols. i. ii. of Du Chesne's _Historiae Francorum
Scriptores_, 1636 (A. 2. 9. 10. Jur.), and Halloix's _Ecclesiae
Orientalis Scriptores_, 1633 (G. 2. 3. Th.); the motto is, 'Coronasti
annum bonitatis Tuae, Ps. 65. Annuo reditu quinque librarum Margaretae
Brooke.' An explanation is found in an entry in the Benefaction-Register
under the year 1632 or 1633, where we read as follows: 'D. Margareta
Brooke, vidua, quondam uxor Ducis Brooke, de Temple-Combe in comitatu
Somerset, armigeri defuncti, donavit centum libras, quibus perquisitus
est annuus reditus quinque librarum ad coemendos libros in usum
bibliothecae in perpetuum.' Probably the books thus stamped were the
first that were bought after the final settlement of the gift. The rent
arises from land at Wick-Risington, in Gloucestershire, and the sum duly
appears to this day in the annual accounts of the Library. In 1655, the
then Librarian, Barlow, makes a memorandum in his accounts that the
University had not paid over this rent for several years; in consequence
of his calling attention to this neglect, the arrears were paid up in
1658. At the same time the rents of the houses in Distaff Lane were
heavily in arrear.

A (second) gift from Sir Henry Wotton consisted of the copy of Tycho
Brahe's _Astronomiae instaurandae mechanica_, 1598, which the author gave
to Grimani, Doge of Venice, containing several additional pages in MS.
with two autograph epigrams; and also of a MS. of the _Acta Concilii
Constantiensis_, which had formerly belonged to Card. Bembi, now
numbered _e Musaeo_, 25.


A.D. 1634.

In this year Sir Kenelm Digby gave a collection of 238 MSS. (including
five rolls) all on vellum, uniformly bound, and stamped with his arms,
which still form a distinct series. They are, for the most part, of the
highest interest and importance, especially with reference to the early
history of science in England. Amongst them are works by Roger Bacon,
Grosteste, Will. Reade, John Eschyndon or Ashton, Roger of Hereford,
Richard Wallingford, Simon Bredon, Thomas of New-market, and many
others. They also comprise much relating to the general history of
England, and are almost entirely the work of English scribes. Many of
them had previously belonged to Thomas Allen, of Gloucester Hall, who
himself was a liberal donor to the Library. [_See_ p. 19.] Two
additional MSS., which formerly belonged to Digby, and which each
contain his inscription, 'Hic est liber publicae Bibliothecae academiae
Oxoniensis, K.D.,' were purchased in 1825. One of these, _R. Baconis
opuscula_, was bought for L51; the other, a Latin translation, by W. de
Morbeck, of Proclus' Commentary on Plato, for L31 10_s._ They are
uniformly bound with the rest of the series, and are numbered 235 and
236 respectively.

The donor stipulated that his MSS. should not be strictly confined to
use within the walls of the Library. Archbishop Laud says, in the letter
in which, as Chancellor, he announced the gift to the University, 'hee
will not subiect these manuscripts to the strictnes of Sir Thomas
Bodley's statutes[92], but will haue libertie given for any man of
woorth, that wilbee at the paines and charge to print any of these
bookes, to haue them oute of the Librarye vpon good caution giuen; but
to that purpose and noe other[93].' But he afterwards left the
University at liberty to deal as it pleased with his MSS. in this
particular, as well as in all other questions that might arise
concerning his books. In a letter to Dr. Langbaine, dated Nov. 7, 1654,
he says: 'The absolute disposition of them in all occurrences dependeth
wholly and singly of the University; for she knoweth best what will be
most for her service and advantage, and she is absolute mistress to
dispose of them as she pleaseth[94].' He mentions in the same letter two
trunks of Arabic MSS. which he gave to Archbp. Laud to send to the
University or to St. John's College, but he never heard whether they
reached their destination or no. He promises also to send over some more
MSS. from France when he has returned thither; since, when the troubles
of the Rebellion drove him into exile, he had carried his library with
him. Upon the Restoration, however, and his own return to England, he
unfortunately left his books behind; and after his death they were
confiscated by the French King as belonging to an alien, and
subsequently sold. Doubtless the two MSS. acquired in 1825 were among
those to which his letter refers.

The first stone of the western end of the Library, with the Convocation
House beneath, was laid on May 13, 1634; it was fitted up with shelves
and ready for use by 1640. Selden's books were placed here in 1659. The
hideous great west window is a monument of the bad taste of the time; it
is much to be hoped that it may some day be replaced by a window more
worthy of its conspicuous position, and affording a less marked contrast
with its opposite neighbour, the noble east window erected by Bodley
himself.

[92] See under 1654-9.

[93] Reg. Conv. R. 24, 102. From MS. note by Dr. Bliss.

[94] [Walker's] _Letters by Eminent Persons, from the Bodl. and Ashm._,
1813, vol. i. pp. 2, 3.


A.D. 1635.

In this year Rouse issued an Appendix to the Catalogue published in
1620, consisting of 208 pages in quarto, in double columns, and
containing, as he says, about 1500 authors. James, on the title-page of
his Catalogue in 1620, speaks of an Appendix accompanying that issue;
hence, probably, it is that the words 'Editio secunda' are placed on the
title of the Appendix of 1635. But, strange to say, no copy of the
earlier Appendix can now be found existing in the Library. At the end of
the later one is added [by John Verneuil, then Sub-Librarian,] an
anonymous enlarged edition (which was also sold separately) of James'
_Catalogus interpretum S. Script, in Bibl. Bodl._, with an Appendix of
authors who had written on the _Sentences_ and the _Summa_, on the
Sunday-Gospels, on Cases of Conscience, on the Lord's Prayer, the
Apostles' Creed, and the Decalogue. A book giving an account of all the
copies of the Catalogue sold between 1620-47, with the names of the
purchasers, still exists, the latter part being in the handwriting of
Verneuil; but some leaves have been torn out at the year 1635. It
appears from this book that the price of James' Catalogue was 2_s._
8_d._, that of the Catalogue of Interpreters 6_d._, of the Appendix
2_s._, and of the whole series complete 5_s._


A.D. 1635-1640.

The Register for these years presents a connected series of benefactions
on the part of Archbishop Laud.

On May 22, 1635, he sent to the Library the first instalment of his
magnificent gifts of MSS. which consisted of 462 volumes and five rolls.
Among these were 46 Latin MSS., 'e Collegio Herbipolensi [Wuertzburg] in
Germania sumpti A.D. 1631, cum Suecorum Regis exercitus per universam
fere Germaniam grassarentur.' Laud directs, in his letter of gift, that
none of the books shall on any account be taken out of the Library,
'nisi solum ut typis mandentur, et sic publici et juris et utilitatis
fiant,' upon sufficient security, to be approved by the Vice-Chancellor
and Proctors; the MS., in such cases, being immediately after printing
restored to its place in the Library[95]. This permission was acted upon
in the year 1647-8, when Patrick Young, the Librarian of the Royal
Library at St. James's, was allowed to have the use of several
volumes[96].

In 1636, 181 MSS. formed the Archbishop's second gift, which were
accompanied by five cabinets of coins in gold, silver, and brass, with a
list arranged chronologically; an Arabic astrolabe, of brass[97]; two
idols, one Egyptian, the other from the West Indies; and the fine bust
of King Charles I, 'singulari artificio ex purissimo aere conflatam,'
which is now placed under the arch opening into the central portion of
the Library. This beautiful work of art is believed by Mr. John Bruce,
the learned Vice-President of the Society of Antiquaries, who is engaged
in researches into the life and productions of Hubert Le S[oe]ur, the
artist of the statue at Charing Cross, to be, (as well as the bust given
by Laud to St. John's College,) a specimen of the skill of that famous
craftsman. The existing arrangements of the Library being found
insufficient for such large accessions, the lower end was fitted up in
1638-9 for the reception of Laud's books, for the cost of which L300 was
voted by Convocation[98]. In the following year, 555 more MSS. were
received, together with a magical wand or staff, and some additional
coins. The wand is of dark polished wood, 2 feet 9 inches long, with a
grotesquely-carved figure at the head, apparently of Mexican
workmanship: it is now kept in one of the Sub-Librarians' studies. The
last gift from the munificent Chancellor of the University came in the
next year, 1640, and consisted of no more than 81 MSS.; for troubles
were beginning to gather now around the head of the Archbishop, and the
Library at Oxford felt the blows which were levelled at Lambeth. This
was accompanied with the following touching letter:--

    'Viris mihi amicissimis Doctori Potter, Vice-Cancellario,
    reliquisque Doctoribus, Procuratoribus, necnon singulis in domo
    Convocationis intra almam Universitatem Oxon. congregatis.

    'Non datur scribendi otium. Hoc tamen quale quale est arripio
    lubens, ut pauca ad vos transmittam, adhuc florentes Academici.
    Tempora adsunt plusquam difficillima, nec negotia quae undique urgent
    faciliora sunt. Quin et quo loco res Ecclesiae sint nemo non videt.
    Horum malorum fons non unus est; unus tamen, inter alios, furor est
    eorum qui sanam doctrinam non sustinentes (quod olim observavit S.
    Hilarius) corruptam desiderant. Inter eos qui hoc [oe]stro perciti
    sunt quam difficile sit vivere, mihi plus satis innotescit, cui (Deo
    gratias!) idem est vivere et officium facere.

    'Sed mittenda haec sunt, nec enim quo fata ducunt datur scire. Nec
    mitiora redduntur tempora aut tutiora querimoniis. Interim velim
    sciatis me omnia vobis fausta et felicia precari, quo tuti sitis
    felicesque, dum hic inter sphaeras superiores stellae cujuslibet
    magnitudinis vix motum suum tenent, aut prae nubium crassitie debile
    lumen emittunt.

    'Dum sic fluctuant omnia, statui apud me in tuto (id est, apud vos
    spero) MS. quaedam, temporum priorum monumenta, deponere. Pauca sunt,
    sed prioribus similia, si non aequalia, et talia quae, non obstantibus
    temporum difficultatibus, in usum vestrum parare non destiti. Sunt
    vero inter haec Hebraica sex, Graeca undecim, Arabica tringinta
    quatuor, Latina viginti et unum, Italica duo, Anglicana totidem,
    Persica quinque, quorum unum, folio digestum ampliori, historiam
    continet ab orbe condito ad finem imperii Saracenici, et est
    proculdubio magni valoris. Haec per vos in Bibliothecam Bodleianam
    (nomen veneror, nec superstitiose) reponenda, et caeteris olim meis
    apponenda, cupio, et sub eisdem legibus quibus priora dedi. Non opus
    est multis donum hoc nostrum nimis exile ornare, nec id in votis
    meis unquam fuit. Hoc obnixe et quotidie a DEO Opt. Max. summis
    votis peto, ut Academia semper floreat, in ea Religio et Pietas et
    quicquid doctrinam decorare potest in altum crescat, ut
    tempestatibus quae nunc omnia perflant sedatis, tuto possitis et
    vobis et studiis et, prae omnibus, DEO frui. Quae vota semper erunt

          'fidelissimi et amantissimi Cancellarii vestri,
                                        'W. CANT.[99]
    'Dat. ex aedibus meis
  'Lambethanis, 6^to Nov. 1640.'

The collection, which contains in the whole nearly 1300 MSS., comprises
works in very many languages: Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic, Persian,
Turkish, Armenian, Ethiopic, Chinese, Russian, Greek, Latin, French,
German, Italian, Irish, Anglo-Saxon, and English are all represented. It
is impossible, in the limits of this survey, to point out many of the
treasures with which the collection abounds; but that which is
pre-eminently styled 'Codex Laudianus' (numbered Laud, Gr. 35) must not,
of course, be omitted. It is a MS. of the Acts of the Apostles, in
quarto, consisting of 227 leaves, and containing the text in both Greek
and Latin, in parallel columns. Its date has been variously fixed by
critics, from the sixth to the eighth century; Mr. Coxe places it
towards the end of the seventh century, with whom Dr. Tischendorf, who
examined it in 1865, and for whom some photographs of portions were
executed, is believed to coincide. Some leaves are wanting at the end,
commencing at chap. xxvi. 29. It is the only MS. known to be extant
which contains the peculiar readings (in number 74) cited by Bede in his
Commentary as existing in the copy which he used; it has consequently
been conjectured, with much reason, that this was the very MS. which he
possessed. It was published by Thomas Hearne in 1715, printed in
capitals corresponding line for line with the MS., but not with entire
correctness; only 120 copies were printed, and it is therefore one of
the rarest in the series of his works. A very fairly engraved facsimile
of one verse (vii. 2) is to be found in Horne's _Introduction_.

Another famous MS. (No. 636) is a copy of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,
which ends at the year 1154, and appears to have been written in, and to
have belonged to, the abbey of Peterborough, from its containing many
additions relating thereto. And a third treasure calling for special
mention is an Irish vellum MS. (No. 610), which contains the Psalter of
Cashel, Cormac's Glossary, Poems attributed to SS. Columb-kill and
Patrick, &c.[100] The Greek MSS. of the collection are fully described
in vol. i. of the _Catal. Codd. Bibl. Bodl._, by Mr. H. O. Coxe,
published in 1853; the Latin, Biblical, and Classical, with the
Miscellaneous, in Part I of the second volume, published by the same
gentleman in 1858; the Oriental, in the various Catalogues of Uri,
Nicoll, Pusey, Dillmann, and Payne Smith.

One of the Wuertzburg books rescued from the Swedish soldiery is a
magnificent Missal printed on vellum by Jeorius Ryser in 1481, with
illuminated initials. On a fly-leaf is the following note: '1481,
Johannes Kewsch, vicarius in ecclesia Herb[ipolensi] hunc librum
comparavit propriis expensis, et pro omnibus, scil. pergameno,
impressura, rubricatione, illinatura, et ligatione, xviii. flor.' Then
follows a bequest, in his own hand, in 1486, of the book to the
successive vicars of St. Bartholomew, which is repeated at the end of
the 'Canon Missae.' In the latter place four subsequent possessors, from
1565 to 1580, have written their names, the last of them adding, 'Omnis
arbor qui non facit fructum bonum excidetur et in ignem mittetur.' The
Library reference is now Auct. i. Q. i. 7.

[95] Reg. Conv. R. 24. f. 109^b. MS. note by Dr. P. Bliss.

[96] Entry at the end of the Register of Readers, 1638-9.

[97] This was given to Laud by Selden, 'vir omni eruditionis genere
instructissimus,' as Laud styles him in his letter of gift on June 16.
Reg. Conv. R. 24. f. 128.

[98] Reg. Conv. R. 24. 156^b. 169^b. The agreements with one Thomas
Richardson for the work are found there.

[99] Reg. Conv. R. 24^b, 182^b.

[100] Four volumes of the miscellaneous collection on Irish affairs made
by Sir G. Carew, afterwards Earl of Totness, are also to be found here.
A list of their contents, as of those of the other volumes preserved at
Lambeth and in University College, is printed in Mr. T. Duffus Hardy's
_Report to the Master of the Rolls on the Carte and Carew Papers_, 8^o,
Lond. 1864.


A.D. 1637.

A Bachelor of Arts and Fellow of St. John's College, one Abraham Wright,
published the results of his lighter reading in the Bodleian in a little
volume printed by Leonard Lichfield, which he entitled, _Delitiae
Delitiarum, sive Epigrammatum ex optimis quibusque hujus et novissimi
seculi Poetis in amplissima illa Bibliotheca Bodleiana, et pene omnino
alibi extantibus, [Grk: anthologia]_.


A.D. 1640.

On Jan. 25, 1639-40, died Robert Burton, of Ch. Ch., 'Democritus
junior,' and bequeathed out of his large library whatever he possessed
which was wanting in the Bodleian. A list of the Latin books thus
acquired is given in the Benefaction Book, followed by this sentence:
'Porro [d. d.] com[oe]diarum, tragediarum, et schediasmatum ludicrorum
(praesertim idiomate vernaculo) aliquot centurias, quas propter
multitudinem non adjecimus.' These latter were just the classes of books
the admission of which the Founder had almost prohibited, viz.,
'almanacks, plays, and an infinite number that are daily printed.' Even
if 'some little profit might be reaped (which God knows is very little)
out of some of our play-books, the benefit thereof,' said he, 'will
nothing near countervail the harm that the scandal will bring upon the
Library, when it shall be given out that we stuffed it full of baggage
books[101].' In consequence of this well-meant but mistaken resolution,
the Library was bare of just those books which Burton's collection could
afford, and which now form some of its rarest and most curious
divisions. In his own address 'To the Reader' of his _Anatomy of
Melancholy_ he very fully describes the nature of his own gatherings. 'I
hear new news every day; and those ordinary rumours of war, plagues,
fires, inundations, thefts, murders, massacres, meteors, comets,
spectrums, prodigies, apparitions, of towns taken, cities besieged in
France, Germany, Turkey, Persia, Poland, &c. * * * * are daily brought
to our ears; new books every day, pamphlets, currantoes, stories (&c).
Now come tidings of weddings, maskings, mummeries, entertainments,
jubilees, embassies, tilts and tournaments, trophies, triumphs, revels,
sports, plays; then again, as in a new shifted scene, treasons, cheating
tricks, robberies, enormous villainies, in all kinds, funerals, burials,
death of princes, new discoveries, expeditions; now comical, then
tragical matters.' His books are chiefly to be found in the classes
marked 4^o Art. (particularly under letter L), Theol., and Art. BS.
Amongst his smaller books is one of the only two known copies of the
edition of _Venus and Adonis_ in 1602. He is specially mentioned also in
the preface to Verneuil's _Nomenclator_, 1642, as being (together with
Mr. Kilby of Linc. Coll., Mr. Prestwich, of All Souls', and Mr. Francis
Wright, of Merton) a donor of Commentaries and Sermons. Besides his
books, he bequeathed L100, with which an annual payment of L5 was
obtained. For some time, however, this payment was subsequently lost;
for in Barlow's Accounts for 1655, after mentioning the receipt of L40
paid by one Mr. Thomas Smith, occurs this '_Memorandum_:--that the L40
above mentioned amongst the _Recepta_ is a part of an L100 given to the
Library by Mr. Rob. Burton of Ch. Ch. It was first lent to Mr. Thomas
Smith, and he (by bond) was to pay to the Library L5 per annum. He
breaking, or very much decay'd in his estate, and deade, this L40 was
payd in by his executors, L50 more is to be payd us by University Coll.
(it was owinge to Mr. Smith, and his executors assigned it over to us),
and Dr. Langbaine hath in his keepinge a bond of one Spencer for L10
more.' The latter was paid in 1658, as appears from an entry, 'Recept. a
Dno. Spicer (_sic_) et Hopkins, ex syngrapha;' but the former was still
unpaid in 1660.

[101] _Reliquiae Bodl._ p. 278.


A.D. 1641.

The famous 'Guy Fawkes' Lantern,' which is to this day such an object of
interest in the Picture Gallery to most sight-seers, was presented to
the University by Robert Heywood, M.A., Brasenose College, who had been
Proctor in 1639. It came into his possession from his being the son of a
Justice of the Peace who assisted in searching the cellars of the
Parliament House, and arrested Fawkes with the lantern in his hand. In
1640 this Justice Heywood was wounded by a Roman Catholic when, while
still holding office as a Justice for Westminster, he was engaged in
proposing the oaths to the recusants of that city[102]. The following
inscription is attached to it, engraved upon a brass plate: 'L[=a]terna
illa ipsa, qua usus est et cum qua deprehensus Guido Faux in crypta
subterranea, ubi domo Parlamenti difflandae operam dabat. Ex dono Rob.
Heywood, nuper Academiae Procuratoris, Apr. 4, 1641.' From being for many
years exposed to the handling of every visitor, it became much broken;
but it has now for a long time been secured from further injury by being
enclosed in a glass case.

In May an order was made by the Curators that no strangers should have
the use of any MSS. without finding sureties for the safety of the same,
in consequence of a suspicion that whole pages had been in some cases
abstracted. Hereupon a very earnest, and, in sooth, indignant,
remonstrance was presented to the 'Curatores vigilantissimi' by the
strangers then residing in Oxford 'studiorum causa.' The original
document is preserved in Wood MS. F. 27, and is signed by eleven persons
from Prussia and other parts of Germany, six Danes, and one Englishman
(John Wyberd), a medical student. Some of these visitors are found, by
reference to the Register of Readers, to have been students for a
considerable time; the Baron ab Eulenberg, for instance, having been
admitted on Jan. 18, 1638-9, and one Ven, a Dane, in 1633. The
memorialists say that there is not even the very slightest ground for
attributing such an offence to any of them, and that the Librarian
himself candidly confesses that it has never been proved to him that
strangers have ever done anything of the kind; they urge the difficulty
of their finding sponsors for their honesty when they themselves are
strangers and foreigners; they appeal to Bodley's own statutes as
providing sufficiently for the contingency by ordering the Librarian to
number the pages of a MS. before giving it out, and to examine it when
returned; they fortify their arguments by abundant references to the
civil law; they upbraid those who,--'internecino exterorum atque
advenarum odio aestuantes (O celebratam Britanniae
hospitalitatem!),'--have originated the calumny; and, finally, warn the
Curators against giving occasion for suspicion to the learned men of the
whole world that 'doctos Angliae viros, priscae hospitalitatis immemores,
majori exterorum quam Athenienses Megarensium odio flagrare.' The
memorial is endorsed: 'De hac re amplius deliberandum censebant Praefecti
ult. Maii, 1641;' and no doubt the obnoxious order was soon repealed.
Half a century later, on Nov. 8, 1693, the order was in a certain degree
renewed: it was then enjoined 'that no one be permitted to _transcribe_
any manuscript, but such as have a right to study in the Library.' The
revival, however, was not due to any revived fear of foreigners; the
following reason is given in a letter of information on Library matters
from Dr. Hyde to Hudson, his successor, written on the latter's
appointment in 1701:--'Some in the University have been very troublesome
in pressing that their Servitors may transcribe manuscripts for them,
though not sworn to the Library, nor yet capable of being sworn;
wherefore the Curators made an order (as you will find in the Book of
Orders in the Archives) "that none were capable of transcribing, except
those who had the right of studying in the Library," viz.
Batchelors[103].' But no doubt this order also soon became dormant, even
if it were not definitely repealed.

[102] Neal's _History of the Puritans_, i. 688.

[103] Walker's _Letters of Eminent Men_, 1813, vol. i. p. 175.


A.D. 1642.

'The Kinge, Jul. 11, 1642, had L500 out of Sir Th. Bodlyes Chest, as
appeares by Dr. Chaworthes acquittance in the same box.' (Barlow's
Library Accounts for 1657. _MS._) This loan was, of course, never
repaid. It is regularly carried on in the Annual Accounts up to the year
1782.

Nov. 30. 'At night the Library doore was allmost broken open. Suspitio
de incendio, &c.' (Brian Twyne's _Musterings of the Univ._, in Hearne's
_Chron. Dunst._ p. 757.)

It must have been about the close of this year or beginning of the next,
while the king was in winter quarters at Oxford, that the visit was paid
to the Library, which is the subject of the following well-known
anecdote. It is here quoted from the earliest authority in which it is
found, viz. Welwood's _Memoirs_, Lond. 1700. pp. 105-107:--

'The King being at Oxford during the Civil Wars, went one day to see the
Publick Library, where he was show'd among other Books, a Virgil nobly
printed and exquisitely bound. The Lord Falkland, to divert the King,
would have his Majesty make a trial of his fortune by the _Sortes
Virgilianae_, which everybody knows was an usual kind of augury some ages
past. Whereupon the King opening the book, the period which happen'd to
come up was that part of Dido's imprecation against AEneas, which Mr.
Dryden translates thus:--

    "Yet let a race untam'd, and haughty foes,
    His peaceful entrance with dire arts oppose,
    Oppress'd with numbers in th' unequal field,
    His men discourag'd, and himself expell'd,
    Let him for succour sue from place to place,
    Torn from his subjects, and his son's embrace.
    First let him see his friends in battel slain,
    And their untimely fate lament in vain:
    And when at length the cruel war shall cease,
    On hard conditions may he buy his peace.
    Nor let him then enjoy supreme command,
    But fall untimely by some hostile hand,
    And lye unburi'd in the common sand."

  (AEneid, iv. 88.)

It is said K. Charles seem'd concerned at this accident, and that the
Lord Falkland observing it, would likewise try his own fortune in the
same manner; hoping he might fall upon some passage that could have no
relation to his case, and thereby divert the King's thoughts from any
impression the other might have upon him. But the place that Falkland
stumbled upon was yet more suited to his destiny than the other had been
to the King's, being the following expressions of Evander upon the
untimely death of his son Pallas, as they are translated by the same
hand:--

    "O Pallas, thou hast fail'd thy plighted word,
    To fight with reason, not to tempt the sword.
    I warned thee, but in vain, for well I knew
    What perils youthful ardor would pursue;
    That boiling blood would carry thee too far,
    Young as thou wert in dangers, raw to war.
    Oh! curst essay of arms, disastrous doom,
    Prelude of bloody fields and fights to come."

  (AEneid, xi. 220.)'

There is no copy of Virgil now in the Library amongst those which it
possessed previously to 1642, which is 'exquisitely bound' as well as
'nobly printed;' it is not therefore possible to fix on the particular
volume which the King consulted.


A.D. 1645.

A small slip of paper, carefully preserved, is the memorial of an
interesting incident connected with the last days in Oxford of the
Martyr-King whose history is so indissolubly united with that of the
place. Amidst all the darkening anxieties which filled the three or four
months preceding the surrender of himself to the Scots, King Charles
appears to have snatched some leisure moments for refreshment in quiet
reading. His own library was no longer his; but there was one close at
hand which could more than supply it. So, to the Librarian Rous, (the
friend of Milton, but whose anti-monarchical tendencies, we may be sure,
had always hitherto been carefully concealed) there came, on Dec. 30,
an order, 'To the Keeper of the University Library, or to his deputy,'
couched in the following terms: 'Deliver unto the bearer hereof, for the
present use of his Majesty, a book intituled, _Histoire universelle du
Sieur D'Aubigne_, and this shall be your warrant;' and the order was one
which the Vice-Chancellor had subscribed with his special authorization,
'His Majestyes use is in commaund to us. S. Fell, Vice Can.' But the
Librarian had sworn to observe the Statutes which, with no respect of
persons, forbad such a removal of a book; and so, on the reception of
Fell's order, Rous 'goes to the King; and shews him the Statutes, which
being read, the King would not have the booke, nor permit it to be taken
out of the Library, saying it was fit that the will and statutes of the
pious founder should be religiously observed[104].'

Perhaps a little of the hitherto undeveloped Puritan spirit may have
helped to enliven the conscience of the Librarian, who, had he been a
Cavalier, might have possibly found something in the exceptional
circumstances of the case, to excuse a violation of the rule; but, as
the matter stood, it reflects, on the one hand, the highest credit both
on Rous's honesty and courage, and shows him to have been fit for the
place he held, while, on the other hand, the King's acquiescence in the
refusal does equal credit to his good-sense and good-temper. We shall
see that this occurrence formed a precedent for a like refusal to the
Protector in 1654 by Rous's successor, when Cromwell showed equal good
feeling and equal respect for law.

[104] Bp. Barlow's Argument against Lending Books. _MS._


A.D. 1646.

'When Oxford was surrendered (24^o Junii, 1646) the first thing Generall
Fairfax did was to set a good guard of soldiers to preserve the
Bodleian Library. 'Tis said there was more hurt donne by the Cavaliers
(during their garrison) by way of embezzilling and cutting off chaines
of bookes then there was since. He was a lover of learning, and had he
not taken this special care, that noble library had been utterly
destroyed, for there were ignorant senators enough who would have been
contented to have had it so. This I doe assure you from an ocular
witnesse, E. W. esq[105].'

[105] Aubrey's _Lives_; in _Letters by Eminent Persons_, ii. 346.


A.D. 1647.

John Verneuil, M.A., Sub-librarian, died about the end of September. He
was a native of Bordeaux, and came into England as a Protestant refugee
shortly before 1608. In that year he entered at Magdalene College, and
was incorporated M.A. from his own University of Montauban in 1625.
Besides his share in the Appendix to the Catalogue noticed under the
year 1635, the following small book of a similar kind in English was
issued by him: _A Nomenclator of such Tracts and Sermons as have beene
printed, or translated into English upon any place or booke of Holy
Scripture; now to be had in the most famous and publique Library of Sir
Thomas Bodley in Oxford_. This is the title of the second and enlarged
edition, which appeared in 1642 in a small duodecimo volume, printed at
Oxford, by Henry Hall. The first edition (which was not entirely
confined to books in the Library) was printed under the author's
initials by William Turner in 1637. Some books communicated by friends
are here cited, which would, says Verneuil, have been accessible in the
Bodleian, 'had the Company of Stationers beene as mindfull of their
covenant as my selfe have beene zealous for the good of this our
Library.' In an interesting undated letter from Sir Richard Napier, Knt.
(while apparently an undergraduate of Wadham College, before 1630) to
his uncle the Rev. Richard Napier, which is preserved in Ashmole MS.
1730, fol. 168, is the following curious passage relating to the
facilities for studying in the Library, which were afforded to him by
Verneuil:--

'I have made a faire way to goe into the Library privately when I
please, and there to sitt from 6 of the clocke in the morneing to 5 at
night. I have a private place in the Library to lay those bookes and to
write out what I list, without being seene by any, or any comeing to me.
I have made the second Keeper of the Library [_i.e._ Verneuil] my friend
and servant, who promised me his key at all tymes to goe in privately,
when as otherwise it is not opened above 4 houres a day, and some days
not att all, as on Hollidays, and their eves in the afternoone, yett
then by his meanes I shall [have] free accesse and recesse at all tymes.
He hath pleasured me so farr as to lett me write in his counting house,
or his little private study in the great publick library, where I may
very privately write, and locke up all safely when I depart thence; he
will write for me when I have not the leisure, or will transcribe any
thinge I shall desire him, and if it be French translate it, for that is
his mother tonge.'

Probably the practice here mentioned of admitting readers by favour into
the Library at unstatutable times grew in the course of years to a
considerable height, or was found (as might naturally be expected)
productive of mischievous consequences, for on Nov. 8, 1722, it was
'ordered by the Curators that no person under any pretence whatsoever be
permitted to study in the said Library at any other time than what is
prescribed and limited by the Bodleian Statutes.'

Verneuil was succeeded in his office in the Library by Francis Yonge,
M.A., of Oriel College.

Milton's gift of his _Poems_. See under 1620.


A.D. 1648.

At the end of the Readers' Register for 1647-8, 1648-9, is a list of
nine volumes 'olim surrepti,' of which five had been replaced by other
copies. Entries are made in the same place of some coins which were
given in 1648-50. At this period the Library appears to have been well
attended by readers; about twelve or fifteen quarto and octavo volumes
being daily entered, those of folio size being accessible (as, in regard
to a portion of the Library, is still the case) by the readers
themselves, and not registered because at that time chained to their
shelves. The register for the next years (as well as those which
followed, up to the year 1708) appears to be lost, so that it cannot be
ascertained whether this daily average continued during the Usurpation;
but thus far it seems that Dr. John Allibond's description of the state
of the Library as consequent on the Puritan visitation of the University
in 1648, is not borne out by facts. For that loyal humourist, in his
_Rustica Academiae Oxoniensis nuper reformatae Descriptio_, which is
supposed to commemorate the condition of Oxford in Oct. 1648, writes
thus of our Library:--

    'Conscendo orbis illud decus
      Bodleio fundatore:
    Sed intus erat nullum pecus,
      Excepto janitore.

    Neglectos vidi libros multos,
      Quod mimime mirandum:
    Nam inter bardos tot et stultos
      There's few could understand 'em.'


A.D. 1649.

'The Jews proffer L600,000 for Paul's, and Oxford Library, and may have
them for L200,000 more[106].' They wished to obtain the first for a
synagogue, and to do a little commercial business with the second. It is
said in Monteith's _History of the Troubles_ (translated by Ogilvie,
1735, p. 473) that the sum they offered was L500,000, but that the
Council of War refused to take less than L800,000: probably they
afterwards increased this their original bid to L600,000.

Philip, Earl of Pembroke, the Puritan Chancellor of the University, gave
a splendidly bound copy of the Paris Polyglott, printed in 1645 in 10
vols.

[106] London News-letter of April 2; printed in Carte's _Collection of
Letters_, vol. i. p. 275.


A.D. 1652.

John Rous, the Librarian, died in the beginning of April, probably on
April 3, as, the Statutes requiring the election of Librarian to take
place within three days of a vacancy, it was on the 6th of that month
that Thomas Barlow, M.A., Fellow of Queen's College, was unanimously
elected to be Rous's successor. At the same time certain orders were
read in Convocation which the Curators had made, for the formation by
the Librarian of a Catalogue of the coins and other rarities, providing
also that they should be regularly visited and verified by the Curators
every November[107].

A legacy of L20 from Rous to the Library is entered in the Benefaction
Register, under the year 1661, probably because it may not have been
actually received until that year.

[107] Reg. 'T. 158-9.' MS. Note by Dr. P. Bliss.


A.D. 1653.

Fifteen MSS., by Spanish authors, were given by Peter Pett, LL.B.,
Fellow of All Souls' College; and a sacred Turkish vestment of linen (e
Mus. 45) on which the whole of the Koran is written in Arabic, by
Richard Davydge, an East Indian merchant.


A.D. 1654.

'April last, 1654, my Lord Protector sent his letter to Mr.
Vice-Chancellor to borrow a MS. (Joh. de Muris) for the Portugal
Ambassador. A copy of the Statute was sent (but not the book), which
when his Highness had read, he was satisfy'd, and commended the prudence
of the Founder, who had made the place so sacred[108].'

Cromwell's gift of MSS. See under 1629.

[108] Barlow's Argument against Lending Books out.


A.D. 1654-1659.

The death of John Selden occurred on Nov. 30[109]. By his will the
Library became possessed at once of his collection of Oriental and Greek
MSS., together with a few Latin MSS. specially designated, as well as of
such of his Talmudical and Rabbinical books as were not already to be
found there. It has generally been supposed that no part of his library
was received before the year 1659, and that none at all was actually
bequeathed by Selden. The account usually given (taken from Burnet's
Life of Sir M. Hales, p. 156[110]) is that Selden was so offended with
the University for refusing the loan of a MS., except upon a bond for
L1000, that he revoked that part of his will which left his library to
the Bodleian, and put it entirely at the free disposal of his executors,
and that they, when five years had passed, during which the Society of
the Inner Temple (to whom it was first offered) had taken no steps to
provide a building for its reception, conceiving themselves to be
executors not of Selden's passion but of his will, sent it in 1659 to
its original destination[111]. But it is clear from Selden's will (as
printed by Wilkins in his _Works_, vol. i. p. lv.) that the books
mentioned above were really bequeathed by him to Oxford; a line or two
appears to be somehow omitted, by which the sense of the passage is
lost, and in consequence of which the name of the Library does not
appear, but there is a general reference to it both in the specification
of such Hebrew books as are 'not already in the Library,' and in the
mention of the '_said_ Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars' of the
University (although no previous mention of them occurs); while all
other books not thus conveyed are left to the disposal of his executors.
But a letter from Langbaine to Pococke, written from London only three
days after Selden's death, furnishes proof positive; for there the
former writes, as executor, that all the Oriental MSS., with such
Rabbinical and Talmudical printed books as were not already in the
Library, and the Greek MSS. not otherwise disposed of, are left to
Oxford[112]. And in the Annual Accounts, under the year 1655, we find
the following entries:--

  Pro vectura codicum MSS. a Londino Oxoniam                L0 9_s._
  D. Langbaine pro expensis cum Londinum petiit, libros a
    Seldeno legatos repetiturus                              5 0
  D. Ed. Pococke eodem tempore in rem eandem Londinum misso. 7 0

It is clear, therefore, that a portion of Selden's collection came to
the Library by his bequest immediately after his death. And the reason
why the whole was not bequeathed is certainly not correctly stated by
Burnet, nor even by Wood, who says that he had been informed that it was
because the borrowing of certain MSS. had been refused. For the
Convocation Register shows that a grace was _passed_ in Convocation, on
Aug. 29, 1654, which sanctioned the giving leave to Selden to have MSS.
from the collections of Barocci, Roe, and Digby (these donors having
either expressed an opinion, or distinctly stipulated, that the rigour
of the Library Statutes should sometimes be relaxed), provided he did
not have more than three at a time, and that he gave bond in L100 (not
L1000) for the return of each of them within a year[113]. Had these
conditions been really the cause of Selden's taking offence, his
executors would hardly have stipulated, as they actually did, in their
own conditions of gift, that no book from his collection should
hereafter be lent to any person upon any condition whatsoever. But there
is certainly some obscurity hanging over the matter, which probably may
be dispersed by further investigation. The writer of the sketch of the
history of the Bodleian prefixed to Bernard's _Cat. MSS._, after quoting
Wood's account, only says, when barely more than forty years had
elapsed, that he will not venture to speak rashly about the case of the
lending of books; as if it were already forgotten how the facts stood.
On the proposal to lend being first mooted, Barlow, the Librarian, drew
up a paper on the general question, in which he opposed it both on the
grounds of Statute and expediency; the original MS. of which still
exists in the Library. Selden was at first mentioned in this paper by
name, with distinct reference to his application; but the name was
subsequently crossed out wherever it thus occurred, and the subject
treated without any personal reference[114]. In this paper the
Librarian objects to the proposal, firstly, on the ground of precedent,
since, though the University had power, with the joint consent of the
Chancellor, Heads of Houses, and Convocation, to lend books, yet it had
never thought fit to do so, except with regard to Lord Pembroke's MSS.;
secondly, on the ground that if the rule were once broken, it would be
impossible to refuse any person, without incurring great odium, while
the gratifying all applicants would disperse into private hands the
books intended for the public. He then proceeds as follows:--

'3. Suppose 3 bookes at a time be sent to any private man, 'tis true he
is furnish'd, but 'tis manifestly to the prejudice of the Publick, the
University wanting those books while he has them; so that if any
forreigner coming hither from abroad desire to see them, or any at home
desire to use them, both are disappointed, to the diminution of the
honour of the University, in the one, and the benefit it might have by
those books, in the other. And therefore it seems more agreeable to
reason and the public good (and the declared will and precept of our
prudent and pious Founder[115]) not to lend any books out of the
Library; for by not lending, private persons only want the use of those
books which are another's, whereas by lending, the University wants the
use of those books which are her own. Sure no prudent man can think it
fit to gratify particular persons with the publick detriment.

'4. The Library is a magazine which the pious Founder hath fix'd in a
publick place for a publick use; and though his charity to private
persons is such that he will hinder none (who is justly qualify'd and
worthy) to come to it, yet his charity to the publick is such that he
would not have it ambulatory, to goe to any private person. And sure
'tis more rational that Mahomet should go to the mountaine, than that
the mountaine should come to Mahomet.

'5. Lending of books makes them lyable to many casualties, as, I.
absolute losse, either 1. _in via_, by the carrier's negligence, or
violence offer'd him, or, 2. _in termino_, they may be lost by the
person that borrows them; for (presuming the person noble, and carefull
for their preservation, yet) his house may be burn'd, or (by robbers)
broken open (as Mr. Selden's unhappily was not long since): or, (in case
they scape these casualties) they may be spoyl'd in the carriage, as by
sad experience we find, for above 60 or 100 leaves of a Greek MS.[116]
lent out of _Archiva Pembrochiana_ to Mr. Pat. Younge were irrecoverably
defaced. Now what has happen'd heretofore may happen hereafter; and
therefore to keep them sacredly (and without any lending) in the Library
(according to our good Founder's will and statute) will be the best way
for their preservation.'

Barlow adds finally, in the sixth and seventh places, that if all
lending were declared unlawful, it would greatly encourage others to
give more to the Library when they saw how religiously their gifts would
be preserved, and that if no exceptions were made (except, as allowed
by Archbp. Laud, for the purpose of printing), no applications would be
made, and no one would take it ill if he were denied.

Another reason for Selden's withholding his library in its entirety has,
however, been assigned, besides those mentioned above, and this, too, by
closely contemporary writers. In July, 1649, the new intruded officers
and fellows of Magdalene College found in the Muniment-room in the
cloister-tower of the College, a large sum of money in the old coinage
called _Spur-royals_[117], or _Ryals_, amounting to L1400, the
equivalent of which had been left by the Founder as a reserve fund for
law expenses, for re-erecting or repairing buildings destroyed by fire,
&c., or for other extraordinary charges. This gold had been laid up and
counted in Q. Elizabeth's time and had remained untouched since then;
consequently, although some of the old members of the College were aware
of its existence, to the new-comers it seemed a welcome and unexpected
discovery, especially as the College was at the time heavily in debt.
They immediately proceeded to divide it among all the members on the
Foundation proportionately, not excluding the choristers, (who were at
that time undergraduates), the Puritan President, Wilkinson, being alone
opposed to such an illegal proceeding, and being with difficulty
prevailed upon to accept L100 as his share, which, however, upon his
death-bed he charged his executors to repay. The spur-royals were
exchanged at the rate of 18_s._ 6_d._ to 20_s._each, and each fellow had
33 of them. But when the fact of this embezzlement of corporate funds
became known, the College was called to account by Parliament, and,
although they attempted to defend themselves, they individually deemed
it wise to refund the greater, or a considerable, part of what had been
abstracted.[118] Fuller, whose _Church History_ was published in the
year following Selden's death, after telling this scandalous story,
proceeds thus (book ix. p. 234):--'Sure I am, a great antiquarie lately
deceased (rich as well in his state as learning) at the hearing hereof
quitted all his intention of benefaction to Oxford or any place else, on
suspition it would be diverted to other uses, on the same token that he
merrily said, I think the best way for a man to perpetuate his memory is
to procure the Pope to canonize him for a saint, for then he shall be
sure to be remembred in their Calender; whereas otherwise I see all
Protestant charity subject to the covetousness of posterity to devour
it, and bury the donor thereof in oblivion.' And the name of this 'great
antiquarie' was supplied in 1659 by the Puritan writer Henry Hickman,
who, as a Demy of Magdalene College, had shared in the spoils. He, in
the Appendix to his _Justification of the Fathers and Schoolmen_, gives
(in answer to a passage in Heylin's _Examen Historicum_) a full account
of the dividing of the gold, adding, 'which, as is said, did hinder Mr.
John Selden from bestowing his library on the University.' And Wood
(_Hist. and Antiq._ by Gutch, ii. 942) says that he had been told that
this misappropriation was one reason of Selden's distaste at Oxford.
From all this it is clear that Burnet's narrative gives a very
inaccurate account of the matter.

It was in the year 1659 that the great mass of Selden's collection was
forwarded by his executors. In the accounts for 1660 appear payments to
Barlow of L20 'for his paines in procuring Mr. Selden's books,' and of
L51 for his expenses thereon. The bringing the books from London cost
about L34, and the providing chains for them L25 10_s._[119]
Unfortunately, during the interval, many books had been lost which had
been borrowed in London, and were never returned. (Life, in _Works_, I.
lii.) And a part, which somehow was not sent to Oxford, afterwards
altogether perished, 'for the fire of the Temple destroyed in one of
their chambers eight chests full of the registers of abbeys, and other
manuscripts relating to the history of England; tho' most of his
law-books are still safe in Lincoln's Inn[120].' Some medical books were
bequeathed to the College of Physicians. Some of the original deeds
relating to the gift were bought for the Library in 1837 for L1 1_s._

About 8000 volumes were, in all, added to the Library by this gift, most
of which bear Selden's well-known motto: '[Grk: peri pantos ten
eleutherian].' Amongst them are some which belonged to Ben Jonson, Dr.
Donne, and Sir Robert Cotton. The number of miscellaneous foreign works,
in several European languages, is noticeable, many of which had been
published but a short time before Selden's death. In curious contrast to
the character of the greater part of his collection (rich in classics
and science, theology and history, law and Hebrew literature) there
occurs one volume (marked 4^o C. 32. Art. Seld.) which is priceless in
the eyes of the lovers of old English black-letter tracts. It contains
twenty-six tracts (most bearing the name of a previous possessor, one
Thomas Newton) which are among the rarest of early popular tales and
romances. As mere specimens of the collection may be mentioned, _Richard
Cuer de Lyon_, _Syr Bevis of Hampton_ (unique edit.?), _Syr Degore_,
_Syr Tryamoure_ (only two copies known), _Syr Eglamoure_ (unique?), _Dan
Hew of Leicestre_ (unique?), _Battayle of Egyngecourt_ (unique?), _Mylner
of Abyngton_ (unique?), _Wyl Bucke_, _&c._ Among the MSS. is one of
Harding's _Chronicle_ (Arch. Seld. B. 10) which appears to have belonged
to Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, from his arms being painted at
the end, and which some have supposed was also a presentation copy to
Edward IV. A curious map accompanies the description of Scotland (here
given in prose, not, as in the printed editions, in verse), in which,
next to Sutherland and Caithness, the author, who would have won Dr.
Johnson's respect as being 'a good hater,' places 'Styx, the infernal
flode,' and 'The palais of Pluto, King of hel, _neighbore to Scottz_.'
This map was engraved for the first time in Gough's _British
Topography_, vol. ii. pl. viii.; the description of it occupies pp.
579-583 in that volume. Another interesting volume is a copy of the
Latin _Articles_ of 1562, printed by Reginald Wolfe in 1563, with the
autograph signatures of the members of the Lower House of Convocation
(Arch. Seld. A. 76). Fifty-four Greek MSS. are described in Mr. Coxe's
Catalogue, vol. i. cols. 583-648.

[109] As Aubrey (_Lives_, with _Letters by Eminent Persons_, ii. 532)
has preserved a story that Selden on his death-bed refused, through
Hobbes' persuasion, to see a clergyman (Mr Johnson) who was coming 'to
assoile him,' it is worth while to print the following notice of his
death from Rawlinson MS. B. clviii. fol. 75, a volume containing a
collection of biographical anecdotes, &c., written in a rather clumsy
copyist's hand, about the beginning of the last century: 'Mr. Selden
upon his death-bed disclaimed all Hobbisme and the like wicked and
Atheisticall opinions, commanded that neither Mr. Hobbs nor Capt.
Rossingham should be admitted to him, confessed his sins, and desired
absolution, which was given him by Archbp. Usher; but amongst other
things he much deplored the loss of his time in studying of things more
curious than usefull, and wished that he [had] rather executed the
office of a justice of peace than spent his time in that which the world
calls learning.'

[110] See also Aubrey's _Lives_, _ut supra_, ii. 536.

[111] Nichols (_Lit. Anecd._ i. 333) gives another and very different
story, for which he produces no authority. He says that Selden had
actually sent his library to Oxford during his lifetime, but hearing
that they had lent out a book _without sufficient caution_, he sent for
it back again.

[112] Twells' Life of Pococke, in Pococke's _Theol. Works_, 1740, vol.
i. p. 43.

[113] Reg. Conv. T. p. 251. It is added, as an additional reason for the
concession, 'porro spes sit virum in rem nostram academicam optime
affectum, hanc ei extra ordinem gratiam factam abunde olim
compensaturum.'

[114] A copy also exists of this paper made by Hearne with a view to
publication, and, as appears from a short preface by him, from a double
motive; firstly, to prevent persons taking offence in his own day at
refusals; secondly, to afford warning to persons with 'fanatical
consciences,' who seem to have thought there was no harm done in
carrying books away secretly, provided they returned them again.
Unfortunately 'consciences' such as these still exist, and there is
reason for quoting, with a present application, the words with which the
warm-hearted Hearne concludes: 'Let these men consider seriously how
they will answer this before God, and withall assure themselves that if
they be found out, they will, besides the punishment like to come upon
them hereafter (without an earnest, hearty repentance) be expos'd to all
that infamy and disgrace which the Statute enjoyns to be inflicted upon
such notorious offenders.' (Misc. MSS. papers relating to the Library.)

The first actual theft of a book occurred in 1624. At the Visitation on
Nov. 9, the Curators drew up a formal document, publishing and
denouncing the deed, and exhorting the unknown doer to a timely
repentance. A copy of it is preserved in volume 23 of Bryan Twyne's
Collections, in the University Archives (p. 683), and runs as follows:--

'Cum in hac visitatione nostra anniversaria Bibliothecae Bodleianae, post
diligentem et religiosam status ejus pro officii nostri ratione
examinationem factam, compertum sit volumen unum (Jod. Nahumus. Conc. in
Evangelia Dominicalia. Han. 1604. N. 1. 3[121]) in classe Theologica,
catena abscissum et sacrilega nebulonis alicujus manu surreptum esse;
Cumque ex fideli Bibliothecarii relatione (pensatis loci atque temporis
circumstantis) constet, non nisi a jurato aliquo facinus hoc detestabile
perpetratum esse;--

'Nos Curatores, quorum fidei et inspectioni Bibliothecae cura speciali
nomine a Nobilissimo Fundatore concredita est, insolentis facti
indignitate moti et perculsi, quamvis liber parabilis, exigui et pretii
et usus sit, ne tamen lenti plus quam par est, et frigidi in causa tanti
momenti videamur, post maturam deliberationem, programmate affixo,
facinus publicandum duximus;--

'Impense rogantes omnes et singulos cujuscunque ordinis et loci genuinos
Academia alumnos, ut sicubi librum offendant, sive in privatis musaeis,
sive in bibliopolarum officinis, restituendum curent, unaque operam
nobiscum conferant, ut, si fieri possit, hoc propudium hominis,
Bibliothecarum pestis et tenebrio sacrilegus, e latibulis suis in lucem
extrahatur; denique, odium et indignationem suam contribuant, saltem ut
publicae infamiae tuba miser experrectus, misericordiam divinam tempestive
imploret, conspecta vel Bibliothecae porta posthaec attonitus resiliat,
nec tanti putet libri contemptibilis acquisitionem ut animam pro qua
mortuus est Christus ineptissime periclitari sinat.

  JO. PRIDEAUX, Vice-Canc. et S. Theol. Professor Regius.
  THO. CLAYTON, Medic. Professor Regius.
  DANIEL EASTCOT, Procurator Sen.
  RICARDUS HILL, Procurator Jun.
  EDOARDUS MEETKERKIUS, Ling. Hebr. Professor Regius.
  JOHANNES SOUTH, Graecae Linguae Praelector Regius.'

More serious abstractions, however, than such as these, have lately
(_i.e._ within the last twenty or thirty years) been practised. It has
recently been discovered that two extremely rare tracts by Thomas
Churchyard, his _Epitaph of Sir P. Sidney_, and _Feast full of sad
Cheere_, have been cut out of the volume of tracts in which they were
bound up. May it be hoped that Book-lovers, as well as lovers of
honesty, will remember this, should unknown copies suddenly come to
light? Another book, mentioned by Warton as being in Tanner's
collection, _The Children of the Chapel Stript and Whipt_, is also not
forthcoming; but no trace of its actual existence at any time within the
walls of the Library has, as yet, been found. As in the course of making
a new General Catalogue of the whole library, every separate volume and
tract is now conspicuously stamped with the name of its _locale_, it is
hoped that depredations of this character will be entirely checked.

Two instances, however, in which 'consciences' have been sufficiently
awakened to make restitution of stolen goods, have occurred within the
last twenty years. In 185- (exact year forgotten), on a day on which a
Convocation had been held on some exciting subject, which had
consequently brought up country voters from all parts, the present
writer happened to notice that a small book had been laid in a shelf of
folios near the Library door. Taking it up, he found it to be a rare
volume of tracts by J. Preston and T. Goodwin, printed at Amsterdam, and
bearing a Library reference. On proceeding to restore it to its place,
that place was found to be occupied by another book; this, of course,
led to further examination, and it was then discovered that the former
volume had been missing for so many years, that at last, all hope of its
recovery being abandoned, its place had been filled up. The old
register-books of readers were then ransacked, and at length an entry
was found of the delivery of this book to a reader, who was still living
at the time of this Convocation, on Feb. 14, 1807. A quarto volume was
also found about the same time thrust in amongst other quartos in a
shelf near the door, but the particulars of this case have been
forgotten.

A third case of recovery, but of a different kind, occurred in 1851. In
the year 1789 the Library was visited by Hen. E. G. Paulus, of Jena,
afterwards the too-well-known author of the _Leben Jesu_, who copied
from Pococke MS. 32 (a small octavo volume) an Arabic translation of
Isaiah made, in Hebrew characters, by R. Saadiah, which he published in
the following year, transposed into Arabic characters. Thenceforward the
MS. was lost from the Library, although no direct evidence of the manner
of its disappearance appears to have been obtained. But after the death
of Paulus in the year 1850, a bookseller at Breslau, to whom the volume
had in some way been offered, entered into communication with the
Librarian, Dr. Bandinel, and the result was that the missing MS. was at
length restored, _clothed in an entirely different German binding_, and
with all trace of its original ownership removed, to its right place.
The abstraction of this MS. 'by an Oriental professor,' and its
recovery, are mentioned, without further particulars, by Dr. Pusey, in
his Evidence printed in the _University Report upon the Recommendations
of the University Commissioners_, 1853. p. 171.

[115] Bodley frequently in his letters expresses his positive
determination not to allow books to be removed from the Library by any
means. He mentions the having connived at first at Sir H. Savile's
having a book for a very short space of time, because he was like to
become a very great benefactor; but declares that after the making the
Statutes neither he nor any one else shall be allowed the same liberty
upon any occasion whatsoever. (_Reliquiae Bodl._ pp. 176, 264.) And in
another letter he says, in reference to a particular application, 'The
sending of any book out of the Library may be assented to by no means,
neither is it a matter that the University or Vice-Chancellor are to
deal in. It cannot stand with my publick resolution with the University,
and my denial made to the Bishop of Glocester and the rest of the
Interpreters [_i.e._ the Translators of the Authorized Version of the
Bible] in their assembly in Christ Church, who requested the like at my
hands for one or two books.' (_Ibid._ p. 207.) In 1636 the University
refused leave to Archbishop Laud to borrow Rob. Hare's MS. _Liber
Privilegiorum Universitatis_ (compiled in 1592), when the Archbishop was
prosecuting his claim to visit the two Universities as Metropolitan. But
the refusal was doubtless rather from jealousy respecting their
immunities (as Wood says) than from regard to the rules of the Library
(Huber's _English Universities_, by F. Newman, vol. ii. p. 45.) However,
the book was at last produced before the Council. (Wood's _Hist. and
Antiq._, by Gutch, vol. ii. p. 403.)

[116] '[Grk: Myriobiblos], num. 131' [Barocci].

[117] These were gold coins, of the value of fifteen shillings, which
derived their name from bearing a star on the reverse which resembled
the rowel of a spur.

[118] A few of these coins are still preserved in an ancient chest in
the same room where they were of old deposited. Here is also carefully
preserved a very large and valuable collection of early charters,
including all which belonged to the Hospital of St. John Bapt. upon the
site of which the College was built, and to several suppressed priories
which were annexed to the College, reaching back to the twelfth century.
Of these the author of this volume is engaged in preparing a MS.
catalogue, for the use of the College.

[119] The conditions imposed by the executors (which are printed in
Gutch's _Wood_, ii. 943, and elsewhere) expressly stipulated that the
books should be chained. As late as the year 1751 notices occur in the
Librarian's account-books of the procuring additional chains for the
Library. But the removal of them appears to have commenced as shortly
afterwards as 1757, and in 1761 there was a payment for unchaining 1448
books at one halfpenny each. Several of the chains are still preserved
loose, as relics.

[120] Ayliffe's _Ancient and Present State of the Univ. of Oxford_,
1714, vol. i. p. 462. Pointer, in his _Oxoniensis Academia_, 1749, p.
136, quotes the account of the Bodleian given by Ayliffe as having been
written by Dr. Hudson, under whose name it is also found in Macky's
_Journey through England_ vol. ii. The fire here mentioned was probably
that which occurred about 1679 or 1680, in which the chambers called the
Paper-Buildings were destroyed, where Selden's rooms were situated. At
Lincoln's Inn some MSS. are now amongst Sir M. Hale's.

[121] This was never recovered, but a later edition, in 1609, was
procured instead.


A.D. 1655.

The stipends of the Librarian and Assistants at this time amounted
jointly to L51 6_s._ 8_d._ Of this it appears from the account for 1657
that the Librarian received L33 6_s._ 8_d._, the Second Keeper, then H.
Stubbe, L10, and [the janitor] S. Rugleye (?), L8. A volume of curious
tracts, published during the early part of the reign of Charles I, now
marked 4^o _F. 2 Art. B. S._, furnishes the name of a preceding janitor,
by bearing the inscription, 'Liber Thomae Roch, defuncti, quondam
janitoris bibliothecae.' The janitor originally appointed by Bodley
appears to be mentioned in the following passage in a letter from him to
James: 'There is one Thomas Scott, Under-butler of Magdalen College,
that hath made means unto me for the Porter's place, whom I propose to
elect[122].'

John Evelyn appears in this year, as well as subsequently, as a donor of
books. Nineteen MSS. were given by Peter Whalley, of Northamptonshire.

[122] _Reliquae Bodl._ p. 263.


A.D. 1656.

Cowley's _Poems_. See 1620.


A.D. 1657.

In this year the gifts to the Library, which since 1640 had been but
few, begin once more to increase in number. Five hundred gold and silver
coins were given by Ralph Freke, of Hannington, Wilts, and a cabinet for
their reception, 'auro gemmisque coruscum,' by his brother William.
Amongst various other donations occur a copy of Caxton's Description of
Britain, 1480, from Ralph Bathurst, M.D., Trinity College, and four
Oriental MSS. from William Juxon, 'Londinensis olim Episc.' One entry in
the Benefaction Register has been at one time carefully pasted over, and
at another brought again to light; it is the record of a gift from _Hugh
Peters_. 'Hugo Peters, serenissimo Britanniarum Protectori Olivero a
sacris, pro sua in academiam et rempubl. literariam benevolentia,
codices insequentes Bibl. Bodleianae dono dedit Maii iiii^o, Anno CI[C].
I[C]C. LVII;' viz. the great Dutch Bible with annotations, 'edit. ult.
[scil. Hague, 1637] auro sericoque compacta,' and the AEthiopic Psalter
of 1513. A leaf which followed this entry has been removed from the
Register, probably because it contained some further particulars of
Peters' gift, or possibly the record of the MSS. presented by the
Protector himself in 1654[123]. The binding of silk and gold has now
altogether disappeared, and the Bible is clad in a plain calf coat, with
no note of its former condition or of its donor.

Francis Yonge, M.A. of Oriel College, the Sub-librarian, died in this
year. In his place succeeded, through the influence of Dr. Owen, Dean of
Ch. Ch., Henry Stubbe, M.A., the well-known violent and varying
political writer, then a Student of that House. From the posts, however,
of both Librarian and Student Stubbe was ejected in March, 1659, on
account of the publication of his book entitled, _A Light Shining out of
Darkness_, which was supposed to attack the Universities and clergy.

[123] See p. 55.


A.D. 1658.

Gerard Langbaine, D.D., the learned Provost of Queen's College, died on
Feb. 10 in this year. Twenty-one vols. of his _Adversaria_, consisting
chiefly of extracts from Bodleian MSS. and of notes concerning the
arrangement of the books in the Library, were bought for L11. Nine other
volumes were bequeathed by Ant. a Wood in 1695. They are all fully
described by Mr. Coxe in vol. i. [cols. 877-888] of the General
Catalogue of the MSS. of the Library, which appeared in 1853, as well as
more briefly in Bernard's Catalogue. Besides obtaining his own
autograph collections by purchase, the Library became possessed by
bequest from him of the very valuable MS. (_e Mus. 86_) on the history
of Wickliffe and his followers, entitled _Fasciculi Zizaniorum_, written
by Thomas Walden. This was edited by the late Dr. Shirley in 1858, as
part of the Master of the Rolls' Series of Chronicles. Dr. Shirley
traced the volume to the hands of Bale and Usher, but was not aware of
the way in which it came to the Library.

The effect which civil war and confusion had had upon literature may be
commercially estimated by the fact that a gift of L5 from Joseph
Maynard, B.D., of Exeter College, proved sufficient for the purchase of
28 printed volumes and 11 MSS., many of which were curious.

A crocodile, from Jamaica, was given by John Desborow, the republican
Major-General, and brother-in-law to the Protector.


A.D. 1659.

Thomas Hyde, M.A., of Queen's College, was appointed Under-keeper on the
expulsion of Henry Stubbe.


A.D. 1660.

Thomas Barlow, D.D. (who had been elected Provost of Queen's College in
1658), resigned the Librarianship on Sept. 25, in consequence of his
appointment to the Margaret Professorship of Divinity. Thomas Lockey,
B.D., Student of Ch. Ch., was elected in his place, on Sept. 28, by 102
votes to 80, over Mr. [John] Good, M.A., Balliol College[124].

A curious story is preserved by Wanley and Dr. Wallis, in memoranda,
dated 1698-1701, on the fly-leaves of a copy of the rare _Index Librorum
prohibitorum_ printed at Madrid in 1612-14 (4^o U. 46. Th.), respecting
the visit of a Roman Catholic priest to the Library during the period of
Barlow's headship. In the course of conversation with Barlow, the priest
denied that such a book as this Index had ever been printed at Madrid
(there being various discrepancies between it and the Roman Index),
whereupon this copy was produced, bearing the names of several
inquisitors who had from time to time possessed it. The visitor was
extremely surprised, and, being very desirous of purchasing it, offered
any sum for it that might be demanded, with the intent (as the somewhat
suspicious tellers of the tale suggest) to destroy it; but the Doctor
was above corruption. The vigilance of the Librarians being aroused, the
book was removed from an exposed place where it had formerly been kept,
to a less accessible situation in the gallery, and securely chained.
Wallis adds that one fly-leaf, containing some of the previous owners'
names, had since then been torn out[125].

[124] Reg. Convoc. T^a. 27, p. 57.

[125] The memoranda are printed in Mendham's _Lit. Policy of the Church
of Rome_, second edit., pp. 152-4, and in Bliss' _Reliquiae Hearnianae_,
i. 12-14.


A.D. 1662.

A legacy of L50 was paid which had been bequeathed some time previously
by Alex. Ross, now-a-days best known as the Ross of Hudibrastic memory.
It is singular that a copy of the old printed quarto catalogue of the
Library was amongst the books purchased with this gift; which shows
that, within forty years after publication, it had become scarce even in
the Library itself.

Five Arabic and eight Chinese MSS. were given by William Thurston, a
London merchant. By a mistaken arrangement of various other small gifts,
Thurston now passes as the donor of forty Arabic, Persian, and Syriac
MSS., instead of five. Several of these, at present all numbered alike
as Thurston MSS., were given in 1684 by Jos. Taylor, LL.D., of St.
John's College, one by Crewe, Bishop of Durham, in 1680, one by Benj.
Polsted, a London African merchant, in 1678, one by Charles Robson,
B.D., Queen's College, about 1630, and one is an Armenian poem of thanks
for benefits received from the University, presented by the author, Jac.
de Gregoriis, an Armenian priest, in 1674. One other volume (a
mathematical MS. bought at Constantinople, by Const. Ravius, in 1641)
was at one time, as it appears, abstracted from the Library, and was
restored by means of Dr. Marshall, who, after the words 'Liber
Bibliothecae Bodleianae Oxon.' has added the following note: 'quem ex
Ratelbandi cujusdam bibliopolae officina libraria, prope novum templum
Amstelodami, redimendum pretio persoluto curavit Tho. Mareschallus, e
Collegio Lincolniensi apud Oxonienses.'

The first statutory obligation upon the Stationers' Company to deliver a
copy of each book printed by them to this Library, together with that of
Cambridge and the Royal Library, was imposed by the act of 14 Chas. II.
c. 33, for two years, which was renewed from time to time until the
passing of the Copyright Act of 8 Q. Anne.


A.D. 1663.

The University was visited in September by Charles II and his Queen. And
'on Munday, September 28, about four in the afternoon, the University,
being in their Formalities placed from Christ Church east-gate to the
south gate of the publique Schooles, the King and Queen, the Duke and
Dutches of Yorke, with the nobility and gentry attending, went to the
Schooles, where the Chanceller, Vice-Chanceller and Heads of Houses
received them, and invited them up to the Library; and Mr. Crew, the
Senior Proctor, placed neer the globes, addrest himselfe to their
Majesties in an oration upon his knees; which being ended, the King and
Queen, with the Royal Family and nobility, were by our Chanceller,
Vice-Chanceller, and the Heads of Houses, conducted to Selden's Library,
and there entertained with a very sumptuous banquett[126].'

[126] Reg. Convoc. T^a. 27, p. 173.


A.D. 1664.

James Lamb, of St. Mary Hall, D.D. and Canon of Westminster, died in
this year. Nine MSS. volumes, written by him, consisting of collections
for an Arabic Lexicon and Grammar, together with the book of Daniel, in
Syriac, are preserved in the Library, and form a small separate
collection under his name.


A.D. 1665.

Thomas Lockey, D.D., resigned the Librarianship, on Nov. 29, 1665, in
consequence of his appointment to a canonry of Ch. Ch. In the following
year he gave some coins and the sum of L6 16_s._ In his place was
elected, on Dec. 2, Thomas Hyde, M.A., of Queen's College, then
Under-keeper. Upon Lockey's death, in 1680, books to the value of L16
15_s._ were bought out of his study.


A.D. 1666.

Twenty MSS. were given by Sir Thos. Herbert, Bart. of York.

An East India merchant of London, one John Ken, gave (with other MSS.)
the first Gentoo [i.e. Sanscrit.] book which the Library possessed. It
is noticeable what a real, although somewhat indiscriminating, interest
the London merchants appear to have taken in the Library. Continual
mention occurs not merely of books but of curiosities of all kinds,
natural and artificial, which persons engaged in commerce, chiefly with
the East Indies, sent as for a general repository. Most of these
curiosities are now to be found, it is believed, in the Ashmolean
Museum.

At some period between 1660 and 1667, _i.e._ during Clarendon's
Chancellorship of the University, two volumes of MSS. notes and
observations upon Josephus, by Sam. Petit, the Professor of Greek at
Nismes (who died in 1643), are said by Moreri to have been purchased by
Clarendon, for 150 louis d'or, and given to the University. But in
Bernard's Catalogue the volumes are said to have been bought by the
University 'aere suo.' Dr. T. Smith remarks, in his life of Bernard, that
when the latter was preparing to edit Josephus, he used 'Sam. Petiti
largis commentariis, longe antea in bibliothecae Bodleianae gazophylacium
ex Gallia transvectis,' but found that they were filled only with notes
from Rabbinical writers. They are now numbered Auct. F. infra, I. 1, 2.
One other MS. was certainly given by Clarendon, during his
Chancellorship. It is a Greek _Evangelistarium_ of the fourteenth
century, formerly the property of a monastery described as '[Grk: tes
panagias tes acheiropoietou],' which was given by Parthenius, Patriarch
of Constantinople, to Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsea, when in Turkey,
in 1661, as Ambassador from England, and subsequently given by Clarendon
to the University. On the cover is a silver crucifix, of Byzantine work.
It is now numbered Auct. D. infra II. 12.


A.D. 1668.

John Davies, of Camberwell, the storekeeper at Deptford dockyard, caused
a chair to be made out of the remains of the ship, 'The Golden Hind,' in
which Sir F. Drake accomplished his voyage round the world, which had
been kept at Deptford until the timber decayed, and presented it to the
Library. It stands now in the Picture Gallery, beside a chair which is
said (but on what authority is not known) to have belonged to Henry
VIII[127], and bears a plate on which are inscribed some verses, in
Latin and English, by Abraham Cowley. A good engraving of it is to be
found in Lascelles' and Storer's _Oxford_, published in 1821[128], and
in the _Life of Drake_, published in 1828.

[127] The style of moulding on the back seems to point to a somewhat
later date.

[128] A description, including a copy of the verses, and illustrated by
a woodcut, is also to be found in vol. xxix. (1837) of the _Mirror_, p.
8, copied from the _Nautical Magazine_.


A.D. 1670.

Thirteen Oriental MSS. (chiefly in their possessor's own writing) were
bought from the heirs of Samuel Clarke, M.A., of Merton College, printer
to the University and Esquire Bedel of Law, who died Dec. 17, 1669. He
was greatly distinguished as an Orientalist, and assisted in the
production of Walton's Polyglott. A list of his MSS. is given in
Bernard's Catalogue, and another, by Prof. Nicoll, _Ath. Oxon._ iii.
885. He himself gave four printed Arabic books in 1663.


A.D. 1671.

Upon the death of Meric Casaubon, on July 14, the Library became
possessed, by his bequest, of sixty-one volumes of the _Adversaria_
(chiefly consisting of notes on Greek criticism) of his father, Isaac
Casaubon, who died in 1614. From these Jo. Christ. Wolf made some
extracts when visiting the Library in 1709, which he published in the
following year at Hamburgh, under the title of _Casauboniana_, with a
preface giving some account of all previous collections of _Ana_, and
with copious notes. The MSS. are catalogued in Mr. Coxe's first volume,
cols. 825-850.


A.D. 1673.

Thomas, Lord Fairfax, to whose care the Library had been indebted for
preservation in 1646, bequeathed to it on his decease, in November,
1671, twenty-eight very valuable MSS., including several early English
books (Chaucer, Gower, Wickliffe's Bible, &c.) and works relating to the
history of England, Scotland (Elphinston[129]), and Ireland (Keating).
But besides these, he gave that invaluable collection of genealogical
MSS. known to all pedigree-hunters by the name of their indefatigable
compiler, Roger Dodsworth, to whom he had allowed an annuity of L40
during his life, in order to enable him the better to prosecute his
researches. This collection numbers 161 volumes (bound in 86) in folio
and quarto[130], and consists of extracts bearing chiefly on the family
and ecclesiastical history of Yorkshire and the North of England, with
an innumerable mass of pedigrees, from all the authentic records within
Dodsworth's reach, including many which were destroyed when the Tower of
St. Mary, at York, was blown up during the siege of that city in June,
1644. He appears to have commenced this wonderful series of notes about
the year 1618, and not to have ceased before 1652, dying, in the
seventieth year of his age, in August, 1654. Besides the very full
catalogue of his MSS. which is given by Bernard (pp. 187-233), an
extremely useful and original synopsis of their contents, prefaced with
an account of Dodsworth's life and labours, and drawn up by Mr. Joseph
Hunter, is to be found in the Report of the Record Commission for 1837;
which was reprinted by Mr. Hunter, in an octavo volume, in 1838,
together with a list of the contents of the Red Book of the Exchequer,
and a Catalogue of the MSS. in Lincoln's Inn. After the MSS. were
brought to the Library, they became in some way exposed to the damp,
'and were in danger of being spoiled by a wet season.' Fortunately the
danger was perceived by Ant. a Wood, who obtained leave of the
Vice-Chancellor to dry them, which he accomplished by spreading them out
in the sun upon the leads of the Schools' quadrangle. This cost him a
month's labour, which, he says, he underwent with pleasure out of
respect to the memory of Dodsworth, and care to preserve whatever might
advantage the commonwealth of learning. The MSS. to this day give
abundant proof, by their stains and tender condition, that, had it not
been for Wood's unselfish labour, they would probably soon have
perished. Some part of the collection appears to have been sent to the
Library as late as 1684, for in the accounts of that year there is an
entry of 4_s._ 10_d._ as having been paid for the 'carriage of
Dodsworth's MSS.'

An interesting volume, written by the donor of these MSS., Fairfax, and
entitled by him 'The Employment of my Solitude,' being metrical versions
of the Psalms, with other poems, was bought, in 1858, for L36 10_s._, at
the sale of the library of Dr. Bliss, who had purchased it at the Duke
of Sussex's sale. It is described in Archdeacon Cotton's List of Bibles.

[129] A transcript of Elphinston's Chronicle is to be found among the
Jones MSS.

[130] No. 20 is a volume of Camden's Collections, formerly in the Cotton
Library, Julius B. x., from whence Dodsworth must have borrowed it, and
whither, with an obliviousness too common in book-borrowers, he must
have forgotten to return it. And No. 161 was given to the Library by Mr.
Fras. Drake, the historian of York, in 1736.


A.D. 1674.

In this year appeared the third _Catalogus impressorum Librorum
Bibliothecae Bodleianae_, in one folio volume, divided into two parts of
478 and 272 pages respectively. It is dedicated to Archbishop Sheldon,
by Hyde the Librarian, not without reason, as being printed in that
Theatre which the Archbishop had so lately built. The Keeper, in this
dedication, speaks very feelingly of the daily weariness of mind and
body which the compilation of the Catalogue had cost him, and tells how
his very hours for refreshment had been spent among books alone, and how
(_mirabile dictu!_) he actually had not shrunk even from the
inclemency of winter[131]. In his preface he says that, on his entrance
into office, he reckoned that the work of a new catalogue would occupy
him for two, or at most three, years; six, however, had been spent in
compilation and transcription, one in revision and enlargement, and,
lastly, two in the actual printing. Yet, says he, he never withdrew his
neck from the yoke, and postponed all considerations of bodily health.
People little know, he proceeds, what it is to accomplish a work of this
kind. What is easier, say they, than to look at the beginning of a book
and to copy out its title? They judge only from one or two weeks' work
in some little library of their own. But, what with careful examining of
volumes of pamphlets (which of itself was labour perfectly exhausting),
what with distinguishing synonymous authors and works, and identifying
metonymous ones, unravelling anagrammatical names and those derived from
places, and the like, the poor man declares he endured the greatest
torment of mind ('maximo animi cruciatu') as well as waste of precious
time. It is clear, from these pathetic lamentations, that Hyde had no
great love for Bibliography for its own sake. But, after all his
complaints, it is actually asserted by Hearne that he 'did not do much
in the work besides writing the dedication and preface[132]!' Hearne
attributes the real compilation of the Catalogue to Emmanuel Prichard,
or Pritchard, of Hart Hall, the janitor, who examined every book in the
whole library, and wrote out the Catalogue, in two volumes, with his own
hand. Hearne repeats this assertion frequently; it is found, _e.g._, in
his preface to the _Chronicon Dunstap._ p. xii., and in his
_Autobiography_ (1772, p. 11), where he adds that he was well informed
of this by Dr. Mill and others. If this be true, the inditing such a
preface, while totally suppressing Prichard's name, does little credit
to Hyde.

Frequent mention of this Emmanuel Prichard is found between 1686 and
1699 as being employed upon the MSS., and as engaged in taking an
account of duplicates and arranging Bishop Barlow's books. In 1687, L20
were paid him for 'writing a Catalogue of MSS.' Probably this was the
list upon which Hearne asserts that the index to the Bodleian MSS., in
Bernard's Catalogue, was founded[133]. Hearne describes him[134] as
being 'a very industrious, usefull man.' Although a member of Hart Hall,
he never took any degree; but wore a civilian's gown. He died in the
Hall about 1704, aged upwards of 70, and was buried in St.
Peter's-in-the-East. He left L200 to the Vice-Principal of Hart Hall,
which was partly spent in building a library-room[135].

[131] Of the 'hyemis inclementia' before the present system of warming
the Library was introduced, several of the present staff of officers can
speak as feelingly as Hyde. The writer remembers, in particular, one
winter when, in consequence of the roof being under repair, the
thermometer fell some eleven degrees below freezing point!

[132] _MS. Diary_, 1714, vol. ii. p. 193.

[133] _Reliquiae Hearn._ ii. 591. But see p. 116, _infra_.

[134] _MS. Diary_, li. 193.

[135] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, ciii. 38.


A.D. 1675.

In the Register of Benefactions, on a page faintly headed in pencil with
this date, is entered a gift from Christopher, Lord Hatton, 'Homiliarum
Saxonicarum 4 volumina antiqua.' The donor was consequently the second
baron, and first viscount, Hatton, who succeeded his father Christopher
(a firm royalist, and close friend of Clarendon, as well as antiquarian,
and friend of Dodsworth) in 1670, and died in 1706. Possibly this gift
may have been made through the influence of his uncle, Capt. Charles
Hatton, who appears to have been much interested in Anglo-Saxon studies,
who himself gave three MSS. to the Library, and several of whose letters
to Dr. Charlett in 1694-1707 are preserved in vol. xxxiii. of Ballard's
MSS. Strange to say, these volumes of Homilies (written shortly after
the Norman Conquest) are now among the Junian MSS., Nos. 22, 23, 24, 99,
and their appearance in that collection is accounted for by Wanley
(_Cat._ p. 45, where they are fully described) by a story which, he
says, was often told him by Hyde, viz. that, immediately upon the
arrival of the MSS. at the Library, they were lent to Dr. Marshall, who
most probably in turn lent them to Junius; that, Marshall dying soon
after, Junius kept them until his own death, when they returned to the
Library with his own books, by his bequest. Junius himself frequently
refers to them under the description of _Codices Hattoniani_.

The Library also contains a collection of 112 miscellaneous and valuable
MSS., 'ex Codicibus Hattonianis,' of the presentation of which no record
has been found[136], but which doubtless came about the same time from
the same donor. Some precious Anglo-Saxon volumes form the special
feature of this collection. Amongst them are, King Alfred's translation
of Gregory's _Pastoral Care_, of which the king designed to send a copy
to each Cathedral Church in the kingdom, this being the copy sent to
Worcester (No. 20); the translation by Werfrith, Bishop of Worcester, of
Gregory's _Dialogues_, with King Alfred's preface (No. 76); and a
version of the Four Gospels, written about the time of Henry II (No.
65).

Henry Justell, afterwards Librarian at St. James's, sent to the
University from France, through Dr. Hickes, three very precious MSS. of
the seventh century, written in uncial characters, containing the Acts
of the Council of Ephesus, the Canons of Carthage, Nicaea, Chalcedon, &c.,
which had been used by his father Christopher Justell in his
_Bibliotheca Juris Canonici veteris_, 1661. They are now numbered, _e
Mus._ 100-102. Several other MSS. given at the same time are preserved
in the same series. In return for this valuable gift Justell was created
D.C.L. by diploma.

[136] The Register has evidently been kept very irregularly and
imperfectly during the time that Barlow and Hyde held the headship.


A.D. 1677.

The wonderful collection of Early English poetry known as 'the Vernon
MS.,' was presented 'soon after the Civil Wars' by Col. Edward Vernon,
of Trinity College, who had been an officer in the royal army. One who
bore the same name, doubtless the same person, of North Aston, Oxon, was
created D.C.L. Aug. 6, 1677; it was probably therefore about that time
that the MS. was presented. The volume is described in Bernard's
Catalogue, 1697, p. 181, as being a 'vast massy manuscript;' and very
correctly. Its measurements are these: length of page, 22-1/2 inches;
length of written text, 17-1/2 inches; breadth of page, 15 inches;
breadth of written text, 12-1/2 inches. It is written in triple columns,
on 412 leaves of stout vellum; and having been clad of late years in a
proportionate russia binding, is altogether a Goliath among books. In
date it is of the early part of the fourteenth century. Its first
article bears the titles of 'Salus Animae' and 'Sowle-Hele,' and its
chief contents are Lives of the Saints, Hampole's _Prick of Conscience_,
Grosteste's _Castle of Love_, Hampole's _Perfect Living_, the treatise
on _Contemplative Life_, the _Mirror of S. Edmund_, the _Abbey of the
Holy Ghost_, and _Piers Plowman_; besides a multitude of smaller pieces,
several of which have been recently copied with a view to publication by
the Early English Text Society[137]. Fifty copies of a brief list of the
contents (numbering altogether 161 articles) were printed by J. O.
Halliwell, Esq., in 1848. A MS., similar in size and contents, was
presented to the British Museum a few years ago by Sir John Simeon; it
is, apparently, the work of the same scribe as the Bodleian book.

[137] This Society has also just issued Part 1. of Piers Plowman from
this MS., edited by W. W. Skeat, M.A. (Oct. 1867).


A.D. 1678.

Francis Junius, born at Heidelberg in 1589, who had passed a large part
of his life in England as librarian to that Howard Earl of Arundel who
collected the marbles which go under his name at Oxford, as well as the
MSS. similarly entitled, which are preserved in the British Museum and
at Heralds' College, bequeathed to the Library, on his decease at
Windsor in this year, all his Anglo-Saxon MSS. and his own life-long
collections bearing on the philology of the Northern nations. Amongst
these are some English relics of the greatest value and importance. The
book of metrical Homilies on the Dominical Gospels, compiled by an
Augustinian monk named Ormin, who thence called his book _Ormulum_ ([OE:
'þiss boc iss nemmnedd Orrmulum, Forrþi þatt Orrm itt wrohte']) is one
of the chief of these. Its date is conjectured to be the 13th century.
It is written on parchment, on folio leaves, very long and very narrow
(averaging 20 inches by 8) in a very broad and rude hand, with many
additions inserted on extra parchment scraps. Twenty-seven leaves appear
to be wanting. The whole work was first published in 2 vols., at the
University Press in 1852, under the editorship of R. M. White, D.D.,
formerly Professor of Anglo-Saxon. Caedmon's metrical paraphrase of
Genesis and other parts of Holy Scripture, illustrated with numerous
curious drawings, is another of the gems of this collection. The MS. is
of the end of the tenth century, but the work itself is now generally
believed to be, in the main, the production of the earliest English
poet, the Caedmon noticed by Bede (iii. 24), who died towards the close
of the seventh century, and not, as Hickes conjectured, of some later
writer of the same name. The MS. first came to light in the hands of
Archbp. Usher, by whom it was given to Junius. The latter published it
at Amsterdam in 1655, and it was re-edited by Mr. Benj. Thorpe in 1832;
several English and German translations have also appeared. Many of the
drawings were engraved and published in 1754, as illustrations of the
manners and buildings of the Anglo-Saxons; and the whole of them have
been engraved in vol. xxiv. of the _Archaeologia_, with some remarks by
Sir H. Ellis. MS. 121 is an extremely valuable collection of the Canons
of the Anglo-Saxon Church, written in the tenth century, which belonged
to Worcester Cathedral; and there are four valuable volumes of Homilies,
which appear, however, to have been part of Lord Hatton's gift to the
Library. (See under 1675[138].) Besides books, Junius left to the
University six founts of Gothic, Saxon, and other types, together with
the moulds and matrices.

Fifty-five MSS. and printed books, chiefly Oriental, were purchased in
this year from the library of Dr. Thomas Greaves, Deputy-professor of
Arabic, who died May 22, 1676. It appears from the list in Bernard's
Catalogue that sixty-five volumes were purchased, but that ten of these
were never sent. With Greaves' own books were obtained also the MSS. of
Richard James, of Corpus Christi College, nephew of Thomas James, the
first Librarian, which had come into the possession of his friend
Greaves upon his death in Dec. 1638. These amount to forty-three
volumes, entirely written by James himself, in a large bold hand; they
consist chiefly of _Collectanea_ bearing on the history of England from
various MSS. Chronicles, Registers, and early writers, particularly with
reference to the corruption of the Church and clergy before the
Reformation, and in opposition to Becket. A full list of their contents,
drawn up by Tanner, is given at pp. 248-253 of Bernard's Catalogue. The
price paid for the books bought out of Greaves' library was L55.

Fifteen shillings were paid, as appears from the accounts for the year,
for the carriage of a whale from Lechlade, which, strange to say, had
been caught in the Severn, and was presented by William Jordan, an
apothecary at Gloucester[139]. Ten shillings were also paid for a 'sea
elephant.'

[138] Parts of MSS. 4 and 5, which had been stolen from the Library,
were recovered, in 1720, in the manner recorded in the following entry
in the Benefaction Book: 'Vir doctissimus Joannes Georgius Eckardus,
bibliothecae Brunsvicensis praefectus, pro singulari sua humanitate, folia
quammulta MSS. Dictionarii Fr. Junii, continentia sc. litteras F. et S.,
a nequissimo quodam Dano jam olim surrepta, propriis sumptibus redemit
et Bibl. Bodl. ultro restituit.' Some further portions of Junius' papers
(including some which had formerly been in the Library) are recorded to
have been given in 1753 by the Provost and Fellows of Queen's College.

[139] In the Benefaction Book this gift is assigned to the year 1672.


A.D. 1680. [See A.D. 1665.]

Sir W. Dugdale gave copies of his own works. Two hundred coins were
given by Dr. George Hickes.


A.D. 1681.

In this year John Rushworth, of Lincoln's Inn, the historian of the Long
Parliament, was a member of the Parliament held at Oxford. Probably it
may have been at this time that he presented to the Library one of its
most precious [Grk: keimelia], called, from its donor, 'Codex
Rushworthianus.' (Auct. D. 2. 19.) In 1665, Junius mentions it in the
Preface to his _Glossarium Gothicum_, as being then still in Rushworth's
own hands[140]. It is a MS. of the Latin Gospels, written by an Irish
scribe, Mac-Regol, (who records his name on the last leaf, 'Macregol
dipincxit hoc evangelium,' &c.,) and glossed with an interlinear
Anglo-Saxon version by Owun and by Faermen, a priest at Harewood. The
volume is traditionally reported to have been in Bede's possession, but
since the Irish annals record the death of Mac Riagoil, a scribe and
abbot of Birr in 820, the volume must be about a century too late. It
has been published in full, together with the Lindisfarne Gospels, by
the Surtees Society in 3 vols., under the editorship of Rev. J.
Stevenson and George Waring, Esq., M.A. A description is given in Prof.
Westwood's _Palaeographia Sacra Pictoria_.

Nine shillings were paid for the carriage of a mummy from London,
probably one of those which are now in the Ashmolean Museum. It was
given by Aaron Goodyear, a Turkey merchant, who gave also a model of the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, and various little images,
and in 1684 more than forty coins.

[140] It is strange that no entry of the gift of this priceless volume
is found in the Register of Benefactions, any more than of that of the
Vernon MS.


A.D. 1682.

Richard Davis, M.A., of Sandford, Oxon, gave the portrait of Margaret,
Countess of Richmond, a book of Russian laws, and the Runic Calendar or
Clog Almanack, now exhibited in the glass case at the entrance of the
Library. The latter is thus described in the Register: 'Calendarium
ligneum, tam materia quam usu perpetuum, unius ligni quadrati angulis
incisum, more antiquo.'

Dr. John Morris, Regius Professor of Hebrew, who died in 1648,
bequeathed five pounds annually to the University, to be paid to some
Master of Arts of Ch. Ch., chosen by the Dean, for a speech 'in Schola
Linguarum,' in honour of Sir Thomas Bodley, 'and as a panegyric and
encouragement of the Hebrew studies,' on Nov. 8, in the presence of the
Visitors of the Library after the conclusion of the annual visitation.
The bequest was to take effect after the death of his wife, which
happened on Nov. 11, 1681; and on Oct. 6, 1682, Convocation fixed 3 p.m.
as the hour for delivery of the Speech on the Visitation-day.

The Speeches are continued annually, although, probably for want of
public notice, only scantily attended, none but those actually
interested in the Visitation of the Library, together with the speaker's
friends, being generally aware of it. If provision were made for the
deposit of the Speeches in the Library after delivery, they would no
doubt form an interesting and accurate record of its growth, and of many
passing events which, for want of such a record, are soon forgotten.
Only one speech appears to be preserved in the Library: it is that
delivered on Nov. 8, 1701, by Edmund Smith, M.A., of Ch. Ch., and is
very beautifully written in imitation of typography. But in this case
nothing is recorded of the history of the preceding year, the speech
being simply a panegyric of the Founder. It has been printed among
Smith's _Works_, a pamphlet of 103 pages dignified with that name, of
which the third edition appeared at London in 1719[141]. Dr. Rawlinson
appears to have endeavoured to compile a list of the Speakers; for
Bishop Tanner, in a letter to him dated Oct. 11, 1735, from Ch. Ch.,
says he will enquire them out, if he can, but that they are not entered
upon the Chapter books, since they are not appointed by the Chapter, but
privately by the Dean or Hebrew Professor, and paid by the
Vice-Chancellor, in whose accounts alone their names are probably
entered[142].

The names of the Speakers up to the year 1690 are given in Wood's
_Athenae_ (ii. 127) as follows. They were all M.A., and Students of Ch.
Ch.:--

  1682  Thomas Sparke
  1683  Zach. Isham
  1684  Chas. Hickman
  1685  Thos. Newey
  1686  Thos. Burton
  1687  Will. Bedford
  1688  Rich. Blakeway
  1689  Roger Altham, jun.
  1690  Edward Wake
  *    *    *    *
  1701  Edm. Smith

The following list from 1706 to 1734 has been gathered out of Hearne's
MS. Diary:--

  1706 Rich. Newton
  1707 Thos. Terry
  1708 Will. Periam
  1709 Rich. Sadlington
  1710 Richard Frewin
  1711 -- Aldred[143]
  1712 Gilb. Lake
  1713 Hen. Cremer
  1714 Chas. Brent
  1715 John White
  1716 Edw. Ivie
  1717 Hen. Gregory
  1718 Thos. Fenton
  1719 George Wiggan
  1720 Thos. Foulkes
  1721 Will. Le Hunt
  1722 Hen. Shirman
  1723 Matthew Lee
  1724 Christopher Haslam
  1725 Will. Davis
  1726 Edw. Blakeway
  1727 David Gregory
  1728 [Rob.?] Manaton
  1729 [Hen.?] Jones
  1730 John Fanshaw
  1731 Oliver Battely
  1732 Dan. Burton
  1733 Fifield Allen
  1734 Pierce Manaton, M.D.

[141] A long account of Smith is given in Johnson's _Lives of the
Poets_.

[142] _Letters of Eminent Persons, &c_, ii. 111.

[143] Doubtless an error for Chas. Aldrich


A.D. 1683.

Three MSS., containing the Samaritan Pentateuch, the Syriac Pentateuch,
and the Syriac Old Testament, were purchased at the cost of the
University.


A.D. 1684.

Nine Oriental and Russian MSS. were given by Joseph Taylor, LL.D., of
St. John's College. And Sir Rob. Viner, Bart., the loyal alderman of
London, favoured the Library with a human skeleton, a tanned human skin,
and the dried body of a negro boy!


A.D. 1685.

Thomas Marshall, or Mareschall, D.D., Rector of Lincoln College, and
Dean of Gloucester, who died April 18, bequeathed his MSS., and all such
among his printed books as were not already in the Library. The MSS.
amounted to 159, chiefly Oriental, including some valuable Coptic copies
of the Gospels, &c., which were procured for him by Huntington, with a
few in Dutch, and others miscellaneous in language and subject. They are
entered in Bernard's Catalogue, pp. 272-3, and 373-4. The printed books
are still kept together under his name.


A.D. 1686.

Fell, Bishop of Oxford, who died July 10, bequeathed a few MSS. They
consist of an early and curious collection of _Vitae Sanctorum_ in four
folio volumes, of a transcript (in nine folio volumes) of a _Glossarium
Septentrionale_ by Francis Junius, Dionysius Syrus in Latin by Dudley
Loftus, and two Greek MSS., Damascius and Euthymius Zigabenus, described
at the end (col. 907) of Mr. Coxe's Catalogue of the Greek MSS. One
other MS. has somehow been incorporated in this collection (now numbered
21-23) which does not belong to it. It is a _Clavis Linguae Sanctae_, or
explanation of all the Hebrew, and some Chaldee, roots, found in the Old
Testament, by Nicholas Trott, in three folio volumes, written with great
care and neatness. This, of which the first part had been printed at
Oxford in 1719, was sent to the Library in 1746, as appears from the
following letter, preserved (without address) in a parcel of papers
relating to the Library, now in the Librarian's study:--

'MY LORD,

'My wife's grandfather Judge Trott, cheif justice of South Carolina,
desired on his death bed that his forty years' labour relating to the
Hebrew root might be sent as a present to the Publick Library at Oxford.
I proposed to have carried it, but my time has allways been taken up at
a disagreable series of Court Martials, and now I am again going to the
West Indies. That I must beg your Lordship will order or give it a
conveyance to the University, and I am, with great respect, my Lord,

                 'Your Lordship's most humble servant,
  '_23 Nov., 1746._                       'THOS. FRANKLAND.'

It appears, however, from the accounts, &c., that the MS. was not
actually delivered until 1748 or 1749, when it was received through Dr.
Hunt.

A few of Bishop Fell's MSS. came subsequently to the Library among those
of Rev. Henry Jones[144], who succeeded Fell in his rectory of
Sunningwell, Berks, in the church of which parish the Bishop's wife was
buried.

At the Visitation on Nov. 8, it was ordered that notice be given that
'Nullus in posterum quemlibet librum aut volumen extra Bibliothecam
asportet,' and that monition be sent to every College and Hall for the
return of any books taken out within three days. Several books appear to
have been reported in previous years as missing; hence, doubtless, the
issue of this order.

[144] Hearne's pref. to John Ross, p. 1.


A.D. 1687.

On the occasion of the visit of King James II to Oxford, chiefly, but
unsuccessfully, made for the purpose of overawing the fellows of
Magdalen College, who had refused to elect as president his nominee,
Anth. Farmer, he was invited by the University to partake of a breakfast
or collation in the Library. For this purpose he came hither on the
morning of Sept. 5, between nine and ten, where, at the south part of
the Selden end, a banquet was prepared which cost the University L160,
consisting of 111 dishes of meat, sweetmeats, and fruit. The King sat
here for about three quarters of an hour, and held some conversation
with Hyde about a Chinese, 'a little blinking fellow,' who had recently
visited the place, and about the religion of China; but asked no one to
join him at the table. Upon rising to depart, a scene of strange
indecorum, as it would now appear, ensued; the 'rabble' (as they are
described) of courtiers and academics rushed upon the mass of untouched
dainties, and began a disorderly scramble, in which they 'flung the wet
sweetmeats on the ladies linnen and petticoats, and stained them.' The
King watched the scramble for two or three minutes, and then departed,
commending to the Vice-Chancellor and doctors his chaplain, W. Hall, who
had preached before him the day previous, and delivering a most fatherly
homily on the sin of pride, the virtue of charity, and the duty of doing
as they would be done to. Good, gossipping, Ant. a Wood gives in his
_Autobiography_ a full account of all that passed, from which are taken
the quotations made above[145].

[145] See also Miss Seward's _Anecdotes_, Supplement, 1797, p. 72.


A.D. 1688.

Dr. Hyde went up to London in this year to demand personally of the
Company of Stationers the books which were due to the Library by Act of
Parliament (1 James II, cap. 17, for seven years, continuing previous
acts), but which they had neglected to send. His expenses were L6 5_s._


A.D. 1690.

Thirty pounds were paid in this year to Antony a Wood for twenty-five
MSS. out of his library[146]. These are volumes of great value,
including Chartularies of the Abbeys of Glastonbury and Malmesbury, and
of the Preceptory of Sandford, Oxon, copies of Papal bulls relating to
England, a register of lands in Leicestershire _temp._ Hen. VI, &c.

The rest of Wood's MSS., and printed books, came to the Library,
together with the other collections preserved in the Ashmolean Museum,
in 1860.

It is said that Wood in this year estimated the number of MSS. in the
Library at 10,141. This must have been the number of separate books, not
volumes, as in 1697 the latter appear from Bernard's Catalogue to have
been about 6700.

[146] In Bernard's Catalogue the purchase is said to have been made in
1692, but this is an error, as it is entered in the accounts of 1690.


A.D. 1691.

On Oct. 8, died Dr. Thomas Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln, who, retaining his
attachment for the place over which he had presided from 1652 to 1660,
bequeathed to it seventy-eight MSS. (now bound in fifty-four volumes),
and all the printed books in his collection which the Library did not
possess, the remainder going to Queen's College. They appear to have
been received in the years 1693-4, as large payments for the carriage
are found in the accounts then. His MSS. are described in the old
Catalogue of 1697. The printed books, which are particularly rich in
tracts of the time of Charles I and the Usurpation, are still kept
distinct, being called _Linc._; ending, in the 8^o series, at about the
middle of the shelves marked with the letter C in that division. They
are placed in the gallery on the left hand of the great central
room[147]. His legacy included a copy of the famous _Exposicio Sancti
Jeronimi in Simbolo Apostolorum_, which was printed at Oxford in 1468,
and completed, as the colophon states, on Dec. 17. This volume was given
to Barlow, as he notes at the beginning, by Bishop Juxon, July 31, 1657.
It is exhibited in the glass case near the entrance. The Library
possesses also seven other productions of the early Oxford press. They
are as follow:--

    1. _AEgidius Romanus de Peccato Originali_, dated March 14, 1479.
    This was one of Rob. Burton's books. Qu. unique?

    2. _Textus Ethicorum Aristotelis, per Leonardum Arretinum
    translatus_, 1479. One of Selden's books.

    3. _Expositio Alexandri [de Ales] super tertium librum [Arist.] De
    Anima_. 'Impressum per me Theodericum rood de Colonia in alma
    universitate Oxon.' Oct. 11, 1481.

    4. _Joh. Latteburii Exposicio Trenorum Jheremie_, July 31, 1482. No
    place, but printed with the same type as the last.

    5. _Liber Festivalis_, in English, printed by Rood and Hunt, 1486.
    Two copies, but both very imperfect. The more imperfect one of the
    two formerly belonged to Herbert, and was bought for L6 6_s._ in
    1832; two additional leaves have been inserted by Mr. Coxe, which
    were found among Hearne's scraps, having been given to him as
    fragments of a Caxton by Bagford. The other copy was bought in 1852,
    at Utterson's sale, for L6 10_s._

    6. _Opus Wilhelmi Lyndewoode super Constitutiones Provinciales_. No
    place or date, but identified by the type.

    7. _Vulgaria quedam abs Terentio in Anglicam linguam traducta_.
    Without place or date, but also identified by the type. The
    following note, which corroborates the identification, is written in
    red ink on a fly-leaf in the volume (which includes several other
    tracts): '1483. Frater Johannes Grene emit hunc librum Oxon. de
    elemosinis amicorum suorum[148].'

A list of sixty-six books, which Hunt, the Oxford printer and
bookseller, had in his hands for sale in 1483, is preserved in his own
writing on a fly-leaf in a copy of a French translation of Livy, Paris,
1486, which was bought for the Library from Mr. C. J. Stewart, in Dec.
1860, for L12. The list is headed thus: 'Inventorium librorum quos ego
Thomas Hunt, stacionarius universitatis Oxoniensis, recepi de Magistro
Petro Actore et Johannis (_sic_) de Aquisgrano ad vendendum, cum precio
cujuslibet libri, et promito (_sic_) fideliter restituere libros aut
pecunias secundum precium inferius scriptum, prout patebit in
sequentibus, Anno Domini M^o. CCCC^o. octuagesimo tercio.'

[147] In most of them is inscribed the motto, [Grk: aien aristeuein].

[148] This last book is described by Dr. Cotton in the second series of
his _Typographical Gazetteer_, published in 1866, from a copy in the
University Library at Cambridge. Besides the other Oxford books
enumerated by that learned bibliographer, several fragments of another,
a _Compendium totius Grammaticae_ (conjectured to have been written by
John Anwykyll, Waynflete's first Grammar Master at Magdalene College)
have been discovered. They have been identified by Mr. H. Bradshaw, the
Librarian of the University of Cambridge, whose extensive acquaintance
with early typography is well known. That gentleman found, at Cambridge,
two leaves in the University Library in 1859, two more in Corpus Christi
in 1861, and two in St. John's in 1866. Four other leaves were
discovered by the present writer in 1867, bound up as fly-leaves in a
volume in the library of Viscount Dillon, at Ditchley, Oxfordshire. Mr.
Bradshaw supposes the book to have been printed about 1483-6.


A.D. 1692.

Thirty-eight Persian and Arabic MSS., with one printed book, were bought
from Hyde, the Librarian. They are entered in Bernard's Catalogue, pp.
286-7. Being bought out of the funds of the University, no mention of
the price paid for them is found in the Library accounts.


A.D. 1693.

The Oriental MSS., in number 420, of the famous Edward Pococke, Regius
Professor of Hebrew (who had deceased Sept. 10, 1691), were purchased by
the University for L600. They are chiefly in Armenian, Hebrew, and
Arabic, with three volumes in AEthiopic, a Samaritan Pentateuch, and a
Persian Evangeliary. A list is given at pp. 274-278 of Bernard's
Catalogue. In 1822 the Library became possessed of a portion of
Pococke's Collection of printed miscellaneous books, by the bequest of
Rev. C. Francis, M.A., of Brasenose College. They are chiefly small
volumes in Latin, on historical subjects; and are, for the most part,
placed in the shelves marked 8^o Z. Jur. [Arabic version of Isaiah, see
p. 81.]

Another large Oriental collection was added in this year by the
purchase, from Dr. Robert Huntington, for the sum of L700, of about 600
MSS. These he had procured while holding the post of chaplain to the
English merchants at Aleppo[149]. The collection is one of very great
value and rarity. No. 1 is a fine and ponderous Syriac volume,
containing the works of Gregory Abulpharage. No. 2 is a very fine folio
Arabic MS., written in the year of the Hegira 777 (= A.D. 1375), and
dedicated to the Sultan Almalek Alashraf Shalian ben Hosain; in it, as
Uri says in his Catalogue, 'variae AEgypti regiones recensentur, agrorum
cujusque regionis mensura definitur, et annui redditus exponuntur.'
Dibdin[150] describes it in his own exaggerated style, as follows:--'One
of the grandest books-- ... a sort of Domesday compilation--which can
possibly be seen.... The scription is in double columns, with the
margins emblazoned only in stars. The title, on the reverse of the first
leaf, is highly illuminated, in a fine style; not crowded with
ornaments, but grand from its simplicity. At the end, we observe that it
is (rightly) called _Munus Pretiosum_, and that the author was
Sherfiddin Iahia ben Almocar ben Algiaian. The inspection of such a
volume, on the coldest possible morning, even when the thermometer
stands at _zero_, is sufficient to warm the most torpid system.' No. 80
is a copy of Maimonides' _Yad Hachazaka_, revised by the author, with
his autograph signature at the bottom of fol. 165, and a MS. note by him
on fol. 1. Of these an engraved facsimile is given in _Treasures of
Oxford, containing Poetical Compositions by the ancient Jewish Authors
in Spain, and compiled from MSS. in the Bodl. Libr. by H. Edelman and
Leop. Dukes; edited and rendered into English by M. H. Bresslau_: part
i. 8^o. Lond. 1851. A second part of this work was to have contained
prose selections from MSS. in the Huntington, Pococke, Michael, and
Oppenheim collections, but no more was published. Among Huntington's
books there are also three, of no great antiquity, in the Mendean
character, of which Dr. T. Smith narrates in his life of Bernard (1704,
p. 21) that two were said to have been given by God to Adam, and the
third to the angels, 330,000 years before Adam. And one volume (No. 598)
is in the Ouigour language, a Tartar dialect, of which very few
specimens are known to exist. A gentleman (M. Va&#7743;bery M.
Va['m]bery), the traveller in Tartary, who is engaged in forming a
Chrestomathy of this dialect, came in the last year to England for the
purpose of examining this volume, as one of the few on which his work
could be based. Three MSS. exist at Paris; but that in the Bodleian is
said to be the most beautiful of all as a specimen of writing, as well
as the most ancient. It is a version of the _Bakhtiar Nameh_. A
description of it, with an engraved facsimile, is given in Davids'
_Turkish Grammar_, 4^o. Lond. 1832, pref. p. xxxi.

An exchange of some duplicates was made with the Library of Queen's
College, and in 1695 the duplicates of Bishop Barlow's Collection were
transferred, in accordance with his will, to the same Library.

[149] He had previously given thirty-five MSS. in the years 1678, 1680,
and 1683. He died on Sept. 2, 1701, only twelve days after his
consecration as Bishop of Raphoe.

[150] _Bibliogr. Decam._ iii. 472.


A.D. 1694.

A Mr. Clarke was employed in this year in making a catalogue of
Pococke's and Huntington's MSS., for which he altogether received
between L13 and L14.


A.D. 1695.

Books were bought from Mr. Bobart, and at the auction of the library of
Sir Charles Scarborough, M.D.

_Stationers' Company._ See 1610.

_MSS. from Wood._ See 1658.


A.D. 1696.

From this year until 1700, Humphrey Wanley was an assistant in the
Library, at an annual salary of L12. He had also L10 at the end of this
year 'extraordinary, for his paines already past,' and L15, at the
beginning of 1700, 'for his pains about Dr. Bernard's books.' Possibly
this grant may have been in consequence of the interposition of Bishop
Lloyd of Worcester, who, in a letter to Wanley of Jan. 6, in that year,
promises to speak to the Bishop of Oxford to see whether he can get his
place in the Library made better for him[151]. Wanley was no favourite
with Hearne. The following passage from the _MS. Diary_ of the
latter[152] is a specimen of the censure which he on several occasions
passes on him: 'Humphrey Wanley appears from several passages to be a
very illiterate silly fellow. He committed strange and almost incredible
blunders when he was employed by Dr. Charlett and some others in
printing the catalogue of the MSS. of England and Ireland, which work
was committed first to the care of Dr. Bernard; but he being then very
weak and otherwise employed, he could not take so much pains about it as
he would, had he not been thus hindered.' The very accurate index,
however, to this Catalogue was Bernard's own work, made from the
proof-sheets, and written with his own hand, 'uti ab illo accepi,' says
Dr. T. Smith in his Life (1704, p. 48). He prepared also another index,
which included besides the contents of eight of the great foreign
libraries, but not the Royal Library at Paris, the catalogue of which he
was unable to obtain.

[151] Walker's _Letters by Eminent Persons_, i. 102. It is pleasant to
find that Wanley in more prosperous days evinced his gratitude for the
help he had received in the Library, by giving, in the year 1721, L7
7_s._, together with a MS. Latin Bible.

[152] 1714, vol. li. p. 193.


A.D. 1697.

On the death of Edward Bernard, D.D., the Savilian Professor of
Astronomy (which occurred on Jan. 12), the University became the
purchaser from his widow of the greater part of his library. A selection
from his printed books, made on behalf of the Library by H. Wanley,
comprising many rare Aldines and specimens of the 15th century, were
bought for L140, and his MSS., many of which were valuable copies of
classical authors, together with collated printed texts and his own
_Adversaria_, for L200. Of 218 of the latter, Bernard has given a very
brief list in his own invaluable _Catalogus Manuscriptorum Angliae_,
which appeared posthumously, in the year of his death. (Vol. ii. pp.
226-8.) The bulk of his books are dispersed through various divisions of
the Library; but about thirty volumes of his own _Adversaria_ are kept
together under his name. A very full account, by H. Wanley, of the
purchase of the collection is printed by Dr. Bliss in his notes to the
_Ath. Oxon._ (iv. 709), who adds that this addition 'contained many of
the most valuable books, both printed and MSS., now in the Library.'

In the discharge of his duty of selection, Wanley came into sharp
collision with his chief, Dr. Hyde, as is shown by a curious paper, in
Wanley's handwriting, which was transcribed by Dr. Rawlinson from the
original in Dr. Charlett's possession[153]. The paper gives a list of
books for the not securing which, together with others, out of Dr.
Bernard's collection, blame had been thrown upon Wanley, and which Hyde
had said must by all means be bought at the auction which was to be held
in October, 1697. To the title of each book so specified, Wanley appends
some caustic remarks, exposing Dr. Hyde's little acquaintance with the
Library or with the books themselves; and sums up thus at the
close:--'This is what I have to say to these 13 books, one whereof I
look upon as imperfect, two more I was charged not to meddle with, and
the other ten are in the Library already. I shall wave all unmannerly
reflections, as whether this be not in you _insignis insufficientia_,
for which you are liable to be turned out of your place; or [whether,]
if you had been employed to bring in a list of Dr. Bernard's books
wanting in the Library, and took the same method as now, the University
would not have bought a fair parcel of duplicates, and such like; but I
pass them by. Tho' it must be owned that the University being willing to
lay out but 140 pounds, some different editions of the Bible, Fathers,
Classicks, &c., were preferr'd to some books not at all in the Library,
but they were at the same time judged to be of less moment, and likely
to be given to it by future benefactors.'

The quarrel, however, soon ceased; for, in the following year, Hyde was
anxious to see Wanley appointed as his successor. The latter, in a
letter to Dr. Charlett, dated Oct. 10, 1698[154], repeats a conversation
held with Hyde on the previous evening, in which the Librarian said
'that he is heartily weary of the place of Library-keeper; that he must
use more exercise in riding out, &c., if he intends to preserve his
health; which will of necessity hinder his attendance there. He had
rather I succeeded him than anybody else, which I cannot do untill I am
a graduate; that, if I have any friends amongst the heads of houses,
they cann't do better for me than in procuring for me the degree of
Batchellor of Law, that I may be in a condition to stand for his place
with others, which he will resign as soon as I have obtain'd the said
degree, and (for my sake) will communicate his intentions to nobody else
in the mean time. He presses me to get this degree as soon as possible,
urging that he does not care how soon he is rid of his place.' Wanley
asks for Charlett's advice; what that was does not appear, but, at any
rate, he did not obtain the degree which he desired, and consequently
did not become eligible as Hyde's successor.

Sixteen MS. treatises on Mathematics, Astronomy, and Ancient History, by
Thomas Lydiat, were given by Will. Coward, M.D. They are placed amongst
the Bodl. MSS., chiefly between Nos. 658-671.

[153] Rawlinson's copy is now in MS. Rawl. Misc. 937. For the knowledge
of this paper the writer is indebted to Rev. W. H. Bliss.

[154] Ballard MSS. xiii. 45.


A.D. 1700.

Considerable fears were entertained for the safety of the Divinity
School and that portion of the Library which is built over it. About
thirty-two years before, some failure had been observed in the roof of
the former, which was rectified under the superintendence of Sir
Christopher Wren. When Bishop Barlow's books were brought to the
Library, in 1692 or 1693, the galleries on either side of the middle
room were erected; and, as the beams of the roof of the School were then
observed to give from the wall, they were anchored on both sides, under
the direction of Dr. Aldrich. But the tight bracing had now caused the
south wall, that which adjoins Exeter College garden, to bulge outwards,
so that the book-stalls were found to have started from the wall by
three and a-half inches at the top and two and a-half at the bottom; the
wall itself was seven and a-half inches out of the perpendicular, and
the four great arches of the vault of the School were all cracked.
Hereupon Dr. Gregory, the Savilian Professor, was despatched to London
to consult Sir C. Wren again, and, by his advice, additional buttresses
of great depth and strength were erected on the south side, the weight
of the bookstalls was removed from the roof of the School by their being
trussed up to the walls with iron cramps; and the cracks in the vault
were filled with lead or oyster-shells, and in some places with the
insertion of new stones, and were then 'wedged up with well-seasoned
oaken wedges.' This work went on through the summers of 1701 and 1702;
and in 1703 some similar repairs were executed in some of the other
Schools. The letters and papers of Wren on the subject, with the
draughts, and reports of the workmen employed, are preserved in Bodley
MS. 907. They are printed in [Walker's] _Oxoniana_, iii. 16-27.

In this year died Henry Jones, M.A., Vicar of Sunningwell, Berks[155].
He bequeathed to the Library sixty volumes in MS., very miscellaneous in
character, and chiefly of the 16th and 17th centuries. Some of them had
belonged to Bishop Fell. The bequest probably came to Oxford some few
years after Mr. Jones' death, as the books are entered (in a full and
accurate list) by Hearne, in the Benefaction Book, among the gifts of
about the years 1706-12. It was from a modern transcript among these
that Hearne edited the _Historia Regum Angliae_ of John Ross or Rouse;
and seventy-one documents from No. 23, which is an Hereford Chartulary,
were printed by Rawlinson at the end of his _History of Hereford_, 8^o,
Lond. 1717. One volume has for many years been missing from the
collection, viz., a funeral oration, by John Sonibanck, on the death of
Queen Elizabeth of York, in 1503. A list of the MSS. is printed from the
Benefaction Register, in Uffenbach's _Commercium Epistolicum_, pp.
200-208.

Between 1700 and 1738 Sir Hans Sloane is recorded to have given
considerably more than 1400 volumes, together with his picture in 1731;
but the majority of them do not appear to have been considered of much
value, and only 415 are specified by name in the Benefaction Register.
Dr. Hyde, in a letter to Hudson, which accompanied a list of the books
for which the latter had asked with a view to registration, says he
scarce thinks the entry to be 'for the credit of the business, _nos
inter nos_[156].' But Hudson appears to have thought that the
omission proceeded rather from carelessness, for, in a letter to Wanley,
he says that he thinks Hyde assigned '_non causa pro causa_[157].'

[155] Steele's _MSS. Collections for Berks_; Gough MS. 27.

[156] Walker's _Letters by Eminent Persons_, i. 173.

[157] Ellis's _Letters of Eminent Literary Men_, Camd. Soc. pp. 302-3.


A.D. 1701.

The long-entertained idea of resigning the Librarianship was at length
carried out by Dr. Thomas Hyde in this year, for the reasons given in
the following letter, which was addressed by him to the
Pro-Vice-Chancellor, probably Dr. Charlett. It is here printed from a
copy sent by Hyde to Wake, then Rector of St. James, Westminster, and
preserved amongst the Wake Correspondence in the library of Ch. Ch.:--

  'March 10, 1700/01,
  'CHRIST CHURCH, OXON.

    'SIR,--I being a little indisposed by the gout, acquaint you thus by
    letter, that what I long agoe designed (as you partly knew) I am now
    about to put in execution. That is to say, I shall shortly lay down
    my office of Library-keeper, about a month hence, which resolution I
    do now declare, and I do hereby give you timely and statuteable
    notice of the same as Pro-Vice-Chancellor, entreating that, as the
    Statute requires, you will in two days order Mr. Cowper to draw a
    Programma to be set up at the Schools to the sence of the enclosed
    paper, he best knowing forms and lawyers' Latin.

    'Among the Bodleian Statutes in the Appendix, in the Statute _de
    causis amovendi aut libere recedendi_, you will find that upon the
    Library-keeper's notice thus given, you are in two days' time to fix
    up the programma preparatory to make it known that about a month
    hence (which is about the end of this term) that office will be
    actually resigned and void.

    'My reasons for leaving the place are two, viz. one is because (my
    feet being left weak by the gout) I am weary of the toil and
    drudgery of daily attendance all times and weathers; and secondly,
    that I may have my time free to myself to digest and finish my
    papers and collections upon hard places of Scripture, and to fit
    them for the press[158]; seing that Lectures (though we must attend
    upon them) will do but little good, hearers being scarce and
    practicers more scarce.

    'I should have left the Library more compleat and better furnish'd
    but that the building of the Elaboratory[159] did so exhaust the
    University mony, that no books were bought in severall years after
    it. And at other times when books were sometimes bought, it was (as
    you well know) never left to me to buy them, the Vice-Chancellor not
    allowing me to lay out any University mony. And therefore some have
    blamed me without cause for not getting all sorts of books.

    'Before the Visitations I did usually spend a month's time in
    preparing a list of good books to offer to the Curators; but I could
    seldom get them bought, being commongly (_sic_) answered in short,
    that they had no mony. Nay, I have been chid and reproved by the
    Vice-Chancellor for offering to put them to so much charge in buying
    books. These things at last discouraged me from medling in it. But,
    however, I leave the Library three times bigger than I found
    it[160], and furnished with a Catalogue of which I found it
    destitute. I wish the University a man who may take as much pains
    and drudgery as I have done whilst I was able to do it.

    'I entreat you with all speed to cause the Register to put up the
    programma signed with your name, that so things may be regularly and
    statutably dispatched in order, until the time of actuall
    resignation shall come.

  'In the mean time I remain,
            'Your humble servant,
                      'THOMAS HYDE.'

John Hudson, M.A., of Queen's, afterwards D.D. and Princ. of St. Mary
Hall, was elected in Hyde's room; he was opposed by J. Wallis, M.A., of
Magd., the Laudian Professor of Arabic, but was chosen by 194 votes to
173[161]. A letter to him from Hyde on his election, with advice about
the entering of Sir H. Sloane's books in the Register, the augmentation
of Mr. Crabbe's salary, the Catalogues and the Statutes, is printed in
[Walker's] _Letters by Eminent Persons_, i. 173. He had previously, in
1696-98, given seventy books to the Library, and in 1705-10 he added
nearly 600. Hyde did not long survive his resignation, dying before one
year had elapsed, on Feb. 18, 1702. He was buried at Handborough, near
Oxford.

In this year Thomas Hearne, the famous antiquary, was appointed Janitor,
or Assistant, in the Library. He tells us in his _Autobiography_ (p. 10)
that, from the time of his taking the degree of B.A. in Act term, 1699,
'he constantly went to the Bodleian Library every day, and studied there
as long as the time allowed by the Statutes would admit,' and that the
fact of this his 'diligence being taken notice of by all persons that
came thither, and his skill in books being likewise well known to those
with whom he had at any time conversed,' occasioned Hudson's appointing
him to be an Assistant immediately upon his own election as Librarian.
It appears, from the Visitors' Book, that a payment of L10 was made to
him in this year, and that, in the next year, L30 were voted to him for
his assistance in making an Appendix to the Catalogue of printed
books[162], and for enlarging and correcting the Catalogues of MSS. and
Coins. Extra payments of 50_s._ were also made to him in 1704 and 1706,
and of 20_s._ in 1709.

_The Bodley Speech._ See 1682.

[158] These were left in MS. at Hyde's death, and have never been
published.

[159] _i.e._ the Ashmolean Museum.

[160] Hyde was greatly mistaken here, as a calculation made by Hearne in
1714 (_q.v._) showed that the Library had then little more than doubled
since 1620.

[161] _Reliqq. Hearn._ ii. 616.

[162] For an account of Hearne's Appendix, see 1738.


A.D. 1702.

A considerable number of printed books were given by Steph. Penton,
B.D., and a collection of 500 coins was bequeathed about this time by
Tim. Nourse, of Univ. Coll.


A.D. 1704.

The name of John Locke appears in the Register, as the donor of his own
works (which he gave at Hudson's request), together with some others,
including, with an honourable fairness, those of Bishop Stillingfleet
written in controversy with himself. As Locke's expulsion from Ch. Ch.,
in 1684, by royal mandate, for political reasons, is sometimes, with an
injustice which he himself would doubtless have warmly repudiated,
represented as if it had been the act of Oxford itself, it is worth
while to quote the language in which this gift from him, twenty years
afterwards, is recorded, and recorded, too, by the pen of the earnest
and conscientious Jacobite, Thomas Hearne: 'Joannes Lock, generosus, et
hujus Academiae olim alumnus, praeter Opera ab ipso edita, ob ingenii
elegantiam, doctrinae varietatem, et philosophicam subtilitatem, omnibus
suspicienda (_here follow the titles of his own works_), insuper ex suo
in optimas artes amore, animoque ad supellectilem literariam augendam
propenso, Bibliothecae huic dono dedit libros sequentes;' _scil._
Churchill's _Voyages and Travels_, 4 vols., 1704, Stillingfleet's
_Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity_, Stillingfleet's _Answer to
Locke_, and Rob. Boyle's _History of the Air_. Locke desired, in a
codicil to his will, that in compliance with a second request from
Hudson, all his anonymous works should also be sent to the Library[163].

William Ray, formerly consul at Smyrna, presented about 600 coins,
chiefly Greek, which E. Lhwyd (who reported their number to be about
2000) said he had been told had been collected at Smyrna by his
cook[164]. But the Benefaction Register records that they were obtained
by Ray from the widow of one 'domini Dan. Patridge,' who had himself
intended to present them to the University. They were put in order, and
a Catalogue made of them, some years afterwards, by Hearne, who intended
to have given the Catalogue to the Library, 'had not,' he says, 'the ill
usage he afterwards met with there obliged him to alter his mind[165].'
Ray also gave a Turkish almanac.

[163] Lord King's _Life of Locke_, edit. 1830, vol. ii. p. 51.

[164] Walker's _Letters by Eminent Persons_, i. 137.

[165] _Life_, p. 13, in _Lives of Leland, Hearne, and Wood_, 1772.


A.D. 1706.

The supposed original MS. of _The Causes of the Decay of Christian
Piety_, by the author of _The Whole Duty of Man_, was given by Mr.
Keble, the London bookseller. It is now numbered Bodl. MS. 21. Dr.
Aldrich was of opinion that it is not in the author's own hand, but
copied in a disguised hand by Bishop Fell. Hearne thought it to be in a
disguised hand of Sancroft's; but the resemblance is very slight
indeed[166].

[166] See _Letters by Eminent Persons_, vol. ii. pp. 133-4.


A.D. 1707.

Six volumes of Archbishop Usher's _Collectanea_, with two or three other
MSS. which had belonged to him, were given to the Library by James
Tyrrell, the historian, who was the archbishop's grandson. He had placed
them previously in the hands of Dr. Mill, for use by him in his edition
of the Greek Test., and it was about a week before Mill's death, June
21, 1707, that they were transferred, together with a gift from Mill of
various printed books, to the Library[167]. They are now placed among
the Rawlinson Miscellaneous MSS., 1065-1074, and one volume containing
various readings in the Gr. Test., is numbered Auct. T. v. 30. Other
volumes of his MSS. Collections in the Library are Barlow, 10 and 13; _e
Musaeo_, 46 and 47; Rawl. Misc. 225, 280; Rawl. Letters, 89, and
Rawlinson C. 849, 850, which last were given to Hearne by Tyrrell.
Hearne has printed some extracts at the end of _Gul. Neubrig._ iii. 804.
Six Samaritan and other MSS. which belonged to Usher are now in the
class called _Bodl. Orient._

By the bequest of Dr. Humphrey Hody the Library acquired some 400 or 500
volumes, being all those in his own collection which were wanting here,
together with his MSS. _Collectanea_. These last, amounting to
twenty-three volumes, are now numbered Bodl. Addit. 1. D. 1-4, 2. B.
1-16, 2. C. 1-3.

Thomas, Archbishop of Gocthan, in Armenia, visited England on an errand
which seems to have justly excited great sympathy and attention.
Sensible of the low condition of his fellow-countrymen, through their
want of means of instruction, and being earnestly anxious to do
something towards their elevation, he had spent some forty years in
travels through Europe and Asia for the purpose of procuring books,
establishing printing-presses, educating young men, and obtaining help
for the furtherance of his Christian and patriotic projects. His first
printing establishment, at Marseilles, was ruined by the mismanagement
and fraud of those to whom it was entrusted. He then, for ten years,
carried on a press at Amsterdam, where he printed, in Armenian, the New
Testament, the Prayers and Hymns of the Church, a translation of Thomas
a Kempis, and several other theological works, together with some in
geography, history, and science. But troubles and trials again overtook
him; disputes and law-suits involved him in debt; one hundred books,
which he shipped for Armenia in 1698, were taken at sea, and so never
reached their destination. And so, poor and sorrowful, in extreme old
age, the Archbishop came to England to seek for help, recommended by Dr.
John Cockburn, the English Minister at Amsterdam. He was well received
by the Archbishops, and Sharp, of York, procured him an interview with
the Queen, who gave him some assistance. Then, recommended by Bishop
Compton[168], of London, he came to Oxford. What he received in the way
of the help which he most of all needed, deponent sayeth not; let us
hope it was not small. What he received in the way of honour, and what
he did to cause the introduction of his name in these _Annals_, Hearne
tells, in his own interesting way, in his _Diary_[169]:--

    'May 24. Last night came to Oxon one of the Armenian Patriarchs. He
    is Patriarch of the Holy Cross in Gogthan (near Mount Ararat) in
    Greater Armenia. He subscribes himself in his speech to the Queen in
    the last month, by translation, Thomas. The next day he was attended
    to the publick Library by Dr. Charlett, Pro-Vice-Chancellor. At the
    entrance, Dr. Hudson, the Keeper, made him a handsome complement in
    Latin; but the Patriarch, being about 90 years of age, and
    understanding no Latin, nor Greek, nor any European language but
    Italian, took but little notice of any thing. He afterwards was
    carried to Dr. Charlett's lodgings, where he was treated.

    'May 29. This day was a Convocation in the Theatre, when the
    Archbishop of the Holy Cross in Gocthan was created Doctor of
    Divinity, and his nephew, Luke Nurigian, and Mr. Cockburn, son of
    Dr. Cockburn, were created Masters of Arts. The day before, the
    Archbishop presented to the publick Library several books in
    Armenian which he has caused to be printed. Mr. Wyatt, the orator,
    spoke a speech in his commendation, and presented him, the Queen
    having been pleased to let us be without a Professor. During the
    Convocation, several papers printed at the Theatre were given to the
    Doctors, Noblemen, and some others, entitled, _Reverendissimi in
    Christo Patris Thomae, Archiepiscopi Sanctae Crucis in Gocthan
    Perso-Armeniae, peregrinationis suae in Europam, pietatis et literarum
    promovendarum caussa susceptae, brevis narratio; una cum dicti
    Archiepiscopi ad serenissimam Magnae Britanniae Reginam oratiuncula
    ejusque responso. Accedunt de eodem Archiepiscopo testimonia ampla
    et praeclara._ Printed upon two sheets, folio[170].'

In another volume of memoranda[171], Hearne adds the following notice of
one of the books given by the Archbishop: 'Amongst other books which he
gave to the Bodleian Library is a History, at the beginning of which the
Archbishop's nephew put the following memorandums: "_Historia Nationis
Armeniae, a Moise Chorenensi grammatico, doctore Armeno_. Amst. 1695.
Maii 28, 1707, Bibliothecae Bodleianae dono dedit reverendiss. Thomas
Archiep. S. Crucis in Majori Armenia. Per manum ejusd. reverendiss.
nepotis, Lucae Nurigianidis." Underneath which is written, at the motion
of Dr. Charlett, and by the direction of the said Archbishop's nephew:
"Auctorem istius libri floruisse traditur seculo quarto post Christum."'
The book is now numbered, 8^o V. 134 Th.

[167] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, xv. 24.

[168] And by the good Robert Nelson (_Letters by Eminent Persons_, i.
167, 9), who had also obtained ten guineas for him from the Christian
Knowledge Society (Secretan's _Life of Nelson_, pp. 113-4).

[169] Vol xiv. pp. 64, 68.

[170] A copy of this tract is in V. 1. 1. Jur.

[171] Rawlinson MS. C. 876. p. 44.


A.D. 1709.

In this year the first Copyright Act was passed, which required the
depositing of copies of all works entered at Stationers' Hall at nine
libraries in England and Scotland. This number was increased upon the
Union with Ireland to eleven, but finally reduced to five (British
Museum; Oxford; Cambridge; Advocates' Library, Edinburgh; and Trinity
College, Dublin) by 5 & 6 Will. IV. c. 110.


A.D. 1710.

Dr. Richard Middleton Massey, formerly of Brasenose College, gave (with
a few other books) a very curious and valuable series of Registers of
the Parliamentary Committee for augmentation of poor vicarages, from
1645 to 1652, in eight folio volumes, with one earlier volume containing
a list of livings in the diocese of Norwich, with their values and
incumbents. To local antiquaries these proceedings are full of interest,
while their historical and biographical value is equally great. They are
now numbered Bodl. MSS. 322-330. Of the printed books given by Dr.
Massey, most of those in octavo were placed at the end of Bishop
Barlow's books, in the shelves marked _D. Linc._

Three thousand pounds were offered by the University for the library of
Isaac Vossius, but refused. But the books were shortly afterwards sold
to the University of Leyden for the same sum[172].

[172] _Reliquiae Hearn._ i. 205, 6.


A.D. 1711.

A watch which had belonged to Dudley, Earl of Leicester, is said to have
been presented by Mr. Ralph Howland, of Maidenhead.

Grabe's _Adversaria_. See 1724.


A.D. 1712.

'July 19, Died Mr. Joseph Crabb, Under-keeper of the Bodleian Library,
having kept in ever since this day sennight. He died of a rheumatism,
occasion'd by a careless sort of life. He was, however, an honest
harmless man. He was buried on Monday night following (between 7 and 8
o'cl.) in Haly-well Churchyard, very privately. Upon his coffin was
put, _I. C. ag. 38. 1712_; but I heard him say some time since he was 39
years old[173].' He is described in the following caustic terms by Zach.
Conr. Uffenbach, in a letter written in 1713, and printed in his
_Commercium Epistolicum_[174]:--

    'Alteri [praefecto Bibliothecae], nomine Crab, caput vacuum cerebro
    est, lepidum alias, dignusque homo quem ridiculo illo encomio, quo
    tamen multi serio egregios viros onerarunt, ornetur, vociteturque
    Helluo, non librorum tamen sed praemiorum, quae ab exteris
    Bibliothecam hanc invisentibus avide excipit, statimque cauponibus
    reddit pro liquore, ad guttur colluendum purgandumque a pulvisculo,
    qui librorum tractationem velut umbra aut nebula comitari solet.
    Quamvis non ejus, sed tertii infimique Bibliothecarii, hoc sit
    muneris, ut libros in loculos reponat, quaevis in ordinem redigat
    atque emundet.'

The date of Crabb's appointment has not been ascertained, but it must
have been previous to 1699, as on Nov. 8 of that year an order appears
in the Visitors' Book for an extra payment to him of L10[175]; other
additional payments of L5 and 50_s._ are made to him annually until
1710. Two vols. of an index to texts of printed sermons, ending about
the year 1708, (now Bodl. MSS. 47 and 657,) which were, doubtless,
intended to form a continuation of Verneuil's little book, are said in
an old entry in the Catalogue to be by 'Mr. Crabb.' The following brief
account of him is given in Rawlinson's MSS. collections for a
continuation of Wood's _Athenae_:--

    'Joseph Crabb, son of Will. Crabb, clerk, born at Child-Ockford in
    Dorsetshire on ---- 1674; educated in grammar learning at ----;
    matriculated as a member of Exeter College, 18 July 1691; took the
    degree of B.A. 17 Oct. 1695; became Sub-librarian at the public
    library; removed to Gloucester Hall, where he became M.A., 4 July
    1705, and died ----.'

Rawlinson goes on to attribute to him (as his solitary claim to a place
in the _Athenae_) a _Poem on the late Storm_, Lond. 1704, fol., but this
was written (as well as a Latin poem _In Georgium reducem_, Lond. 1719,
fol.) by John Crabb, Fellow of Exeter College (B.A., Oct. 15, 1685;
M.A., June 19, 1688), who was also a Sub-librarian at an earlier period,
but the date of whose entrance into office as well as of quittance is
not known. The latter became Rector of Breamore, Hants, in 1709, where
he died in 1748 at the age of eighty-five. He is remarkable for having
married four wives, all of whom lie buried with him in his church. The
third of these, Grace Shuckbridge, became his wife when he was aged
seventy-six and she was forty-nine; the last (who survived until March
13, 1777) was thirty-six when she took him, at the age of eighty-one,
for better or worse. There is a handsome marble tablet to his memory on
the north wall of the Chancel of Breamore Church, bearing the following
inscription, and surmounted by his arms (_scil._, on a field gules a
chevron between two fleur-de-lis above and a crab displayed below or;
crest, a demi-lion rampant or) painted in their proper colours:--

    'H. S. E. Reverend. Johan. Crabb, A. M. e Coll. Exon quondam Socius
    Oxon., Bibliothecae Bodleianae Sub-Librarius, et a sacris olim Episc.
    Fowler, hujus Parochiae Minister residens amplius XXXVIII ann. Vir
    doctus, pius, generosus, in Ecclesia Orthodoxus, in Republica
    fidelis, et omnibus liberalis. Author Georgianae et aliorum Carminum
    celebrium latine et anglice, Obiit tandem XIII Id. Martii, Anno
    aetat. suae LXXXV., AErae Christianae MDCCXLVIII[176].'

On July 22, Thomas Hearne was appointed Second-keeper by Dr. Hudson, in
the room of Crabb, while still retaining his post as Janitor, 'with
liberty allow'd him of being keeper of the Anatomy schoole, or Bodleian
repository, on purpose to advance the perquisites of the place, which
are very inconsiderable[177],' but with the proviso that the salary of
the janitor's place should go to an assistant officer. By this
arrangement Hearne retained the keys, so that he could go in and out
when he pleased[178].

'Sept. 16, Dr. Hudson told me to-day that some have complain'd that
books in the Publick Library are not so easily come at as usual. I am
glad there is such a complaint. I am afraid the complainers are such as
us'd to steal books from the Library, and, upon that account, are
concern'd that they are more strictly look'd after than formerly[179].'

[173] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, xxxvii. 180.

[174] 1753, p. 182. For the reference to this passage the author is
indebted to Dibdin's _Bibliogr. Decam._ iii. 281. The same volume of
Uffenbach's contains some criticisms on Bernard's Catalogue of the MSS.,
chiefly with relation to the Barocci collection, with extracts from the
additional entries in the Reg. Benef.

[175] This was granted at Hyde's urgent request, 'in regard of his great
pains in entering books in the Catalogue, and of the smallness of his
place.' _Letter from Hyde to Hudson_, in Walker's _Letters_, i. 174.

[176] For the above particulars of John Crabb's history subsequent to
his leaving Oxford the author is indebted to his friend the Rev. J. H.
Blunt, lately the Curate in charge of the parish of Breamore, who
mentions, with reference to Crabb's connubial experiences, the parallel
case of Bishop John Thomas, Bishop of the adjoining diocese of
Salisbury, 1757-61, and afterwards of Winchester. At his fourth wedding
that prelate had the good taste and feeling to present his friends with
memorial rings inscribed with the couplet:--

    'If I survive
    I'll make them five.'

But the lady did not afford him the wished-for opportunity.

[177] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, xxxvii. 191.

[178] _Life_, 1772, p. 14.

[179] _MS. Diary_, xxxix. 120.


A.D. 1713.

The learned and munificent Narcissus Marsh, Archbishop successively of
Cashel, Dublin, and Armagh, on his death, Nov. 2, in this year,
bequeathed to the Library a very large and valuable gathering of
Oriental MSS., which had been chiefly procured for him in the East by
Huntington, and at the sale of Golius' library, at Leyden, in October,
1696, by Bernard. The collection numbers at present 714 volumes, but
probably some of these may have been books added for convenience' sake
from other sources. Many of them bear the motto of some former owner
(_qu._ Golius?), somewhat like in form to Selden's, but better in
spirit, '[Grk: pantache ten aletheian].' It is strange that no notice of
this liberal gift is found in any of the Library Registers, and it is
only from a passing mention in Hearne's preface to Camden's _Elizabeth_
(p. lxvi.) that we find it was a death-bed legacy, and consequently
learn the date of its acquisition. Hearne there says that the books were
placed in the Library 'in tenebris;' and this expression was made one of
the subjects of complaint against him when prosecuted in 1718 in the
Vice-Chancellor's court on account of that preface. He then replied that
the expression was correct, for that they were placed in a dark corner
to which access was only had through a trap-door, but that he himself
had put them there for want of a better place. He had wished to deposit
them in one of the rooms in the Picture Gallery, but Dr. Hudson kept
that for his own purposes[180].

At this period every stranger admitted to read in the Library had to pay
nine shillings in fees, of which 1_s._ went to the Head Librarian, 3_s._
6_d._ to the Second Librarian, 1_s._ 6_d._ to the Janitor, 2_s._ to the
Registrar (for an order for admission, but in the Long Vacation this fee
went to the Second Librarian), and 1_s._ to the Proctor's man[181]. In
1720 the fee to be received from every visitor not qualified to read was
fixed at one penny, to be paid to a porter who was then first appointed
to the charge of the Picture Gallery. It subsequently rose by a silent
custom to the large sum of a shilling; but some few years ago the
Curators fixed the charge to visitors at threepence each, unless
accompanied, and in consequence _franked_, by some member of the
University in his academic dress. Since this moderate sum has been
fixed, the number of ordinary sight-seeing visitors has, naturally, much
increased[182].

The suppression, by an order of the Heads of Houses, dated March 23,
1712/3, of Hearne's edition of Dodwell's tract _De Parma Equestri
Woodwardiana_, was attributed by Hearne himself to (as the remote
occasion) an incident connected with his office in the Library, which is
related very fully by himself in vol. xliv. of his _MS. Diary_. On Feb.
20, Mr. Keil, the Savilian Professor of Geometry, brought to the Library
an Irish gentleman named Mollineux, recommended by Sir Andrew Fountaine,
to whom he requested Hearne to show the curiosities of the place. As
Keil was 'a very honest gentleman,' Hearne little suspected that his
friend was possessed with the 'republican ill principles' and 'malignant
temper' of Whiggism, and consequently was not very guarded in his talk.
After showing him various MSS. and coins, he took the visitor into the
Anatomy School[183], where all kinds of odds and ends were preserved;
amongst which was (as Hearne gravely notes in another place) a calf
which, being born in the year of the Union, 1707, had (it is to be
presumed in consequence thereof) two bodies and one head. What followed
during the exhibition of this museum is worth relating in the diarist's
own words:--

    'I mentioned a picture engraved and hanging there with horns and
    wings, and underneath, _uxor ejus ad vivum pinxil_. This picture
    many had said was Benjamin Hoadley, the seditious divine of London;
    but, for my part, I gave no other description of it than this, that
    'twas the picture of one of the greatest Presbyterian, republican,
    antimonarchical, Whiggish, fanatical preachers living in England.
    And this description was enough to exasperate him. And yet, for all
    that, he did not discover any passion, nor give the least hint that
    he was a Whig himself. Neither did he give any hint of it afterwards
    till I came to mention a tobacco stopper tipped with silver, and
    given to me by a reverend divine, who had informed me that it was
    made out of an oak that lately grew in St. James's Park, but was
    destroyed by the D. of M. for the great house he was building near
    St. James's, and that the said oak came from an acorn that was
    planted there by King Charles II, being one of those acorns that he
    had gathered in the Royal Oak, where he was forced to shelter
    himself from the fury of the rebells after the fight at Worcester.
    Mr. Mollineux was at the other end of the room when this was shew'd,
    and the said story told; but hearing it he comes immediately to the
    tables, and expresses himself in words of this kind, viz. _that
    'twas a bawble, and that an hundred such things were not worth the
    seeing_. Mr. Keil however thought otherwise, and said that he
    thought my collection was better than that in the Laboratory. Some
    mirth passing after this, I went on with my description, and had not
    yet formed an opinion that Mr. Mollineux was a Whig; but finding
    that he was still inquisitive after other curiosities, and that he
    pretended to much skill in good ingraving and drawing, I produced
    the picture of a beautifull young man, over the head of which was
    [Grk: EIKON BASILIKE], and underneath, _Quid quaeritis ultra?_ I did
    not tell them whose picture it was, but said that I shew'd it them
    as a thing excellently well done, which they all allow'd and view'd
    it over and over, and seemed to be mightily taken with it, and Mr.
    Mollineux in particular was pleased to say that 'twas admirably well
    done, and deserved a place amongst the most exquisite performances
    of this kind, at the same time asking how long I had had it, and
    whose picture I took it to be. To the former of which questions I
    reply'd, about a quarter of a year, to the latter that I did not
    pretend to tell who it was designed for. Yet Mr. Keil was pleased to
    laugh, and to tell Mr. Mollineux, _They are all rebells, Mr.
    Mollineux, they are all rebells in this place_, speaking these words
    in a merry joking way, and not with any intent to do me an injury.
    Mr. Mollineux took the words upon the picture down, which I did not
    deny him, not thinking that 'twas with a design to inform against
    me, as it afterwards proved. Yet from this time I began a little to
    suspect his integrity, and that he was not one of those good men I
    expected from Mr. Keil, whom I had always found to be a man of
    honesty.'

_Hinc illae lachrymae!_ Poor Hearne was reported to Dr. Charlett the same
afternoon for showing the Pretender's Picture; a meeting of the Curators
of the Library was threatened; but eventually the matter seemed to pass
over by his being desired by the Vice-Chancellor to give up the key of
the Anatomy School, in order that the determining Bachelors might meet
there, by which change Hearne was mulcted of the fees which he obtained
for showing the room, and was sometimes detained one hour, or two, later
than usual in order to see to the locking up of the staircase on which
it is situated. On March 23, however, he was summoned before the Heads
of Houses for remarks made in his preface to Dodwell's above-mentioned
tract, and, after a sharp discussion, in which reference was made to his
exhibition of the portraits, he was ordered to suppress his preface, and
re-issue the book without it; to which he consented. He was pressed to
make a formal retractation of the passages to which objection was made,
but this he stiffly refused to do. He says in a letter to Sir Philip
Sydenham that the only form of retractation or expression of sorrow he
could have been prevailed on to sign (strongly resembling the famous
apology of a middy to an insulted naval surgeon) would have been some
such form as this:--'I, Thomas Hearne, A.M., of the University of
Oxford, having ever since my matriculation followed my studies with as
much application as I have been capable of, and having published several
books for the honour and credit of learning, and particularly for the
reputation of the foresaid University, am very sorry that by my
declining to say anything but what I knew to be true in any of my
writings, and especially in the last book I published, intituled,
_Henrici Dodwelli de Parma Equestri Woodwardiana Dissertatio, &c_, I
should incurr the displeasure of any of the Heads of Houses, and as a
token of my sorrow for their being offended at truth, I subscribe my
name to this paper, and permitt them to make what use of it they
please[184].'

[180] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, vol. lxxi. May 20.

[181] _Ibid._ vol. xlvii. p. 89.

[182] In an account of a visit to Oxford by an American tourist, which
appeared very recently in the _New York Times_, and was copied into
English journals, written with the warm-hearted tone of one who could
rightly appreciate the interest of the place, although (like most
Transatlantic visitors) he spent but twenty-four hours in it, the
following comment is made upon the smallness of this Bodleian fee:--'The
gentleman [_i.e._ the present Janitor, Mr. John Norris] who showed me
through this noble collection, and gave me the most interesting
explanations, politely informed me that the charge was 3_d._ It went
against my conscience to give a gentleman of his civility and erudition
the price of a pot of beer, and I added a small testimonial, for which
he seemed more than sufficiently grateful.'

[183] This was the room which is now attached to the Library under the
name of the _Auctarium_.

[184] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, xlviii. 22. The retractation and apology
which Hearne afterwards actually submitted to the Vice-Chancellor in
court in 1718, when in trouble again for his preface to Camden's
Elizabeth, was very similar in style to this. But he was not allowed to
read it. _Ibid._ lxxi. 3 May.


A.D. 1714.

An evidence of the increased intercourse which sprang up between Denmark
and England, in consequence of the marriage of Queen Anne, is probably
to be found in the number of Danish readers who frequented the Library
in the interval between her marriage and her death. Between the years
1683 and 1714, forty-nine Danes are entered in the _Liber Admissorum_,
besides many from Sweden, Norway, and the North of Germany. The total
number of foreigners admitted within the same period was no less than
244.

'In the year 1714 were in the Bodleian Library:--

          30169 pr. vols.
          05916 MSS. vols.
          -----
  In all  36085.'

  (Hearne's _MS. Diary_, vol. xci. p. 256.)

It is strange that, notwithstanding Selden's and Laud's large additions,
the Library had therefore very little more than doubled since 1620.

It is recorded in vol. li. of the same Diary (p. 187) that the old
series of portraits which were painted on the wall of the Picture
Gallery was renewed in November of this year. These portraits, amounting
in number to about 222, ran round the gallery, immediately under the
roof; many of them were fancy-heads of ancient philosophers and writers,
but besides these there were some real portraits of English writers and
divines, up to the time of James I. A list of the whole series, as well
as of the oil paintings in the Gallery, was printed by Hearne together
with his _Letter containing an Account of some Antiquities between
Windsor and Oxford_. Of the renovation of the wall-paintings he thus
speaks in his preface to _Rossi Historia Regum Angliae_ (1716): 'Non
possim quin bibliothecae Bodleianae Curatores laudem, qui pictori
Academico [_i.e._ Wildgoose] in mandatis dederunt, ut veteres effigies
renovet nitorique pristino restituat: quippe quas eo pluris aestimendas
esse censeo, quod eas in galeria depingendas jusserit ipse Bodleius,
Loci Genius.' When the Gallery was re-roofed in 1831, all these
paintings were, however, removed [_see_ p. 15].

About the end of this year the Arundel Marbles, which, strange to say,
had been exposed to the open air within the quadrangle of the Schools
ever since they were given to the University, were removed into one of
the rooms on the ground-floor, where they still remain. It was said that
they had suffered more 'since they were exposed to our air, than they
did in many hundred years before they came into it[185].' But the
influence of the air was not all they had to contend against, for Hearne
tells us that the defacing of the Marble Chronicle (of which there are
portions that were read by Selden, which now can no longer be read at
all) and some others, was owing not merely to exposure to the weather,
but 'to the abuses of children who are continually playing in the area,
and of other ignorant persons[186].'

[185] _Letters by Eminent Persons_, 1813, vol. i. p. 297.

[186] _Letters by Eminent Persons_, 1813, vol. i. p. 204.


A.D. 1715.

We learn from Hearne's MS. Diary [vol. liii.] that differences between
him and Dr. Hudson (of which he makes frequent mention) increased during
this year. He was reported to the Vice-Chancellor in April for absence
from the Library through his duties as Bedel, by reason of which readers
had difficulty in obtaining books lodged above stairs. To this complaint
his reply was that he was not bound, as Second Librarian, exclusively to
do such 'drudgery,' but that Dr. Hudson was himself obliged by statute
to deliver out such books as were under lock-and-key, and books in
quarto and octavo, either personally or by his own special deputy. At
the same time a complaint was made against him by three Bachelors of
Arts of Queen's College, for refusing books to them which were out of
the faculty of Arts prescribed to them by the statutes of the Library.
Hearne's only reply to the Vice-Chancellor in this case was the asking
whether they had, also in accordance with the Statutes, come to the
Library in their hoods, if under two years' standing; at which 'he
smiled.' It appears, therefore, that this requirement had already become
obsolete. Dr. Hudson, however, regarded the matter more seriously, and
threatened that Hearne should be turned out of both his places.

    April 15. (Good Friday!) 'This morning Dr. Hudson went out of town,
    and that pert jackanapes Bowles (who is Dr. Hudson's servitor) came
    to tell me that he is gone, and that the sweeper of the Library
    being dead, I must not admitt any one to sweep the Library as
    formerly. I returned answer I had nothing to do in that case. In the
    afternoon I was at study in the Library, and Bowles brings up a
    woman and girl, and set them to sweeping, and left them there, tho'
    this should not have been, they being not sworn nor admitted as
    sweepers. Indeed all things are now done very irregularly in the
    Library by the permission of Dr. Hudson, and by the impudence of
    this pert, silly servitour, and I am afraid much mischief is done
    withall. The whole Library and galleries and studies and the Anatomy
    School used to be swept this day; they began about eight, and had
    not done till four or five in the afternoon. But now the Library
    only below stairs was swept over, and that very slightly, and all
    things were left in a bad condition, to my very great concern[187].'

At the visitation on Nov. 8, the Curators passed a resolution that the
places of Under-librarian and Bedel were inconsistent, and that on S.
Thomas' day Hudson should be at liberty to appoint some other person to
Hearne's office. Hereupon Hearne immediately, without a moment's delay,
resigned both the offices of Architypographus and Superior Bedel of
Civil Law, and claimed to remain in the Library; but Hudson had fresh
locks put on the doors, of which Bowles kept the keys, so that Hearne
was unable to go in and out as before. However, he continued to execute
his office whenever the Library was open until Jan. 23, 1716, when the
Act which imposed a fine of L500, with other penalties, upon any one who
held any public office without having taken the Oaths, came into
operation. Then at once, all worldly interests, all affection for the
old place of his studies and his care, gave way to the honest and
unwavering dictates of his conscience; the Non-juror withdrew, and, with
singularly hard measure, in spite of his representations, his place was
ordered by the Curators to be filled up at Lady-Day, not on the ground
of his own retirement, but on that of _neglect of duty_! His successor
was Rev. John Fletcher, M.A., Chaplain, and afterwards Fellow, of
Queen's College. Hearne states that his salary was, with great
unfairness, withheld from him for the whole half-year preceding
Lady-Day, together with some fees which were due[188]. But to the end of
his life he maintained that he was still, _de jure_, Sub-librarian, and,
with a quaint pertinacity, regularly at the end of each term and
half-year, up to March 30, 1735[189], continued to set down, in one of
the volumes of his Diary, that no fees had been paid him, and that his
half-year's salary was due.

On Hearne's announcing John Ross's _Historia Angliae_ for publication in
this year, W. Whiston forwarded to him a MS. of a Latin historical poem
entitled _Britannica_, written in 1606 by an author of the same names as
the forth-coming historian, with the following note inserted:--

    'This book was written, as I think, by my great uncle, Mr. John
    Rosse, rector of Norton-juxta-Twycross in Leicestershire, where I
    was myself born. If it may be of any use to Mr. Hern at Oxford in
    his intended edition of this or some other work of the same author
    now advertis'd, or may be thought worthy of a place in the publick
    library of that University, it is hereby freely given thereto by

                                        'WILLIAM WHISTON.
  '_London, December 12, 1715._'

Hearne adds that (of course) the author was altogether different from
the Ross of his editing, and that the poem had been printed at Frankfort
in 1607, as he learned from a MS. Catalogue of Mr. Richard Smith's books
lent him by Bp. Fleetwood of Ely[190]. The MS. is now numbered, Bodley
573.

A learned tailor of Norwich was in this year recommended by Dr. Tanner,
then Chancellor of Norwich Cathedral, for the Janitor's place in the
Library should it be vacant. Although but a journeyman tailor of thirty
years of age, who had been taught nothing but English in his childhood,
Henry Wild had contrived within seven years to master seven languages,
Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic and Persian, to which
Tanner adds, in another letter to Dr. Rawlinson, Samaritan and Ethiopic.
The application appears to have been unsuccessful so far as the holding
office in the Library was concerned; but Wild found some employment in
the Library for a time in the translating and copying Oriental MSS[191].
He removed to London about 1720, and died in the following year, as we
learn from an entry in Hearne's _MS. Diary_, (xcii. 128-9,) under date
of Oct. 29, 1721, where we read:--

    'About a fortnight since died in London Mr. Henry Wild, commonly
    called, the _Arabick Taylour_. I have more than once mentioned him
    formerly. He was by profession a taylour of Norwich, and was a
    married man. But having a strange inclination to languages, by a
    prodigious industry he obtain'd a very considerable knowledge in
    many, without any help or assistance from others. He understood
    Arabick perfectly well, and transcrib'd, very fairly, much from
    Bodley, being patroniz'd by that most eminent physician, Dr. Rich.
    Mead. He died of a feaver, aged about 39. He was about a
    considerable work, viz. a history of the old Arabian physicians,
    from an Arabick MS. in Bodley. The MS. was wholly transcrib'd by him
    a year agoe, but what progress he had made for the press I know
    not.'

Five MSS., including the Leiger Book of Malmesbury Abbey, together with
a large number of printed books, were given on May 7, by William
Brewster, M.D. of Hereford, a well-known antiquary[192].

A thick quarto volume (1052 pages) containing a Latin treatise by Adam
Zernichaus on the controversy between the Eastern and Western Churches,
concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost, was forwarded to the
Library through Sir Robert Sutton, ambassador at Constantinople, by
Chrysanthus, Patriarch of Jerusalem, nephew and successor of Dositheus,
an autograph Greek epistle from whom, occupying seven pages, is
prefixed. At the end is a list of eleven German scribes who were
employed upon the transcription of the volume, with the payments they
severally received. It appears from the Benefaction Register that the
volume was not actually received at the Library until 1722; and in 1731,
an entry in the catalogue records that the MS. 'was restored to Sir
Robert Sutton, by order of the Vice-Chancellor;' but no reason or
explanation is given. For more than a century the Patriarch's gift was
consequently lost from the place of its destination; but in Dec. 1864,
having turned up for sale among the well-known stores of Mr. C. J.
Stewart, it was secured by the Librarian at the cost of L5 15_s._ 6_d._,
and is once more to be found in its legitimate quarters, numbered MS.
Addit. Bodl. ii. c. 9. Chrysanthus also gave, in 1725, a copy of
Dositheus' History of the Patriarchate of Jerusalem, which was printed,
in Greek, in 1715.

[187] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, liii. 124, 5.

[188] _Life_, 1772, pp. 18-20.

[189] He died on June 10, in that year.

[190] This catalogue was sold at the auction in 1855 of the MSS. of Dr.
Routh, who had bought it at Heber's sale.

[191] _Letters by Eminent Persons_, i. 271, 300. [On p. 270 for
_Turner_, read _Tanner_.]

[192] Hearne's _MS. Diary_, liii. 148.


A.D. 1716.

On Aug. 23, a legacy of L100 from Dr. South (who died July 8), for the
purchase of modern books, was paid to the Vice-Chancellor[193].

_Arms in the window._ See 1610.

[193] Hearne's _Diary_, lix. 141; _Reliqq. Hearn._ i. 366.


A.D. 1718.

One Mr. Hutton appears to have been employed in the Library during this
year. It seems, from a passage in a letter of C. Wheatly's, printed in
_Letters by Eminent Persons_, ii. 116, that the learned commentator
Samuel Parker, son of the Bishop of Oxford, was also at some time
employed in the Library; for Wheatly expresses a wish that S. Parker's
son, then (1739) an apprentice to Mr. Clements the bookseller, might, if
the accounts of his extraordinary proficiency be true, be placed 'in his
father's seat, the Bodleian Library.' As Parker was a non-juror, his
employment must doubtless have been at some earlier period than this,
but his name is not met with in any of the old Account-books or
Registers. One Thomas Parker occurs in the Library accounts in 1766 and
in 1772.


A.D. 1719.

Dr. Hudson died, on Nov. 27, of dropsy. And at one o'clock on the
afternoon of the very next day, Joseph Bowles, M.A., of Oriel College,
was elected in his room.

The bitter terms in which Hearne frequently, in the course of his
_Diary_, condemns Hudson's management, or rather mismanagement, of the
Library, may be supposed to be owing in a considerable degree to
personal pique and quarrel[194]. But they meet with very singular and
abundant confirmation in the letter of Z. C. Uffenbach, quoted above (p.
130), when the writer expresses, in the following strong language, his
opinion of Hudson's neglect and incapacity, and of the general condition
of the Library under his management:--

    'Perpende, quaeso, mecum, vir eruditissime, quantus thesaurus ex
    solius Bodleianae Bibliothecae codicibus elici possit, nisi
    Proto-Bibliothecarii Hudson negligentia ac pertinacia obstaret. Is
    enim muneri abunde satisfecisse, imo eximie ornasse Spartam videri
    vult, dum tot annis unico scriptori, Thucydidem ejus puto, omni
    Bibliothecae cura plane abjecta, insudavit, cum hoc, quod supra dixi,
    potius agendum fuisset. Nefandam hujus insignis Bibliothecae sortem
    (ignosce justae indignationi) satis deplorare nequeo. Inculta plane
    jacet, nemo ferme tanto thesauro uti, frui, gestit. Singulis sane
    diebus per trium mensium spatium illam frequentavi, sed, ita me dii
    ament, nunquam tot una vice homines in illa vidi quot numero sunt
    Musae, vel saltem artes liberales. De librorum studiosis loquor; nam
    puerorum, muliercularum, rusticorum, hinc inde cursitantium,
    voluminumque multitudinem per transennas spectantium mirantiumque,
    c[oe]tum excipio.... De Proto-bibliothecarii incuria jam dixi,
    ejusque stupendam in historia literaria librariaque, inprimis extra
    Insulam ultraque maria, ignorantiam taceo.'

Of Hearne, however, Uffenbach writes in the following different
strain:--

    'Hic scholaris, ut hic loqui amant, esse solet, atque etiamnum est,
    nomine Hearne, qui, prae reliquis, diligentiam suam non modo
    scriptis, sed in novo etiam Bibliothecae catalogo confitiendo, typis
    proxime exscribendo, probavit; ast, quod dolendum, ad exemplum
    prioris, qui satis jejunus, inconcinnus, erroribusque innumeris
    scatens est.'

Hudson's successor, Bowles, had previously been his Assistant for some
years, and as, while Hearne was Under-keeper, he had come into sharp
collision with that irascible antiquary (see under 1715), his election
now was a matter of sore annoyance to the latter. Hearne dwells upon it
in his _Diary_ with great bitterness and at great length: 'Competitors
were Mr. Hall, of Queen's, and that pert conceited coxcomb Mr. Bowles
(who is not yet Regent Master) of Oriel College. Bowles carried it by a
great majority, having about 160 votes, and Mr. Hall about 77. I think
it the most scandalous election that I have yet heard of in Oxford.' Of
his supporters he speaks thus:--'Charlett and such rogues, who contrived
to bring in that most compleat coxcomb Bowles to be Head-Librarian, to
the immortal scandal of all that were concern'd in it[195].' And even,
when ten years later he records Bowles' death, he indulges, in
forgetfulness of charity to the departed, in the following strain: 'Of
this gentleman (a most vile, wicked wretch) frequent mention hath been
made in these Memoirs. He took the degree of M.A. Oct. 12, 1719. 'Tis
incredible what damage he did to the Bodl. Library, by putting it into
disorder and confusion, which before, by the great pains I had taken in
it (&c.), was the best regulated library in the world[196].' Bowles'
name never occurs in the _Diary_ without some opprobrious epithet being
attached to it, which may be accounted for partly from his having taken
the oaths of allegiance after declaring he would never do it (a
defection which Hearne never forgave in any one), but chiefly also from
his having personally excluded Hearne from the Library, when the latter
refused to resign his keys in 1715, by procuring new locks and keys,
which he kept in his own custody.

Three or four days after Bowles' election, Mr. Fletcher, the
Sub-librarian (disliking, no doubt, the appointment of his junior over
his head), resigned his office, to which Bowles appointed the well-known
antiquary, Francis Wise. Upon this appointment Hearne comments thus:
'Bowles put in Mr. Wise, A.M., of Trin. Coll. (a pretender to
antiquities), tho' he had promised it to one of Oriel Coll., that came
in fellow of Oriel when he did, and was very serviceable to him in
getting the Head Librarian's place; for which Bowles is strangely
scouted and despis'd at Oriel, as a breaker of his word, and a
whiffling, silly, unfaithfull, coxcomb.' It must be allowed that the
portrait of Bowles in the Library bears out in some degree Hearne's last
epithet, by giving him the appearance rather of a fine clerical
gentleman than of a student.

Baskett, the printer, presented to the Library a magnificent copy on
vellum of the 'Vinegar' Bible, printed by him in 1717. Only three copies
were so struck off; the second was placed in the King's Library, and the
third was sold to the Duke of Chandos, for five hundred guineas, at
whose sale, in 1747, Lord Foley purchased it for L72 9_s._

[194] In one passage, Hearne says that such was Hudson's self-esteem
that he reckoned himself equal to Erasmus or Sir Thomas More, while all
that was curious in his books was gained from Hearne himself or others.
(_MS. Diary_, vol. lviii. p. 158.)

[195] Vol. lxxxiv. pp. 59, 60.

[196] Vol. cxxii. p. 158.


A.D. 1720.

About this time, one John Hawkins, a highwayman (who was executed in
May, 1722), is said by an accomplice, Ralph Wilson, who published an
account of his robberies, to have defaced some pictures in the Library.
The University is said to have offered L100 for discovery, and a poor
Whig tailor was taken up on suspicion, and narrowly escaped a whipping.
No particulars, however, of Hawkins' act are given in the pamphlet, and
no further notice of it has been found elsewhere.

Joseph Swallow, B.A., who died in this year, is found from the Accounts
to have been employed, for some short time, in the Library.

In this year the titles of all books which were bought out of the
Library funds begin to be recorded, together with their prices; they are
entered in a Register marked with the letter C.

_Visitors' Fees._ See 1713.


A.D. 1721.

The inscription on the Schools' Tower, beneath the statue of James I,
was renewed in this year[197].

Sir Godfrey Kneller presented his own portrait to the Gallery.

[197] Hearne's _Diary_, xci. 196.


A.D. 1722.

Mrs. Mary Prince is recorded to have presented heads of our Blessed LORD
and of King Charles I, painted by herself. They appear to be the two
paintings on copper, now hanging in the Sub-librarian's study, called
_Mus. Bibl. II._ Beneath that of our LORD is the following inscription:
'This present figure is the symylytude of our Lorde Jesus our Saviour,
imprinted in amyrald by the Predecessors of the Great Turke, & sent to
Pope Innocent y^e Eight at the cost of the Great Turke for a token, for
this caus, to redeme his brother that was taken prisner.' The
inscription is, of course, if the painting be Mrs. Prince's work,
reproduced _literatim_ from some older copy.

The attachment to the old Stuart family, which was so warmly cherished
in Oxford, appears to have lingered in the Bodleian, notwithstanding
Hearne's departure, who himself would scarcely have thought that a
vestige of it had been left behind. For in the Benefaction Register for
this year, the gift of a portrait of Sheffield, Duke of Buckingham, from
his widow Catherine, a natural daughter of James II, is entered as
coming from 'filia Regis Jacobi II, [Grk: tou makaritou].'

_Chrysanthus, Patriarch of Jerusalem._ See 1715.


A.D. 1723.

The noble brass statue of William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, (who was
Chancellor of the University from 1617 to his death in 1630, and was the
donor of the Barocci MSS.,) which forms such a conspicuous feature in
the Picture Gallery, was presented this year by the earl's great nephew,
Thomas, the seventh Earl of Pembroke. It was cast by the famous artist
Hubert le S[oe]ur, from a picture by Rubens, and is said to weigh about
1600 lbs. The letter of thanks from the University was read in
Convocation on April 19; it is criticized by Hearne in his _Diary_[198]
in the following terms: 'I am told that this letter is very silly and
poor, and that, among other things, his Lordship is told in it that the
statue is placed _in aede immortalitatis_. Now what this _aedes
immortalitatis_, church, temple or chappel of immortality is, I cannot
conceive, but am sure that the statue is at present fix'd in the Picture
Gallery, adjoyning to the Bodl. Library.'

[198] Vol. xcvi. p. 101.


A.D. 1724.

The MSS. _Adversaria_ of Dr. J. E. Grabe came to the Library in this
year after the death of Bishop Smalridge (Sept. 27, 1719), in accordance
with the will of their writer, who at his death (Nov. 12, 1712)
bequeathed them first to Hickes and next to Smalridge, with the final
reversion to the Bodleian. They form forty-three volumes. Some account
of them is given in Hickes' _Discourse_ prefixed to Grabe's _Defects and
Omissions in Whiston's Collection of Testimonies, &c._ (8^o. Lond.
1712), and they are fully catalogued by Mr. Coxe in vol. i. of the
general Catalogue of MSS., cols. 851-876. In a written list of them,
preserved in the Library, Dr. Bandinel has noted that several volumes of
the series were purloined before they came to Oxford, while remaining in
the possession of a friend after Grabe's death.

A Zend MS. very well and clearly written (dated in the year 1005 of the
era of Yezdegird, _i.e._ A.D. 1635), of the _Leges Sacrae, Ritus, &c.
Zoroastris_, was received from G. Bowcher, a merchant in the East
Indies. It was given in 1718, but not forwarded until 1723, when it was
brought from India by Rev. Rich. Cobbe, M.A. It is now numbered Bodl.
Or. 321. And a Coptic Lexicon, compiled and prepared for the press by
Rev. Thos. Edward, M.A., a former Chaplain of Ch. Ch., was bought for
the sum of ten guineas, which was specially granted from the University
Chest. It is now numbered Bodl. Orient. 344. The author was originally
of St. John's College, Cambridge, and tells us in his preface that
Bishop Fell, who was also Dean of Ch. Ch., meeting him there in the
house of Dr. Edmund Castell, with whom he was living, brought him to
Oxford by appointing him a Chaplain of the Cathedral, with the view of
carrying on the study of the Coptic language, which had fallen to the
ground upon the death of Dr. Marshal of Lincoln College. But just when
Edward was prepared to begin printing the results of his labours, his
patron, the Bishop, died; and, as he found no one else cared for the
subject, he took the College living of Badby in Northamptonshire, and
quitted Oxford. He finally became Rector of Aldwinkle in the same
county, and died there in the year 1721. His book is dated 1711. It is
cited by Archdeacon Tattam in his _Lexicon AEgyptiaco-Latinum_. Another
MS. Coptic Lexicon, in two volumes, was purchased in 1857.


A.D. 1726.

A large collection (in twenty-five volumes) of the tracts on the Roman
Catholic Controversy which appeared between 1680-1690, was given by
Will. Smith, M.A., of Univ. Coll., and Rector of Melsonby, Yorkshire.


A.D. 1727.

Thomas Perrott, D.C.L., of St. John's College, gave nine volumes of
MSS., the most important of which is a copy-book of the letters written
by Sir John Perrott, Lord Deputy of Ireland, in 1584-6. Another is a
book of orders from the Privy Council to the officers of the Customs at
London, 1604-18: a third, notes of a sermon preached by Usher at the
Temple, July 2, 1620. A few political and miscellaneous tracts, _tempp.
Eliz.--Jac. I_, and two heraldic MSS., complete the number. The MSS. are
noticed in the return printed in the Record Commission Report for 1800,
p. 348.

Some Greek MSS. were bought which had been brought from Mount Athos;
three of them are now placed amongst the Cromwell MSS., Nos. 15, 16, and
27, and three others are numbered Miscell. Gr. 137-9.

_Sale of Duplicates._ See 1745.


A.D. 1729.

Mr. Bowles, the Librarian, died at Shaftesbury, the place of his birth,
and was buried there on Nov. 25. On Dec. 2, Mr. Robert Fysher, B.M.,
Fellow of Oriel College, was elected his successor by 100 votes to 85
over Francis Wise, the Under-librarian. Mr. John Bilstone, M.A.,
Chaplain of All Souls' and Janitor of the Library, was also a candidate,
but retired before the election, in the hope of securing Wise's return.
As Wise held Hearne's old place, and was regarded by him as an usurper,
and as Bilstone held in his possession the new keys which Bowles
originally procured to render Hearne's old ones useless, the latter
consequently regarded them both with great disfavour, and rejoiced
greatly at the result of the election. His account of it is printed in
the _Reliqq. Hearn._ vol. ii. p. 712.

Forty-two MS. volumes came to the Library by the bequest of the widow of
Mr. Francis Cherry, of Shottesbrooke, Berks, the early patron and
constant friend of Hearne[199]. Cherry himself died Sept. 23, 1713, and
Hearne says that he had intended to give his MSS. to his old _protegee_.
They are not, for the most part, of very great value, but among them are
various volumes by Dodwell; and a book written and bound by Q. Eliz. is
described above, under the year 1628. Hearne was greatly annoyed at a
paper of his own, containing reasons for taking the oath of allegiance,
which he had written in 1700, coming into the Library amongst these
books; he endeavoured in vain (although now in these days his legal
right would be at once recognized) to recover it, and it was published,
to his still greater annoyance, by the Whigs, under the editorship of
Mr. Bilstone, the janitor. An account of Hearne's endeavours to regain
it, together with a notice of Mrs. Cherry's bequest and of the MSS., is
to be found in Dr. Bliss' Appendix to his _Reliqq. Hearn._ ii. 899-906.

In the Register of Readers admitted by favour occurs, under date of
April 19, the name of 'C. Wesley, AEdis Xti alumn.,' written in a neat
and clear hand. The name of his great brother is not found in any
register extending over the period of his stay in Oxford. At this time
the Library appears to have been almost entirely forsaken. Between
1730-1740 it rarely happens that above one or two books are registered
to readers in a day, while often for whole days together not a single
entry occurs; and since, in the register for this period, the books are
noted down by three hands, it can hardly be possible that the blanks are
due to the negligence of librarians (as might have been supposed were
the same handwriting found throughout) rather than to the lack of
students.

[199] In the Benefaction Register they are erroneously entered as coming
by the bequest of Mr. Cherry himself.


A.D. 1735.

On the death of Hearne (June 10, 1735) fifteen of the MSS. of Thomas
Smith, D.D., of Magdalen College, the well-known and learned non-juror,
came to the Library, Smith having bequeathed them to Hearne on this
condition. With them came also copies of Camden's _Britannia_ and
_Annales Eliz._, with MSS. notes by their author. The rest of Smith's
MSS. appear to have come to the Library together with the mass of
Hearne's collections, included in Rawlinson's bequest in 1755. They
amount altogether to 138 thin volumes, containing notes, extracts and
letters on all kinds of subjects. There is a very full _written_
catalogue of their contents, in two volumes. Three Greek MSS. were given
by Smith himself on his return from his travels in the East about 1681.


A.D. 1736.

The Library was enriched with the collections of the well-known
antiquary, Thomas Tanner, Bishop of St. Asaph, who died on Dec. 14, in
the preceding year. By his will, dated Nov. 22, 1733, he bequeathed his
MSS. to the Library together with such printed books, not already there,
as the Curators and Library-keeper should think fit to accept. But he
directed his executor to burn all his sermon-notes, 'and other little
pieces and attempts in divinity,' as well as all his own private papers
and letters. The largest portion of his MSS. (nearly 300 volumes out of
467) consists of the papers which he himself says he 'bought of
Archbishop Sancroft's executors,' but which it is said in the _Gent.
Mag._ for 1782 (cited by Gough in his _British Topography_, i. 126) he
bought for eighty guineas of the bookseller Bateman, to whom Sancroft's
executors had sold them[200]. Together with these, and perhaps not now
to be distinguished, are some of the collections of Dr. Nalson between
1640 and 1660. To the latter a claim was made through Archdeacon Knight,
in 1737, by Dr. Williams of St. John's College, as grandson of Nalson;
but the Bishop's brother replied (as we learn from a copy of his answer
and of another letter written by him in 1753) that the Bishop had
bought them at Ely, where they had lain neglected for many years, and he
thought possibly from some one living in the house which Nalson
inhabited when Prebendary of Ely. The matter ended by Dr. Williams
waiving any claim which he had, in consideration of the place of deposit
being the Bodleian[201]. Sancroft's and Nalson's papers together
comprise a large series of letters of the time of the Civil War, of the
highest interest and value, from most of the leading personages on both
sides, including Charles I, Rupert, the Protector Oliver, and Hampden.
There are also collections relating to various dioceses, with very much
that illustrates both the ecclesiastical and literary history of the
seventeenth century[202]. A selection from the Civil War letters was
published, in 2 vols. in 1842, by Rev. Henry Cary, M.A. (a son of the
translator of Dante, and at that time an assistant in the Library),
under the title of _Memorials of the Civil War_; but the transcripts
were very carelessly made, and scarcely a single letter can be trusted
as faithfully and _verbatim_ representing the original. Another volume
of selections from Sancroft's papers was published, with much better
care, by Will. Nelson Clarke, D.C.L., 8^o, Edinb. 1848, entitled, _A
Collection of Letters addressed by Prelates and Individuals of high rank
in Scotland, and by two Bishops of Sodor and Man, to Archbishop
Sancroft, in the reigns of Charles II and James VII_[203]. A catalogue
of the MSS., compiled by the Rev. Alfred Hackman, M.A. (now
Sub-librarian) was published in 1860, in a thick quarto volume, forming
vol. iv. of the general Catalogue of MSS. The several volumes are
described in brief in the body of the work; but a very full Index is
subjoined, in which the contents of all the letters and papers are
entered in detail. The printed books (upwards of 900) contain many, by
the Reformers and their opponents, which are of the utmost rarity in
early English black-letter divinity. One of these is an unique copy (as
it is believed) of an edition, printed without place or date, of the
_Pore Helpe_, of which there is also an unique copy of another edition,
equally without place or date, among the Douce books. It has not
hitherto been remarked that two copies, or two editions, exist of this
metrical satire. Another volume, which contains several tracts printed
by W. de Worde and Gerard Leeu, has also two by Caxton, hitherto
unnoticed as exhibiting his type, and described in the Catalogue simply
as being books without place or date. The merit of their discovery as
Caxton's is due to the recent research of Mr. Bradshaw, the Librarian of
the Cambridge Library. The one is a clean and perfect copy of the
_Governayle of Helthe_, with the verses called _Medicina Stomachi_, of
which the only copy known to Mr. Blades is in the library of the Earl of
Dysart at Ham House; the other a wholly unknown quarto edition, in the
same type, of the _Ars Moriendi_.

Unfortunately, when Tanner was removing his books from Norwich to
Oxford, in Dec. 1731, by some accident in their transit (which was made
by river) they fell into the water, and were submerged for twenty
hours[204]. The effects of this soaking are only too evident upon very
many of them[205]. The whole of the printed books were uniformly bound
in dark green calf, apparently about fifty years ago; the binder's work
was well done, but unhappily all the fly-leaves, many of which would
doubtless have afforded something of interest, with regard to the books
and their former possessors, were removed. Many of Tanner's own letters
are to be found amongst the Ballard and Hearne MSS., as well as
scattered here and there in other collections; and one volume of them
was purchased in 1859. Some coins were given by him in 1733. We learn
from the Accounts that Thomas Toynbee, an undergraduate of Balliol
College (B.A. 1743, M.A. 1745), received L12 12_s._, in 1741, for making
a list of Tanner's MSS., and that E. Rowe Mores, the subsequently
well-known antiquary, arranged some of his deeds in 1753-4.

[200] Eighteen other volumes of Sancroft's MSS. are to be found in the
Harleian Collection, Brit. Mus., and a few among Wharton's books at
Lambeth.

[201] Thirty-one other volumes of Nalson's papers were offered for sale
to Dr. Rawlinson in 1751 (Letter to H. Owen, Rawl. MS. C. 989. fol.
121). Four volumes which belonged to Bp. Moore's library were restored
to Cambridge out of Tanner's collection in 1741; two of them were
registers of the Abbeys of St. Edmund's-bury and Langley.

[202] Some collections for Wiltshire made by Tanner did not come to
Oxford with his library, but were forwarded by his son in 1751.

[203] Dr. Clarke appears not to have been aware of the existence of an
interesting volume of letters from Scottish Bishops to Bishop Compton of
London, among Rawlinson's MSS. (C. 985), which was rescued by Rawlinson,
with the rest of Compton's papers, from being destroyed as waste paper.
Other letters, including a large number from Archbishop Burnett of
Glasgow, addressed to Archbishop Sheldon, are in a volume of the Sheldon
papers.

[204] _Gent. Magaz._ 1732, p. 583.

[205] None of them, however, are now in the state described in a note in
_Letters by Eminent Persons_, ii. 89, where it is said that many 'have
received so much injury as to be altogether useless, crumbling into
pieces on the slightest touch.' Perhaps the unique copy of _The Children
of the Chapel Stript and Whipt_ which Warton says was amongst Tanner's
books, but which has never appeared in any Bodleian Catalogue, may have
perished from this cause. For a notice of the disappearance of two of
Churchyard's tracts, see under the year 1659, p. 81.


A.D. 1738.

The fourth Catalogue of the printed books appeared this year in two
volumes, folio, of 611 and 714 pp. respectively. It is still a Catalogue
of great use and value, from its remarkable accuracy, and from the
abundance and minuteness of its cross-references. The secret history of
this Catalogue, however, as of the preceding one, is related by Hearne.
By him, as he himself frequently tells us[206], the greater portion of
it was virtually prepared soon after his appointment as Sub-librarian,
in 1712 (although no mention of his name is made in Fysher's preface),
and to him, therefore, its accuracy is most probably in a great measure
due[207]. He compared every book in the Library with Hyde's Catalogue,
and corrected many mistakes, adding notes here and there about anonymous
and synonymous authors, and, as the Vice-Chancellor (Dr. Maunder, of
Balliol) was anxious to have an Appendix issued, he transcribed for this
purpose all his corrections and additions into two folio volumes,
'which' (to take up now Hearne's own account in his _Diary_, vol. lxii.
p. 58, under date 1717) 'now lye and are to be seen in the Library....
But at last Dr. Hudson thought it more convenient with respect to
himself that both Dr. Hyde's Catalogue and my Appendix should come out
together as one intire work, so that he might have the honour of all.
Upon which he employed one Moses Williams, his servitour[208] (the Dr.
being then Fellow of University College), to transcribe it, the said
Williams being in the Dr.'s debt. When Williams had done, he demanded
the remaining part of his money, which was about ten or twelve pounds,
the rest having been stopped by the Dr. for the debt just now mentioned.
The whole was fifty lbs. which he bargained for with the Dr. But when
Williams desired the said ten or twelve pounds, of which he had
immediate occasion to discharge the fees and charges for the degree of
Bachelor of Arts, the Dr. was in a very great passion, and refused to
pay it. Upon which Williams moved the matter so far that the Catalogue
was laid before the Delegates of the Press, and the Dr. was called
before them to his very great mortification, and they told him that
'twas highly unreasonable to stop the poor lad's money. Upon which the
Dr. in a great rage and fury paid him; otherwise Williams had most
certainly put him into the Court. This Catalogue was last summer ordered
to be printed, and the Dr. was refunded his money; but 'tis not yet put
to the press, the Dr. being unwilling it should be printed till such
time as he hath done Josephus.' But Hudson died before his Josephus was
finished, and the proposed new Catalogue was consequently begun, and
only begun, by his successor, Bowles. The latter printed as far as p.
244 of vol. i. and p. 292 of vol. ii. His successor, Fysher, upon his
appointment, engaged the assistance of his friend, Emmanuel Langford,
M.A., Vice-Principal of Hart Hall, who completed the second volume,
while Fysher himself finished the first. At the end of the second volume
appeared an announcement of a supplemental Catalogue, as being ready for
the press, containing the books existing in College Libraries but
wanting in the Bodleian. This, however, never appeared, and nothing is
known of the MS. from which it was to have been printed. Fysher's
Catalogue appears, from the University Accounts, to have occupied from
1735 in preparation, for which, and for transcribing it for the press,
L194 5_s._ were paid to him.

Alexander Pope gave, together with copies of his _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_,
a curious volume, containing a series of 178 Portraits of East Indian
Rajahs and Great Moguls, down to Aurung-Zebe. It is now numbered Bodl.
MS. Sansk. 14.

The names of various persons (all, probably, undergraduates) employed in
the Library about this time are learned from the Accounts:--1738, Mr.
Hall; 1740-1, Mr. Allen; 1740, Mr. Toynbee (Ball. Coll., B.A., 1743);
1743, Mr. Jessett (All Souls', B.A., 1745); 1747, Mr. Thomas Winbolt
(All Souls', B.A. 1748).

[206] Pref. to _Chron. de Dunstaple_, p. xii. _Autobiogr._ p. 11, &c.

[207] It is fair to say that Fysher remarks in his preface that
experience proved how entirely vain and foolish were the reports which
had been spread abroad of the little or the nothing which, after the
labours of their predecessors, would remain for the then editors to do.

[208] Moses Williams took his degree as B.A. in 1708. One John Williams
(probably the one of that name who is entered in the Register of
Graduates as having taken the degree of B.A. at Oriel in 1704) appears
to have been a colleague of Hearne's in employment in the Library, about
1704. For in a letter written to Hearne, March 20, 1705/6, one year and
a-half after he had quitted Oxford, in which he mentions his having been
appointed to the Head-mastership of Ruthin School in November, 1705, he
refers to 'our dear friends that are in irons at the Bodleian Library,
there being several, I suppose, that have been manacled in that pleasing
prison since my being there.' (_Rawlinson Letters_, vol. xii. f. 1.)


A.D. 1739.

Notification was given to the Vice-Chancellor, on June 9, that thirteen
pictures (of no great value) were bequeathed to the Gallery by Dr. King,
Master of the Charter House, by his will dated July 28, 1736, together
with L200 for the cleansing and repairing the frames of the pictures
already in the Gallery. A list of these thirteen is given in Gutch's
transl. of _Wood's Annals_, vol. ii. pp. 969, 970. The pictures
themselves are now in the Randolph Gallery. Dr. King also left a legacy
of L400 to the University to prepare a complete and handsome edition of
Zoroaster's Works, in Persian, with a Latin translation and notes; but
this portion of his bequest was not accepted.


A.D. 1740.

A copy of the Byzantine historian, Pachymeres, was restored in this
year, by order of the Curators, to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, from
which it had by some means been removed; but the College paid L4 4_s._
for its restoration.


A.D. 1745.

In this year died Nathaniel Crynes, M.A., Fellow of St. John's College
and Superior Bedel of Arts, to which latter office he had been elected
Jan. 26, 1715/16[209]. He bequeathed to the Library all such books out
of his own valuable collection as it did not already possess, the rest
going to his own College. His books in octavo and smaller sizes, with a
few quartos, are still kept distinct, under his own name, and number 968
volumes, many of which are of great rarity. Seven MSS. were presented
by him in 1736. In 1727 he purchased some duplicates from the Library,
for L3 16_s._ 8_d._, and a story, told by Warton in connection with this
purchase, of his fortunately rejecting books which bore the name of
Milton, will be found under the year 1620. There is a biographical
notice of him in J. Haslewood's Introduction to Juliana Barnes' _Boke of
St. Alban's_, Lond. 1810, pp. 86-7. In the Accounts for 1746 occur
special payments to Fr. Wise, and to one Mr. Gerard Bodley, for
cataloguing and arranging Crynes' books.

[209] He left a benefaction to his successor in this office, which now
produces L13 6_s._ 8_d._ yearly.


A.D. 1746.

Trott's _Clavis Linguae Sanctae_. See 1686.


A.D. 1747.

Dr. Fysher, the Librarian, died on Nov. 4, at Mr. Warneford's, of
Sevenhampton, Wilts, and was buried, on Nov. 7, in Adam de Brome's
chapel in St. Mary's Church, Oxford. And on Nov. 10, Rev. Humphrey Owen,
B.D., Fellow of Jesus College (afterwards D.D., and chosen Principal of
his College in 1763), was unanimously elected his successor[210].
Rawlinson mentions, in a letter to Owen of April 15, 1751, that he had
heard a complaint that in Fysher's time 'there was a great neglect in
the entry of books into the Benefactors' Catalogue, and into the
interleaved one of the Library; as to these objections, my answers were
as ready as true, at least I hope so, that Dr. Fysher's indisposition
disabled him much from the duty of his office, and that I did not think
every small benefaction ought to load the velom register[211].'

[210] Memorandum by Owen himself, in reply to a question from Rawlinson,
Rawl. MS. C. 989, f. 142. This volume contains a collection of letters
to Owen, chiefly from Browne Willis and Rawlinson, between the years
1748-1756. It affords proof that Owen was what his correspondents would
call an 'honest' man, _i.e._ a Jacobite. In one letter, Willis sends him
a Latin inscription in praise of Flora Macdonald, which he says is 'on a
fair lady's picture, in an honest gentl. seat in the province of St.
David's;' in another, Rawlinson sends him, as a contribution to the
Oxford collection of verses on the death of Frederick, Prince of Wales,
this Jacobite epitaph:--

    'Here lies Fred., Down among the dead;
    Had it been his Father, Most had much rather;
    Had it been his Brother, Better than any other;
    Had it been a Sister, More would have mist her;
    Wer't the whole generation, Happy for the nation;
    But since it is only Fred., There is no more to be said.'

[211] Rawl. MS. C. 989.


A.D. 1749.

A Runic Primstaff, or Clog Almanack, was given by Mr. Guy Dickens, a
gentleman-commoner of Ch. Ch. It is now exhibited, together with another
(_see_ p. 105), in the glass case near the entrance of the Library.
Pointer, in his _Oxoniensis Academia_ (p. 143), mentions that an
explanation of the Primstaff was given by himself; the Accounts show
that it was also in this year.

A number of coins were added to the Numismatic Museum, which had been
collected by the late Librarian, Fysher.


A.D. 1750.

A copy _on vellum_, with illuminated initials, &c., of vol. i. (reaching
to the Psalms) of the Vulgate Bible, printed by Fust and Schoeffer in
1462, was bought for L2 10_s._! The volume was imperfect at the end,
ceasing at Job xxxii. 5, and seven leaves followed in contemporary and
beautiful MS., which also ended imperfectly at Ps. xxxvi. 9, with one
leaf wanting at the end of Job. But when the Canonici Collection of MSS.
was received from Venice, in 1818, among some fragments which were found
in one of the boxes were fourteen leaves of a MS. Bible, which were at
once recognised as being part of those wanted to complete this book, and
which left only four still deficient. The volume came to the Library
from the collection of Nic. Jos. Foucault, 'Comes Consistorianus,' many
other of whose MSS. and printed books came by Rawlinson's bequest; but
through how many hands the missing leaves had passed in the seventy
subsequent years ere they were thus marvellously restored to their
place, it is impossible to tell[212].

[212] The story of this recovery has been already related by Archd.
Cotton in his _Typographical Gazetteer_, p. 339, where by mistake he
refers the original purchase to the year 1752.


A.D. 1751.

A benefaction from Lord Crewe, Bishop of Durham, of L60 to the Librarian
and of L10 for the purchase of books, appears for the first time in the
Accounts for this year. These sums (which are still annually paid into
the General Fund) proceed from a bequest of L200 _per ann._ from Crewe
(who died Sept. 24, 1721) to the University. A proposal to give these
same sums to the Library, with other assignments for the remainder, was
brought forward in Convocation on June 5, 1723, but the scheme was then
rejected[213]. And thus nearly thirty years seem to have elapsed from
the time of the bequest before the share for the Library was definitely
fixed and paid.

Charles Gray, M.P. for Colchester, presented a MS. Roll, containing a
Survey of the estates of the Abbey of Glastonbury at the Dissolution,
which is printed by Hearne in his Appendix to Langtoft's _Chronicle_,
vol. ii. pp. 343-388, from a copy made from this original; and an
inscription, in the Ph[oe]nician language, upon a white marble stone,
which was brought, with many others, from Citium, in the island of
Cyprus, by Dr. Porter, a physician of Thaxted in Essex. The stone
measures twelve inches in length, by three in breadth, and three in
depth. It has been frequently engraved: first by Pocock (_Travels in the
East_, vol. ii. pl. xxxiii. 2); next by Swinton (_Inscriptiones Citieae_,
1750, and _Philos. Trans._ 1764); afterwards by Chandler, Barthelemy,
&c; and, lastly, by Gesenius (for whom former copies were collated with
the original, and corrected, by Mr. Reay) in his _Scripturae Linguaeque
Ph[oe]niciae Monumenta_, published in 1837, where the inscription is
described at pp. 126-133, part i., and engraved at pl. xi. part iii. It
appears to be an epitaph by a husband in memory of his wife. The stone
is now kept in one of the Sub-librarians' studies.

Thomas Shaw, the well-known Eastern traveller, bequeathed his collection
of natural curiosities, which was sent to the Ashmolean Museum, and the
MS. of his own travels, with corrections, and other papers. Copies of
Caxton's _Game of the Chesse_ and _Recuyell of Troye_ were given by Mr.
James Bowen, of Shrewsbury, painter[214].

[213] Hearne's _Diary_, xcvii. 12.

[214] A MS. vol. of collections by him relating to the history of
Shropshire, dated 1768, is among Gough's books, Salop MS. 20.


A.D. 1753.

In May of this year died Henry Hyde, Lord Cornbury, son of Henry Hyde,
Earl of Rochester, and great-grandson of the great Earl of Clarendon. He
had made a will bequeathing all the Chancellor's MSS. to the University
of Oxford, to be printed at their press, and the profits to be devoted
to a school for riding and other athletic exercises in the University,
should such an institution be accepted, or else to other approved uses.
Dying before his father, through the effects of an accident, his bequest
was void, as he was never actually in possession of the papers to which
it referred; but after the death of his father in Dec. following, his
sisters, who were the co-heiresses, carried out his will, by sending all
the Clarendon MSS. in their possession to the University on the same
conditions[215]. From these was published in 1759 (in which year the
papers appear to have been deposited in the Library) the _Life_ of the
first Earl, reprinted in several editions up to the year 1827. This was
followed, in 1767-73, by the publication, under the editorship of Dr.
Rich. Scrope, of Magd. Coll., of vols. i., ii. of a selection from the
_State Papers_; of which vol. iii. appeared under the editorship of Mr.
Thos. Monkhouse, of Queen's Coll., in 1786. During the progress of this
publication, however, the original collection of MSS. papers was very
largely increased by the acquisition of various portions which had long
before been detached. Some were obtained, before the publication of vol.
i., from the executors of Rich. Powney, LL.D.; and many were presented
to the University, before the publication of vol. ii., by the Radcliffe
Trustees, who had bought them for L170 when sold by auction in 1764 by
the executors of Joseph Radcliffe, Esq., one of the executors to Edward,
third Earl of Clarendon, who died in 1723. Dr. Douglas (afterwards
Bishop of Salisbury), who was employed in the latter purchase, himself
bought and gave some MSS. which had belonged to Mr. Guthrie, and was
instrumental also in procuring some letters from Viscountess Middleton,
&c. Again, before the publication of vol. iii. many further papers were
purchased by the Radcliffe Trustees from a Mr. Richards, near Salisbury
(from whose father Mr. Powney had obtained his portion), and from Mr. W.
M. Godschall, of Albury, Surrey. And lastly, about eight or ten years
ago, several boxes (including Clarendon's own iron-bound _escritoire_),
containing miscellaneous papers, were forwarded by the Clarendon
Trustees in final discharge of their trust.

A MS. of the _History of the Rebellion_, in seven volumes, together with
one of the _Contemplations_, in three volumes, was forwarded in 1785 or
1786 by the Duke of Queensbury. The former MS. appears to be that from
which the first edition was printed by the Earl of Rochester[216].

A complete Calendar of the _Clarendon State Papers_ is now in progress
under the care of several editors. As far as it has advanced, it has
proved the good judgment and the extreme correctness with which the
printed selection was made; but as that selection ended with the
Restoration, while the papers themselves reach on to 1667, the year of
the Earl's banishment, the later portion may be expected to contain much
of fresh interest and value.

It was in this year also that the first portion of the MSS. of Thomas
Carte, the 'Englishman' and historian, came to the Library. It has been
universally supposed that his voluminous and invaluable collections came
_en masse_ subsequently to his death, but the Library Register shows
that Oxford was indebted to him for a considerable and important portion
during his life. In this year we find that he sent the papers which
relate to the life of the great Duke of Ormonde, with a large number of
others bearing on the history of Ireland from the time of Queen
Elizabeth, comprised in thirty volumes folio and quarto. In the
following year, shortly before his death (which occurred on April 2,
1754) he forwarded twenty-six more of his Irish volumes, in folio,
marked A, B, C, D, &c. And in 1757 nine more of the same series were
forwarded by his widow from Caldecot, near Abingdon, according to an
entry in the old Catalogue, which appears to correspond to one in the
annual Register to the effect that four more boxes were forwarded by the
executors, 'by order of Rev. Mr. Hill.' The remainder of his collections
were left in the hands of his widow, who, re-marrying to Mr. Nicholas
Jernegan, or Jerningham (of the family seated at Cossey, Norfolk),
bequeathed them, upon her death, to him, with the reversion to the
University of Oxford. While they were in Mr. Jernegan's possession they
were largely used by Macpherson for his publication of _State Papers_,
for which use of them L300 were paid; and the agreement entered into by
the publisher Cadell, when borrowing some of them for this purpose, is
preserved in the MS. Catalogue of the collection. In 1778, however, Mr.
Jernegan disposed of his life-interest to the University, for (as
Nichols[217] was informed by Price) the sum of L50, and the remainder
were consequently at once transferred to the Library. The collection
numbers altogether 180 volumes in folio, fifty-four in quarto, and seven
in octavo, besides several bundles of Carte's own papers; and is
accompanied by a very full list of contents, compiled by Carte himself,
in one folio volume. The mass of papers relating to Ireland which these
volumes contain is enormous, drawn chiefly from the stores accumulated
by Ormonde at Kilkenny Castle; to which are added miscellaneous
historical collections derived from Lords Huntingdon, Sandwich, and
Wharton. There are, also, several volumes of extracts and papers,
collected with immediate reference to Carte's _History of England_. And
a third, and especially interesting, portion consists of the papers of
Mr. David Nairne, under-secretary to James II during his exile, which
reach from 1692 to 1718, and fill two volumes in folio and eight or nine
in quarto. It was from these that Macpherson chiefly compiled his
_Original Papers_, published in 1775, in 2 vols., 4^o. A Report upon the
contents of the collection, with special reference to Ireland (omitting
the Nairne papers) was made to the Master of the Rolls by T. Duffus
Hardy, Esq., and Rev. J. S. Brewer in 1863, and was printed in the
following year, together with an extremely useful summary of the
contents of the various volumes, and a reference-table of the letters,
&c., printed by Carte in his Ormonde volumes. In consequence of this
Report, two Commissioners (the Rev. Dr. Russell, President of Maynooth,
and J. P. Prendergast, Esq.) were appointed to examine the whole series,
and select for transcription all historical and official papers of
interest relating to Ireland, with a view to the preservation of copies
in the Record Office at Dublin. Several transcribers are therefore now
continuously employed in transcribing for this purpose the papers
selected by the Commissioners. Some notice of the MSS. is to be found in
the Record Commission Report for 1800, p. 354.

[215] On Feb. 4, 1868, a scheme for the appropriation of the accumulated
fund (now amounting to about L12,000), which had been approved by the
Clarendon Trustees, was accepted by Convocation. The money is to be
applied to the erection of laboratories, &c., at the University Museum,
for the Professor of Experimental Philosophy.

[216] In the Benefaction Book this gift is entered under 1793, but it is
mentioned in the Preface to vol. iii. of the _State Papers_, dated May
29, 1786, as having been '_lately_' given. Another copy of part of the
_History_, partly written by William Edgeman, who was Hyde's secretary
at Scilly and during his first exile, came to the Library among
Rawlinson's MSS., by whom it was bought at the sale of the Chandos
Library in 1747 for L1 10_s._!

[217] _Lit. Anecd._ ii. 514.


A.D. 1754.

In this year the MS. collections of Rev. John Walker, D.D., of Exeter
(son of Endymion Walker, of Exeter; born 1674, dec. 1747[218]), from
which he compiled his valuable and laborious work, _The Sufferings of
the Clergy_, were forwarded to the Library by his son, William Walker, a
druggist in Exeter, as appears from a letter from the latter preserved
among papers relating to the Library in the Librarian's study. The
annual accounts, however, mention the gift under the year 1756. Dr.
Walker had expressed in his book (_pref._ p. xliii.) his intention to
deposit his papers in some public repository, and his purpose was
fortunately thus carried out. The papers have recently been bound, and
now form twelve volumes in folio and eleven in quarto, with a few papers
still in bundles[219]. A large number of letters from many among the
sufferers and their representatives are here preserved; but,
unfortunately, Walker's own handwriting is often hard to decipher. Many
pamphlets which belonged to him (identified by the peculiar handwriting
in MS. notes) are amongst a vast series recently bound and placed in
continuation of the Godwyn Tracts; and several volumes of pamphlets
written by Dissenters were given by himself in the years 1719-21.

The name of Hogarth occurs in the list of donors, as presenting his two
engravings of the _Analysis of Beauty_, which he had published in the
preceding year.

[218] His successor in his Exeter prebend was appointed in that year.

[219] The present writer, in answer to an enquiry in _Notes and Queries_
in 1862 (3rd series, i. 218), said that these papers were amongst the
_Rawlinson_ MSS. This mistake arose from the fact that the least
important portion had recently been found in a mass of papers belonging
to that collection, but they did not at any time themselves form part of
it.


A.D. 1755.

This year is remarkable for the number and variety of the collections
with which, during its course, the Library was enriched, comprehending
those of Rawlinson, Furney, St. Amand, and Ballard.

On April 6 died Richard Rawlinson, D.C.L., a Bishop among the
Non-jurors, notwithstanding that he passed in the world as a layman.
From the time of Bodley, Laud, and Selden, he was the greatest
benefactor the Library had known; and his only rivals since his own day
have been Gough and Douce. In point of numbers, his donation of MSS. far
exceeded all. From the short autobiographical notice of himself, given
in his own collections for a continuation of the _Athenae Oxon._ (where
he has inserted a small portrait of himself, engraved, without his name,
by Van der Gucht), we learn the following particulars. He was born Jan.
3, 1689/90, in the Old Bailey, his father being Sir Thos. Rawlinson, who
was Lord Mayor of London in 1706. On March 9, 1707/8 (having been
previously at St. Paul's School and Eton), he was matriculated as a
commoner of St. John's College; but in consequence of the death of his
father in the same year, he became a gentleman-commoner in 1709; B.A.,
Oct. 10, 1711[220]; M.A., July 5, 1713; Governor of Bridewell and
Bethlehem Hospitals, 1713; F.R.S., 1714; ordained (among the Non-jurors)
Deacon, Sept. 21, and Priest, Sept. 23, 1716[221]. He then travelled
through the whole of England, except some of the northern parts, and in
1719 went into Normandy, where, while staying at Rouen, he received
from Oxford the degree of D.C.L. by diploma of June 30. Thence he went
to the Low Countries, where, in Sept., he was admitted into the
Universities of both Utrecht and Leyden, and returned into England in
Nov. On June 12 in the following year, he started on a longer journey,
which he extended through Holland, France, Germany, the whole of Italy,
and Sicily, to Malta; and returned on the death of his elder brother
Thomas, also a well-known book-collector, in 1726. During his six years'
travels, he had seen, he remarks, four Popes[222]. Admitted F.S.A. May
10, 1727. On March 25, 1728, he was consecrated Bishop, by Bishops
Gandy, Doughty, and Blackbourne, in Gandy's Chapel[223]. Appointed a
Governor of St. Bartholomew's Hospital in March, 1733. He resided at
London House, Aldersgate, so called from having been in early days a
mansion of the Bishops of London. During his lifetime he was a constant
benefactor to the Library; in the years 1733-4-5-7-8-9 and 1750, he is
entered in the great Register for special gifts of coins, books, and
pictures. Some hundreds of printed books, now in the gallery called
'_Jur._,' and elsewhere, were given by him at these times; while many of
the Holbeins and other valuable portraits in the Picture Gallery came
from him[224]. A few MSS. also came from him during his lifetime which
are now placed in the general Bodley collection. But at his death all
his collections came _en masse_[225]; collections formed abroad and at
home, the choice of book-auctions, the pickings of chandlers' and
grocers' waste-paper, everything, especially, in the shape of a MS.,
from early copies of Classics and Fathers to the well-nigh most recent
log-books of sailors' voyages[226]. Not a sale of MSS. occurred,
apparently, in London, during his time, at which he was not an
omnigenous purchaser; so that students of every subject now bury
themselves in his stores with great content and profit. But history in
all its branches, heraldry and genealogy, biography and topography, are
his specially strong points. The printed books bequeathed by him in
selection from his whole library (of which those in quarto and smaller
sizes are still called by his name) amounted to between 1800 and
1900[227], but the MSS. to upwards of 4800, besides a large number of
old charters and miscellaneous unsorted deeds.

The staff of the Library being very small at the time, as well as
ill-paid[228], and such an accession being completely overwhelming, the
officers appear to have contented themselves with duly entering the
printed books, while leaving the MSS. entirely neglected. About the
beginning of the present century some steps were taken towards a
Catalogue, and a portion were arranged and numbered; still later,
considerably more was done. But it was only on the accession of the
present Librarian to the Headship, that the full extent of Rawlinson's
collections was ascertained. Every corner of the Library was then
thoroughly examined, and cupboard after cupboard was found filled with
MSS. and papers huddled together in confusion, while, last not least, a
dark hole under a staircase, explored by the present writer on hands and
knees, afforded a rich 'take,' including many writings of Rawlinson's
Non-juring friends. The whole number of volumes thus brought to light
amounted to about 1300.

The classes into which the whole collection of MSS. is now divided are
the following:--

1. _Class A_: 500 volumes, chiefly of English history, with a few
theological books. Amongst these are the _Thurloe State Papers_, in
sixty-seven volumes, of which all of importance were published by Birch,
in seven vols. folio, in 1742. These papers were found after the
Revolution concealed in the ceiling of garrets in Lincoln's Inn, which
belonged to the rooms formerly occupied by Thurloe; and they still bear
too evident marks of the damp to which they were there exposed. They
passed through Lord Somers' and Sir Jos. Jekyll's hands into those of a
bookseller, Fletcher Gyles, from whom Rawlinson obtained them in 1751,
and who, as Rawlinson says, asked at first an 'immoderate price' for
them. Another series is that of _Miscellaneous Papers of Sam. Pepys_, in
twenty-five volumes, containing his correspondence, collections on
Admiralty business, &c.[229] These, together with many other volumes
which belonged to Pepys (including many curious dockyard account-books
of the times of Henry VIII and Queen Elizabeth) were 'redeemed from
_thus et odores vendentibus_[230].' Of another acquisition Rawlinson
writes thus:--

    'There was lately an auction here of Mr. Bridgeman's books,
    curiosities, and MSS., who was formerly clerk of the Council to K.
    James II, and register to the Ecclesiastical Commission. Here I laid
    out some pence, and picked up some curiosities; the original
    minute-book of the High Commission, the proceedings every session
    with the names of those present, by which it appears that Bp. Sprat
    was not so innocent as he would persuade us in his letter to the
    Earl of Dorset to think, and that notwithstanding all his shiftings
    he sat to the penultim. Session of that Court;' [Letters canvassing
    the nobility, gentry, justices of the peace, &c., in favour of the
    repeal of the Test;] '3 letters from the D. of Monmouth, two to the
    King and one to the Queen, desiring an audience in which he would
    give them such satisfaction, ... very pathetic, and deserved at
    least some attention[231]; ... several volumes of treaties, ...
    instructions to ambassadors. Very remarkable are those to Lord
    Castlemain on his going to Rome, the King's two letters to the Pope,
    a third of revocation, all personal and complement, but no embassy
    of obedience. Copy-books of letters, private and public, wrote by K.
    Charles and K. James II, from which might be collected such a fund
    of true tho' secret history, that the prize is not to be
    valued[232], and will, I hope, be a standing monument of great
    events, and preserved in Bodley's repository, with the papers of Bp.
    Turner and other great men at and since the year 1688[233].'

There are also some papers in this class and in Class C which belonged
to Archbp. Wake, about which Rawlinson writes, on June 24, 1741[234]:--

    'My agent last week met with some papers of Archbp. Wake at a
    chandler's shop; this is unpardonable in his executors, as all his
    MSS. were left to Christ Church. But quaere whether these did not
    fall into some servant's hands who was ordered to burn them, and Mr.
    Martin Folkes ought to have seen that done. They fell into the
    curate's hands of St. George, Bloomsbury.'

2. _Class B_ numbers 520 volumes nominally, but really, including double
numbers, 534. They comprise heraldry and genealogy (including MSS. of
Sir Richard and Sir Thos. St. George, W. Wyrley, Guillim, Ryley, Glover,
Le Neve, and other heralds) English and Irish history, and topography,
including several monastic chartularies. Among the genealogical MSS. is
a remarkable collection of pedigrees, in twelve volumes, which the
present writer ascertained to have been compiled by Thomas Wilkinson,
Vicar of Laurence Waltham, Berks, between about 1647 and 1681. They are
arranged alphabetically, as far as the letter P in tolerable order and
regularity, but thenceforward only in a rough and incomplete state.
Unfortunately the handwriting is far from clear, and the ink has often
made it worse. Among the volumes relating to _Essex_, _Norfolk_,
_Suffolk_, &c., are twelve or thirteen which belonged to William Holman,
a voluminous collector for the first-mentioned county, who incorporated
the gatherings of Rev. John Ousley and Thos. Jekyll. Morant, the
historian of Essex, obtained the larger portion of Holman's books; some
are in the British Museum; and the remainder ('the refuse,' says Morant)
were bought by Rawlinson in 1752 for L10[235]. Besides the
above-mentioned volumes, there are a large number of Holman's MSS. which
are kept distinct, and which have been recently bound in fourteen folio
volumes, eleven quarto, and five octavo. Under _London_ are some
nineteen or twenty volumes of Diocesan papers which belonged to Bp. John
Robinson. They formed (with one volume in Class A and several in Class
C) a mass which are described by Rawlinson, as follows[236]:--

    'I lately rescued from the grocers, chandlers, &c. a parcel of
    papers once the property of Compton and Robinson, successively Bps.
    of London. Amongst those of the first were original subscription and
    visitation books, letters and conferences during the apprehensions
    of Popery amongst the clergy of this diocese, remarkable
    intelligences relating to Burnet and the Orange Court in Holland in
    those extraordinary times before 1688[237], minutes of the
    proceedings of the Commissioners for the Propagation of the Gospel,
    and a great variety of other papers. Amongst those of Bp. Robinson,
    numbers of originals relating to the transactions at the treaty of
    Utrecht, copies of his own letters to Lord Bolingbroke, and
    originals from Lord Bolingbroke, Lord Oxford, Electress and Elector
    of Hanover, Ormonde, Strafford, Prior, &c.; letters from the Scots
    deprived Bishops to Compton, and variety of State papers. They
    belonged to one Mr. [Anth.] Gibbon, lately dead, who was private
    secretary to both the afore-mentioned prelates.'

Under _Bucks_ are Rawlinson's own collections for a history of Eton
College, and under _Middlesex_ and _Oxon._ his parochial collections for
those counties. The _Irish_ MSS. include many of great antiquity and
value which formerly belonged to Sir James Ware, _e.g._ Tigernach's
Annals, Annals of Ulster, Lives of Saints, Dublin Chartularies, Arms of
Irish families, Irish poems, &c. Among them is the often noticed Life of
St. Columba by Magnus O'Donnell, written in 1532, which was bought by
Rawlinson at the Chandos sale for twenty-three shillings.

Of these two classes a Catalogue, in one volume quarto, was printed in
1862, which was compiled by the writer of this volume[238]. A full index
to the contents of all the MSS. has been made, which remains at present
unprinted, but may possibly at some time appear in conjunction with a
volume describing the contents of the succeeding class.

3. _Class C_ comprehends 989 MSS. of very miscellaneous character, but
chiefly consisting of law, history and theology, with a few medical
works. Among the theological portion are papers of John Dury, the
zealous labourer for union amongst Protestants in the time of Charles I,
papers of Bedell and Usher, some volumes of John Lewis of Margate[239],
and some interesting Service-books of English use, including a
Pontifical given to Salisbury Cathedral by Bp. Roger de Martivale
between 1315-1329, and an early Oseney book. Several volumes consist of
papers of Dr. Chamberlaine (author of _Notitia Angliae_) and Mr. Henry
Newman, secretaries of the Societies for the Propagation of the Gospel,
and Promoting Christian Knowledge, which, Rawlinson mentions in a
letter, dated April 28, 1744, (Ballard MS. ii.) that he had then
recently purchased. Some seventeen or eighteen volumes came from the
library of Bp. Turner of Ely (together with others in the classes called
_Miscellaneous_ and _Letters_), containing papers of himself and his
brother, Dr. Thomas Turner, Dean of Canterbury. These were obtained by
Rawlinson in 1742, who in them became master, as he says, of a
considerable treasure for ten guineas[240].' Early English poets are
represented by Lydgate, Rolle of Hampole, William of Nassyngton, and
others[241]; and one volume contains a few Welsh verses. A catalogue
exists in MS. The volumes relating to English history in classes A and C
are noticed in the return printed in the Record Commission Report for
1800, pp. 348-353.

4. The class entitled _Miscellaneous_ numbers about 1400 volumes, and
includes the greater part of those which were discovered in 1861. They
are so entirely miscellaneous that it is impossible to give in a few
lines a real idea of their nature. History, travels, biography, and
religious controversy largely prevail. There are papers of Sir Thos.
Browne, Dr. Dee, Maittaire, Peter Le Neve, Ashmole[242], John Dunton,
and Bagford, with a very large mass of _Hearniana_. Of the Non-jurors,
there are papers of Grascome, Gandy, Spinckes, Hickes, Fitzwilliams,
Howell, and Dean Granville. Some nine or ten volumes are occupied with
the accounts of the Royal Surveyor of Works from 1532 to 1545. The
Church-wardens' accounts of Sutterton, Lincolnshire, from 1493 to 1536,
and of St. Peter's, Cornhill, from 1664 to 1689, are also found
here[243]. There is a large series of Italian MSS. (amongst other
foreign books, chiefly French) which bear on English history, as
containing copies of reports made to Rome by Papal agents and to Venice
by ambassadors, together with the proceedings at many conclaves. These
were bought by Rawlinson at Sir Jos. Jekyll's sale of the Somers' MSS.
in 1739, for L3 15_s._[244] There is also a mass of papers of J. J.
Zamboni, Venetian Resident in England, and a friend of Maittaire. A
considerable number of autograph signatures, barbarously cut out from
various books, by Thomas Rawlinson, were found in loose papers; these
have now been mounted and bound in two volumes. There are not, however,
many of interest among them, except several of Ben Jonson.

5. In _Letters_ there are upwards of 100 volumes, comprising all the
multifarious correspondence of Hearne with Anstis, Bagford, Baker,
Barnes, Dodwell, Smith, &c., the correspondence of Rawlinson, Dr. Thomas
Turner, and Bishop Francis Turner, Philip Lord Wharton, and Sir Edm.
Warcupp. One volume contains a few letters by Dryden, Pope, Edw. Young,
&c. There is also a series of letters in three vols. relating to Dr.
John Polyander, of Kerckhoven, Professor of Divinity at Leyden, and
eight or nine volumes of Vossius' correspondence, being the originals
from which the folio volume published at London in 1691 was printed.

6. The class of _Poetry_ contains 221 volumes, including Chaucer,
Hoccleve, Lydgate, Capgrave (Life of St. Catherine), and Rolle of
Hampole, with Piers Plowman and the Romance of Parthenope of Blois (both
imperfect). The majority are miscellaneous poems and plays of the
seventeenth century. One volume, containing the words of anthems with
the composers' names, is supposed to be the Chapel-book used by Charles
I.

Of the three last-mentioned classes, a brief MS. list was drawn up with
great neatness and accuracy by Dr. Bliss, in 1812 (reaching in the case
of the _Miscell._ only as far as No. 407); an index, in continuation, to
all the later additions is now in process of formation.

7. Of _Sermons_ there are about 200 volumes; many of which are by
Non-jurors, including three by Rawlinson himself. Ten volumes are by
Dan. Price, Dean of St. Asaph, 1696-1706; and one volume is said to
contain unpublished sermons by Leighton, apparently from notes taken by
some auditor at the time of delivery. These have been copied for
publication in a proposed new edition (under the care of Rev. W. West,
of Nairn, N.B.) of Leighton's whole works.

8. A selection of Biblical and Classical MSS., with a few others,
amounting to 199, are placed in the case marked '_Auctarium_,' G.
Amongst these are a few Greek volumes, with critical _Adversaria_ of
Maittaire, Josh. Lasher, and J. G. Graevius. Early copies of Statius,
Ovid, Virgil, &c. form part of the classics; while among the Biblical
MSS. is a grand eighth-century copy (written in rounded minuscules, in
the same style as the Rushworth book) of the Gospels of St. Luke and St.
John, and a beautiful eleventh-century Psalter with the commentary of
St. Bruno. One other fine book is a Psalter written for Ch. Ch.
Cathedral, Dublin, by the care of Stephen Derby, Prior, about A.D.
1360-80, with remarkable miniatures illustrating Psalms xxxix, liii,
lxix, lxxxi, and xcviii.

9. Of _Missals_, _Horae_, and other Service-books, there are (besides
those which are scattered in Classes C and G Auct.) about 130. These
(most of which are of French origin, bought out of the library of Nic.
Jos. Foucault[245], of Flemish, or of Italian) are now incorporated with
a large collection of Liturgical books, which are called _Canon.
Liturg._, from their having formed part of the Canonici collection
purchased in 1818.

10. A small collection of _Statutes_, comprising sixty-five volumes, is
kept distinct. They consist of the Statutes of various Colleges at
Oxford and Cambridge, of the Cathedrals of Lichfield, Hereford,
Worcester, Chester, Manchester, Canterbury, Exeter, and the Abbey of
Westminster; of the Order of the Garter (various copies); of Hospitals
at Croydon, Chipping-Barnet, and Chichester; of the Gresham Charities,
together with the Charters of London and Bristol; Statutes made by the
Chapter of Paris for the Church of the Holy Sepulchre there in 1421, and
an eighteenth-century transcript of the Statutes of the College at
Bayeux. But the volume of most interest in this class is the rare
printed volume of the Statutes of Thame School, issued in 1575. Of this,
only five other copies are known, one kept at the School itself, a
second in the custody of the Warden of New College (the Visitor of the
School), a third in the Royal Library, Brit. Mus., and the fourth and
fifth, both on vellum, in the possession of the Earl of Abingdon and in
the Grenville Library, Brit. Mus. Rawlinson's copy, which wants the
title, has in it the book-plate of John, Duke of Newcastle.

11. Of the MSS. of Dr. Thomas Smith, the Non-juror, of Magd. Coll.,
Oxford, there are 139 volumes, which (with the exception of a few
bequeathed by Smith himself) came into Rawlinson's hands together with
the rest of Hearne's collections. They are noticed above, under the year
1735.

12. Besides the multitude of books, scattered throughout every class of
Rawlinson's library, which belonged to Hearne or were written by him,
there are about 150 small duodecimo volumes of Hearne's daily diary and
note-books, commencing in July, 1705, and ending on June 4, 1735, the
last actual entry being on June 1, and his decease occurring on June 10.
The character of this diary is well known from the two volumes of
Extracts published by Dr. Bliss in 1857, with the title, _Reliquiae
Hearnianae_. But it must not be supposed that these volumes comprehend
all that deserves publication; the diary throughout is full of like
curious personal history and anecdote, antiquarian gleanings and amusing
gossip, mixed, of course, with a good deal of occasional acrimony
against those with whom Hearne came in collision either from
differences in academic or literary matters, or from their being
friends of the 'Elector of Hanover.' There is scarcely a subject falling
within its writer's scope of observation on which this Diary may not be
consulted; and as it is written in his usual plain and neat hand, with
an index to each volume, it is fortunately easy for reference. Hearne
bequeathed all his MSS., and books with MSS. notes, to Mr. William
Bedford, son of the well-known bishop among the Non-jurors, Hilkiah
Bedford; the legatee died on July 11, 1747, and Rawlinson bought them of
his widow for L105. Hence it was that they came finally to the place
where Hearne would himself have rejoiced to see them deposited. The
autobiographical sketch of Hearne's own life, which Huddesford published
in 1772, in conjunction with the lives of Leland and Wood, is preserved
among the _Miscellaneous_ MSS. Of this Rawlinson says, in a letter dated
June 19, 1740[246]: 'Tom's own life was so low and poor a performance
that I recommended it to Bedford to burn.' On account, probably, of the
numerous reflections which the Diary contained on living persons,
Rawlinson ordered in his bequest that it should not be open to
inspection until after the lapse of seven years. He laid also the same
restraint upon the use of his own papers noticed in the next paragraph.

13. Large collections were made by Rawlinson for a continuation of
Wood's _Athenae Oxon._ These contain much valuable biographical
information, derived in very many cases from the actual information of
the persons noticed, letters from many of whom are inserted. There are,
in all, twenty-five volumes, folio and quarto; among the folios there
are two series of notices arranged alphabetically, and one volume (also
alphabetical) of notices of Cambridge men admitted _ad eundem_; the
quartos contain 1331 notices, numbered but not arranged in any other
order, with one general alphabetical index. These collections, together
with Hearne's Diaries, and Rawlinson's Non-jurors' Papers, and notes of
his own Travels, were included in a fourth and last codicil, dated Feb.
14, 1755, which directed that all these papers should be kept locked up
during a period of seven years. By the same codicil also were conveyed
numerous engravings by Vertue, portraits of Englishmen, some paintings,
and a collection of Roman, Persian, Italian, and English medals[247].
Some of the Italian medals, particularly a fine set in copper of the
members of the House of Medici, are now exhibited in a case in the
Picture Gallery[248]. By a codicil of June 17, 1752, Rawlinson had
previously bequeathed a series of medals of Popes, of which he remarks,
'as they are, I take them to be one of the most complete collections now
in Europe;' together with twenty shillings _per annum_ for enlarging and
continuing the set[249].

14. Finally (as regards MSS.), Rawlinson left a mass of ancient
charters, five hundred of which were catalogued by Mr. Coxe some years
ago, and of vellum deeds and documents of all kinds, chiefly of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. He left, also, all the
copper-plates containing engravings of some of his ancient documents and
other curiosities, as well as a large number of impressions from these
plates. Many of these impressions were sold at the sale of Bodleian
duplicates in 1862. The copper-plates were added to his bequest by a
second codicil, dated July 25, 1754, in which he desired that
impressions should be taken from them, to be sold in one volume for the
use and benefit of the University. A last item in Rawlinson's
miscellaneous gifts (besides various bas-reliefs, figures, a Jewish
vessel, Muscovite cup, &c.) was a large collection of matrices of
ancient conventual and personal seals, chiefly foreign; together with
impressions of seals, ancient and modern, in metal and wax, 'most of
which,' it is said in the Will (p. 4), 'were of the collection of Mr.
Charles Christian, the celebrated seal engraver.' The wax impressions
are now exhibited in the Picture Gallery.

Distinct from Rawlinson's other printed books is a curious series of
Almanacs, in 175 volumes, extending from 1607 to 1747, which were sent
to the Library in 1752. Some volumes in continuation, from 1747 to 1768,
were given by Sir Rob. H. Inglis, Bart., in 1846[250]. Another series,
between 1571 and 1663, is in the Ashmole collection.

By his second codicil, of July 25, 1754, Rawlinson bequeathed a fee-farm
rent of L4 _per annum_ to the Under-librarian, in consideration of his
taking charge of the MSS., but clogged with the strange conditions that
he should not be a doctor in any faculty, married, or in Holy
Orders[251]. The receipt of this sum is entered in the Accounts for
1756, but in no subsequent year.

The following is an alphabetical list of the principal libraries from
which Rawlinson's MSS. were collected, with the dates (so far as
ascertained) at which these libraries were dispersed:--

  Acton (Oliver), of Bridewell Hosp.
  Bacon (Thos. Sclater), 1737.
  Bridgeman (Will. & Rich.), 1742.
  Chandos (Duke of), 1747.
  Clarendon (Henry, Earl of). Through _Chandos_.
  Clavell (Walter), 1742.
  Compton (Bishop). See p. 175.
  Foucault (Nic. Jos.), 'Comes Consistorianus[252],' 1721.
  Gale (Samuel), 1755.
  Graves (Rich.), of Mickleton. Through _Hearne_.
  Halifax (Montagu, Earl of), 1715.
  Hearne (Thomas), 1747.
  Holman (William). See p. 174.
  Jekyll (Sir Joseph), 1739.
  Le Neve (Peter), 1731.
  Maittaire (Mich.), 1748.
  Mead (Richard, M.D.), 1754-5.
  Murray (John), 1749.
  Oxford (Harley, Earl of), 1743-5.
  Pepys (Samuel). See p. 172.
  Pole (Francis), 175-.
  Powle (Henry), in 1689 Speaker of House of Commons.
  Rawlinson (Thomas), 1734.
  Robinson (Bishop). See p. 175.
  St. George (Sir Thomas).
  Somers (Lord). Through _Jekyll_.
  Spelman (Sir Henry).
  Spinckes (Rev. Nathan), 1727.
  Turner (Bishop). See p. 176.
  Usher (Archbishop). Through _Hearne_.
  Wake (Archbp.). See p. 174.
  Ware (Sir James). Through _Clarendon_ and _Chandos_.
  Whiston (William).

On July 15, a bequest of printed books and MSS. was received from Rev.
Richard Furney, M.A., Archdeacon of Surrey (who had been schoolmaster at
Gloucester, 1719-1724, and who died in 1753,) by the hands of the Rev.
John Noel, of Oriel College. The printed books (nineteen in all)
consisted almost entirely of early editions of classics. The MSS. (six
folio volumes) are thus described in a list made by the Librarian,
Humphrey Owen, at the time of their receipt:--

    '1, 2, 3 and 4 contain collections relating to the history and
    antiquities of the city, church and county of Gloucester. 5, 6, a
    fair copy, seemingly prepared for the press, of the history and
    antiquities of the said city, church and county, by the Arch-deacon
    himself, or some friend of his from whom these papers came into his
    hands.'

The gift comprised also two ancient brass seals, and eighteen original
deeds, amongst which is the original confirmation charter granted to
Gloucester Abbey, by Burgred King of Mercia, in 862. This remarkable
deed (which is not printed in Kemble's _Codex_) is in admirable
preservation, is written in seventeen lines, with five lines containing
seventeen signatures, and measures sixteen inches in width and ten and
one-third in length. There are also original grants to the abbey from
Hen. II and Stephen, and a confirmation, 29 Edw. I, of Magna Charta,
which has a magnificent impression of the beautiful great seal. The
deeds are noticed in the Report on the Public Records for 1800, p. 354.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the death on Sept. 5, 1754, of James St. Amand, Esq.[253] (formerly
of Lincoln College), a bequest of books, MSS., coins, &c. which had been
made by a will dated Nov. 9, 1749, accrued to the Library, being
received in the year 1755. The books consist chiefly of the then modern
editions of the classics, and of the writings of modern Latin scholars;
such of them as the Library did not need, were to go to Lincoln
College. The MSS., sixty-eight in number, comprise various papers
relating to the history chiefly of the Low Countries[254], together with
notes and indices by St. Amand himself to Theocritus and other Greek
poets, Horace, &c. They are described by Mr. Coxe, in vol. i. of the
Catalogue of MSS., cols. 889-908. The main part of the residue of his
property was bequeathed to Christ's Hospital, together with a picture of
his grandfather James St. Amand, done in miniature and set in gold, with
the singular proviso that the picture should be exhibited, and the part
of the will relating to these bequests be read, at the first annual
court of the Hospital, and also that the picture be shown annually to
the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford, if required. Should a refusal to show the
picture be persistently made, or any of the conditions of the will be
avoided, then all the residue was to be given to the University, first
to increase the stipend of the chief Librarian to L120 and of the second
Librarian to L70, but only so long as both of them were unmarried, and
then to be devoted to the purchasing of books and MSS., specially of
classic authors.

Many of his books have a book-plate, which the author has ascertained to
be that of Dr. Arthur Charlett; being the initials A. C., interlaced
with the same repeated in an inverse way, surrounded by piles of books,
and with the motto, 'Animus si aequus, quod petis hic est.'

       *       *       *       *       *

By the bequest of George Ballard (the author of the _Memoirs of Learned
Ladies_), who died on June 24, the Library became enriched with
forty-four volumes of Letters, chiefly addressed, by ecclesiastical and
literary personages of all ranks, to Dr. Arthur Charlett, Master of
University College, between the reigns of James II and George I. For the
biographical and bibliographical history of the time these letters
possess great interest and value; it was from them that the _Letters by
Eminent Persons_, published in 1813, by Rev. John Walker, M.A., Fellow
of New College, were chiefly drawn. No printed catalogue of them has yet
appeared, but the Library possesses a MS. index to the contents of each
volume, and a more complete and minute index has been recently
commenced[255]. Besides the Letters, Ballard bequeathed some other MSS.,
in number twenty-three, among which is a volume of various voyages and
expeditions, 1589-1634; Sir Edm. Warcupp's autograph account of the
treaty in the Isle of Wight;[256] a dialogue between a tutor and his
pupil, by Lord Herbert, of Cherbury; the second book of the
_Supplication of Soules_, by Sir Thos. More, a precious little volume of
103 closely-written duodecimo pages, entirely in the handwriting of the
great Chancellor; the _Universitie's Musterings_, by Brian Twyne;
collections by Ant. a Wood; a small volume of Gloucestershire notes,
supposed by Guillim; and several volumes written by Mr. Elstob and his
sister. An extract from Ballard's will, with a list of his MSS., is in
the Register marked 'C.'

Ballard was originally a stay-maker or mantua-maker at Campden,
Gloucestershire; but, following the study of antiquities with great
ardour, became well known and highly esteemed amongst all of like
pursuits. At the age of forty-four he was appointed one of the eight
clerks of Magdalen College, being matriculated Dec. 15, 1750, but never
took any degree. He bequeathed to the College Library some of his books
which were there wanting. The fullest account of him will be found in
vol. ii. of _A Register of St. Mary Magd. College_, by J. R. Bloxam,
D.D., pp. 95-102, 1857. Some letters from him are printed in Nichols'
_Lit. Hist._ iv. 206-226.

The very valuable MS. of the letters of Gilbert Foliot, Bishop of London
(which are of great importance for the illustration of the history of
Thomas a Becket), now numbered _E. Musaeo_ 247, was given by Sir Thomas
Cave, Bart. It is described in the Benefaction Book as 'liber
rarissimus; per totam Angliam unum hoc tantum modo exstat exemplar.' The
letters were first printed by Dr. Giles, together with the Lives of
Becket, in his series of _Patres Ecclesiae Anglicanae_, in 1845.

[220] This date is from the _Register of Graduates_; Rawlinson says,
Mich. Term, 1710.

[221] By Bishop Jeremy Collier, in Mr. Laurence's Chapel on College
Hill, London. (See a communication from the present writer in _Notes and
Queries_, 3rd series, iii. 244.) He appears to have endeavoured to
conceal from the world his clerical character. In a letter to T.
Rawlins, of Pophills, Warw. in 1736, he requests him not to address him
as _Rev._ (Ballard's MSS. ii. 6.) Some volumes of Sermons in his
handwriting are among his MSS. His writing is of a very broad, rude, and
clumsy character; and it is singular that his brother Thomas wrote a
hand very similar. Richard usually signs only with his initials,
separated by a cross, 'R + R.'

[222] The small note-books kept on his journeys, containing epitaphs,
inscriptions, accounts of places visited, &c., are preserved (but,
unfortunately, in an imperfect series) among his Miscellaneous MSS.

[223] See _Notes and Queries_, 3rd series, i. 225.

[224] Two beautiful miniature portraits of James Edward, son of James
II, and his wife Clementina Sobieski, which could not, probably, at the
time be safely exhibited, have recently been exhumed by the Librarian
from the obscurity to which they had been consigned, and are now hung in
the Picture Gallery. In Feb. 1749/50, Rawlinson sent Kelly's 'Holy
Table,' a marble slab, covered with astrological figures (engraved in
Dr. Dee's _Actions with Spirits_), which, he says, had been subsequently
in the possession of Lilly. It is now in the Ashmolean Museum.

[225] By the terms of his will, dated June 2, 1752, and printed in 1755,
he bequeathed all his MSS. of every kind (excepting private papers and
letters) to the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University, to
be placed in the Bodleian Library, or in such other place as they should
deem most proper, for the use and benefit of the University, and of all
other persons, properly and with leave resorting thereto with a view to
the public good; and to be kept separate and apart from every other
collection. With these he gave also all his books printed on vellum or
silk (of which latter kind there are two or three small specimens), all
his deeds and charters, and all his printed books containing any MSS.
notes, together with various antiquities and miscellaneous curiosities.
His MS. and printed music he bequeathed to the Music School. Of the
Musical library preserved in this room, a MS. Catalogue was made a few
years ago by Rev. Robert Hake, M.A., then Chaplain of New College, now
Precentor of Canterbury.

[226] _Apropos_ of log-books, it may be mentioned that whereas it
appears from the eighth Report of the Deputy-Keeper of the Records, p.
26, 1847, that the earliest log among the Admiralty Records is of the
year 1673, there are several of about the same date and a little earlier
to be found in Rawlinson's collection.

[227] Among the printed books are two copies of Archbp. Parker's rare
_De Antiq. Eccl. Brit._, 1572. One of these is the identical copy
described by Strype in his _Life of Parker_, and which was then in the
possession of Bp. Fleetwood of Ely; the other (which was given to the
Library by Jos. Sanford, B.D., Balliol Coll., in 1753) was presented to
Rich. Cosin by John Parker, the Archbishop's eldest son, Jan. 5, 1593.
Owen, the Librarian, notes on the cover that Dr. Rawlinson tells him
this copy was bought at the sale of the library of his brother, Thos.
Rawlinson, by the Earl of Oxford, for L40. A collection of the original
broadsides proclamations issued during the whole of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, in beautiful condition, forms a remarkable and splendid
volume; the collection is complete, except that a few proclamations, of
which printed copies are wanting, are supplied in MS. As far as the year
1577 they are printed by Richard Jugge, sometimes alone and sometimes in
conjunction with John Cawood; thenceforward they are printed by the two
Barkers, first by Christopher, and afterwards by Robert. They appear to
have been collected in the reign of James I. A printed chronological
table of contents is prefixed, together with a portrait of the Queen,
engraved by Fr. Delaram, with six lines of verse by 'Jo. Davies, Heref.'
At the year 1559 a leaf is inserted containing the arms of Q. Mary of
Scotland quartering those of England (the assumption of which by Mary
gave irreconcileable offence to Q. Eliz.), beautifully painted, with the
note, 'Sent out of Fraunce, in July, 1559,' and these lines below:--

    'The armes of Marie Queene Dolphines of ffraunce,
    The nobillest Lady in earth for till aduaunce:
    Off Scotland queene, and of Ingland also,
    Off Ireland als, God haith providit so.'

This leaf is one of two copies executed for Cecil and Q. Eliz. Two,
probably unique, 'red-letter' books are also among the rarities of
Rawlinson's printed collection. The one is a Sermon on Ps. iv. 7,
preached before Charles I at Oxford by Josias Howe, B.D., of Trinity
College. It is printed entirely in red, and has no title. It was bought,
included in a volume of miscellaneous sermons, out of Dr. Charlett's
library, by Hearne, who says in a MS. note that only thirty copies were
printed. A description of it is given by Dr. Bliss in his _Reliquiae
Hearn._ vol. ii. pp. 960-1, where Hearne's note is printed in full. The
other is a volume entitled, _The Bloody Court; or, the Fatal Tribunal_,
being an account of the trial and execution of Charles I. The lengthy
title is printed by Dr. Bliss, _ubi supra_. Some few of Rawlinson's
printed books came to the Library among Gough's, in 1809.

[228] The salaries being miserably insufficient, the recognised duties
of the officers appear to have been simply the cataloguing the few books
that were received in ordinary course, and attending upon the readers.
Consequently for any other work, for arranging or cataloguing any new
collections, &c., special payments were always made. A somewhat amusing
instance of this occurs under the year 1722, when the Librarian craved
payment for making with his own hand certain new hand-lists, &c., but was
refused. However, he carried on his claim from year to year until it was
admitted to the amount of L5 15_s._ 6_d._ in 1725. And as the funds were
insufficient to defray in this way the extra cost of cataloguing such a
collection as Rawlinson's, hence, doubtless, came the neglect which it
experienced. Such work was so clearly understood to form no part of the
Librarians' regular duties, that Rawlinson says, in a letter to Owen,
Apr. 15, 1751 (MS. C. 989), 'I think large benefactors should pay the
expense of entries into the Bodleian, as their books are useless till so
entered.'

[229] It was chiefly from these that the two volumes published in 1841
under the title of _Life, Journals, and Correspondence of S. Pepys_ were
compiled. Unfortunately the editor, or his copyist, appears to have been
sometimes unable to read the MSS., and at other times very careless; his
book therefore abounds with errors. The following is one of the worst,
as it libels the memory of a statesman who deserved better treatment:
Sir R. Southwell is represented as saying in a letter to Pepys (vol. i.
p. 282) that he has lost his health 'by sitting many years at the
_sack_-bottle,' whereas the poor man had lost it by sitting many years
'at the _inck_-bottle.' A line or two farther on, Southwell's occupation
with 'some care and much sorrow,' is changed into 'love, care and much
sorrow.' Certain '_Novelles_,' or newspapers, which Mr. Hill sends to
Pepys are explained (vol. ii. p. 135) to have been the _Novellae_ of
Justinian! Throughout the book proper names are frequently made to
become anything but proper to their owners.

[230] Letter from Rawlinson to T. Rawlins, Jan. 25, 1749/50; Ballard MS.
ii. 115.

[231] The same volume (now A. 139^b) also contains Monmouth's
acknowledgment, written and signed by himself on the day of his
execution, that Charles II had declared that he was never married to his
mother; witnessed by Bishops Turner and Ken, together with Tenison and
Hooper. This is now exhibited in the glass case at the entrance to the
Library.

[232] In his delight at his new purchase, Rawlinson seems to have
exaggerated the interest of these volumes.

[233] Letter to T. Rawlins, Feb. 24, 1742/3; Ballard MS. ii. 78.

[234] To the same; _Ibid._ 59.

[235] Gough, _Brit. Topogr._ i. 370, 345.

[236] Letter, June 24, 1741; Ballard MS. ii. 59.

[237] Including some letters from Ken while Chaplain to Princess Mary.
These papers of Compton are in class C.

[238] For the description of the contents of three of the Irish volumes,
the author was indebted to an experienced Irish scholar, Standish Hayes
O'Grady, Esq.

[239] A volume of collections by him relating to the early versions of
the Bible was bought in 1858 for five guineas.

[240] Ballard MS. ii. 87.

[241] One curious volume is described by Sir F. Madden in his preface to
_Syr Gawayne_, printed by the Roxburghe Club in 1839.

[242] With relation to these Rawlinson says, in a letter dated Feb. 25,
1736-7, that he had bought, about two years since, some of Ashmole's
papers from his heirs, including some of Dugdale's (Ballard MS. ii. 11).

[243] For Parish Registers, see under 1821.

[244] Two MS. volumes of the Relations of Venetian Residents in various
countries were given to the Library by Will. Gent, in 1600, and Sir
Rich. Spencer, in 1603.

[245] From this library Rawlinson also obtained some French editions of
the _Horae_, printed on vellum.

[246] Ballard MS. ii. 41.

[247] The clock, still in use in the Library, made by Robinson in
Gracechurch Street, was one of the items comprised in this codicil,
where it is described as a 'table clock,' then in the custody of Mr.
John King, a bookseller, in Moorfields.

[248] These were bought, 'very cheap,' at Mrs. Kennon's sale, Feb. 24,
1755, by a dealer named Angel Carmey, who sold them to Rawlinson for L10
10_s._ Carmey's letter conveying his offer of sale is preserved in
Rawlinson's copy of the sale catalogue.

[249] It does not appear, however, that this sum was ever paid.

[250] A curious, and probably unique, little 'Almanacke for XII yere,
after the latytude of Oxenforde,' printed in 48^o (measuring two and
a-half inches by one and three-quarters), by Wynkyn de Worde, 'in the
fletestrete,' in 1508, was presented by David Laing, LL.D., the eminent
Librarian to the Writers to the Signet, Edinburgh, in 1842. The Library
also possesses two copies of a sheet Almanack, by Simon Heuringius, for
1551, printed by John Turck, at London; and other almanacs for 1564,
1567, and 1569. A volume containing five almanacs for the year 1589 was
bought in 1857.

[251] With the same perverse eccentricity he ordered that the recipients
of his endowments for the Keepership of the Ashmolean Museum and the
Professorship of Anglo-Saxon, should be unmarried (in the former case
only M.A. or B.C.L.), not a native of Scotland, Ireland, or the
Plantations, nor a son of such native, nor, in the case of the Museum,
even educated in Scotland, and not a member of either the Royal Society
or the Society of Antiquaries.

[252] Autobiographical memoirs by Foucault, extending to 1719, were
published under the editorship of F. Baudry, 4^o. Paris, 1862, in the
French Government series of _Documents inedits sur l'Histoire de
France_. The editor remarks in the preface (p. xli.), 'On ignore en
quelles mains la bibliotheque de Foucault passa apres sa mort [1721]. Le
P. Le Long nous apprend seulement qu'elle fut vendue, et probablement
dispersee.'

[253] A record of his birth and baptism is entered in a family register
kept by his father on the fly-leaves of a splendid copy of the folio
Prayer-Book of 1662. He was the second son; born in Covent Garden, Apr.
7, 1687; bapt. Apr. 21, by Dr. Patrick, the sponsors being Major-Gen.
Werden, Sir Peter Apsley and the Countess of Bath. Prince George of
Denmark was one of the sponsors to his elder brother, George. He had
also a sister, Martha.

[254] Amongst these is a large collection of MS. news-letters written
from various places abroad about the years 1637-1642; one of these,
containing particulars of movements of the Swedish and Imperialist
armies, is printed, as a specimen, in _Letters by Eminent Persons_,
1813, vol. i. pp. 15-17.

[255] References to many particulars relative to Thoresby, Bishop
Gibson, White Kennett and Hickes (with a few others) are given in J.
Nichols' notes to the _Letters of Archbp. Nicolson_ (2 vols. 1809), an
interesting and varied biographical miscellany, but which is guilty of
the capital crime of omitting an index.

[256] This ought, apparently, to have reached the Library much sooner,
through the hands of Dr. Charlett; since it has the following
inscription on the fly-leaf: 'Given by the Hon^ble. S^r. Edmund Warcup
(being all writ w^th his own hand at y^e Isle of Wight at y^e Treaty)
to the Public Library in Oxford, to be placed there when I thought
fitting.

                                      'AR. CHARLETT.

  'Univ. Coll.
  Nov. 25, 97.'


A.D. 1756.

Dr. Samuel Johnson presented the account of Zachariah Williams' attempt
to ascertain the longitude at sea, which he had published under
Williams' name in the preceding year; and, as Warton noted[257], he
entered it with his own hand in the Library Catalogue. The entry is
still to be seen, with a memorandum of its being in Johnson's hand, in
an interleaved, and now disused, copy of the Catalogue of 1738.

[257] Boswell's _Life of Johnson_, edit. 1835, vol. ii. p. 54.


A.D. 1759.

Above forty Syriac, Greek and Arabic MSS. are recorded in the Registers
to have been presented by Henry Dawkins, Esq., of Standlynch, Wilts,
who had collected them while travelling in the East with Robert Wood,
whose works on Baalbec and Palmyra he presented at the same time. There
are now _sixty_ MSS. in Syriac alone which pass under the name of
Dawkins, some of which are of great age and value. They are described in
Dr. R. Payne Smith's Catalogue of the Syriac MSS. Mr. Dawkins died in
London, June 19, 1814, aged eighty-six.

Swedenborg's _Arcana C[oe]lestia_, published anonymously, in 8 vols.
were sent 'by the author, unknown.' The same donor, still unknown, sent
in 1766 _Selecti Dionys. Halicarn. tractatus_.

In this year and in 1761 published music began to be received from
Stationers' Hall, and to be entered in the Register. It remained piled
up in cupboards until about twenty-three years ago, when it was all
disinterred and carefully arranged by Rev. H. E. Havergal, M.A., then
Chaplain of New Coll. and Ch. Ch., and an assistant in the Library (now
Vicar of Cople, Beds.), and bound in some 300 or 400 volumes. Since that
time two further series of musical volumes have been arranged and bound.

A meagre list of the pictures, &c., in the Picture Gallery and Library
was printed by the Janitor (or Under-janitor), N. Bull, and 'sold by him
at the Picture Gallery.' It fills twelve duodecimo pages. A new edition,
'with additions and amendments,' including the pictures in the Ashmolean
Museum, was issued by him in 1762, in sixteen octavo pages. This was, as
it seems, the first list that had been issued since Hearne printed his
original Catalogue in his _Letter containing an Account of some
Antiquities between Windsor and Oxford_. A list, equally meagre with
Bull's, was published by W. Cowderoy, Janitor, in 1806. He was succeeded
in office (before 1825) by ---- Lenthall; on whom followed the present
Janitor, J. Norris, appointed in 1835. By him a new Catalogue, enlarged
with biographical notices, was issued, filling sixty pages; which was
reissued, with a few alterations, in 1847, when such of the pictures as
were not portraits had been removed to the new Randolph Gallery. As all
the portraits were a few years ago distinctly labelled, but few copies
of the Catalogue have, consequently, been since sold, and no new edition
has appeared.


A.D. 1760.

The MSS. of the eminent antiquary, Browne Willis, who died on Feb. 5, in
this year, came to the Library by his bequest. They were received from
his executor, Dr. Eyre, on April 24. There are altogether fifty-nine
volumes in folio, forty-eight in quarto, and five in octavo, consisting
chiefly of Willis' own collections for his various works, with much
correspondence intermingled and a few older historical papers. There is
much of value for general ecclesiastical topography and biography,
besides his large collections for the county of Bucks, and special
volumes relating to the four Welsh Cathedrals. He desired in his will
that the books should be placed in the Picture Gallery, 'next to those
of my friend Bishop Tanner;' both collections have since been removed to
a room on the floor below, but the presses which contain them still
adjoin each other. Many of his letters are to be found among Ballard's
and Rawlinson's papers, and show throughout both the warm interest which
he took in ecclesiastical renovation and religious work generally, but
particularly in the state of the Church in Wales, and the continual
efforts which he made to rouse slothful and negligent dignitaries to a
sense of their duties and responsibilities. The restoration of the
ruined and desolate Cathedral at Llandaff was an object especially dear
to him. By his will, which was dated Dec. 20, 1741, he bequeathed to the
University, besides his MSS., all his numerous silver, brass, copper and
pewter coins, and also his gold coins, if purchased at the rate of L4
per oz., as the best return he could make for the many favours he
acknowledged to have been conferred on him and on his grandfather, Dr.
Thomas Willis, Professor of Natural Philosophy. This latter provision of
his will was at once carried into execution; in the following year the
University purchased one hundred and sixty-seven gold coins for L150 at
L4 4_s._ per oz., and two more in 1743 for L8 5_s._ His other coins were
given by him in the years 1739, 1740, 1741, 1747 and 1750; and by a
codicil to his will dated Feb. 5, 1742, he desired that the whole
collection should be annually visited on the Feast of St. Frideswide
(Oct. 19), which day he had himself been wont annually to celebrate in
Oxford. His first gift to the Library was in the year 1720, when he gave
ten valuable MSS., chiefly historical (now placed among the general
_Bodley_ Series), together with his grandfather's portrait.

A bequest of L70, towards the purchase of an orrery, was received from
Rev. Jos. Parsons, M.A., of Merton College.


A.D. 1761.

Kennicott's collations of Hebrew Biblical MSS., made during the years
1759-60, were received from him on Dec. 17, in this year, according to
an entry in the Register. But all his MSS., collations, correspondence,
and miscellaneous books (including one in Zend, upon cloth), were
subsequently deposited in the Radcliffe Library, whence they were
removed, in 1862, together with the other contents of that collection,
to the place of their present deposit, the New Museum.


A.D. 1762.

The west, or Selden, end of the Library was re-floored at a cost of L66.
Unchaining of those books which hitherto, on account of their
accessibility to all comers, were fastened to their shelves, appears to
have been commenced in this year.


A.D. 1763.

The Janitor, Rev. John Bilstone, M.A., was deprived of his office by Dr.
Owen, the Librarian, on account of his neglecting to perform his duties
in person. An action for arrears of salary was subsequently brought by
Bilstone against Owen[258]. He died Feb. 13, 1767, at which time he held
three livings, besides his Chaplaincy of All Souls' College.

[258] 'See papers in _Files_, 1763; Archiv.' (MS. note in Dr. P. Bliss'
_Collectanea_.)


A.D. 1764.

The _Editio princeps_ of Homer, Florence, 1488, was bought for L6 6_s._


A.D. 1768.

H. Owen, the Librarian, and Principal of Jesus College, died in March of
this year, and was buried in his College Chapel. In his room was elected
the Rev. John Price, B.D., of Jesus College, 'after a severe contest
with Mr. Cleaver, of Brasenose, afterwards head of that College and
Bishop of St. Asaph, who used to say that he was indebted to Mr. Price
for his mitre, for had he obtained the Bodleian he should have there
continued, instead of becoming tutor in a noble family, and so placed in
the road to advancement. In this election the votes were equal, and Mr.
Price, being senior, was nominated by the Vice-Chancellor[259].' Price
appears to have been employed in the Library as early as the year 1760,
when a payment of L8 8_s._ was made to him; in 1766 he signs, together
with Owen and Thomas Parker, an account of books received from
Stationers' Hall.

[259] Note by Dr. Bliss in the edition of Wood's _Life_ published, in
1848, by the Eccl. Hist. Soc. p. 88.


A.D. 1770.

The Library was largely enriched with books which were then modern, in
which it appears to have been very deficient, by the legacy of the
library of Rev. Charles Godwyn, M.A., Fellow of Balliol College. The
collection, which is still in the main kept undivided (although a few
folio and quarto volumes are placed in the general class marked _Art._),
consists chiefly of works in English and general history, civil and
ecclesiastical, published in the eighteenth century, and includes
besides the later Benedictine editions of the Fathers. There is also a
series of theological and literary pamphlets; to which have been added
of late years upwards of 2400 volumes, of all dates and on all subjects,
which are now all alike numbered, for convenience sake, in connection
with Godwyn's own. The residue of his property, after payment of all
claims and bequests, formed a further portion of his legacy; and the
interest upon L1050 which accrued from this source, still forms part of
the annual income of the Library.


A.D. 1771.

A payment of L2 12_s._ 6_d._ was made in this year (or rather, at the
close of 1770) to a glass-painter, named Brooks, for one of the coats of
arms in the great east window.


A.D. 1775.

Twenty-four Oriental MSS. and bundles of papers which had been found in
the study of Rev. Dr. Thos. Hunt, Reg. Prof. of Hebrew, who died in the
preceding year, were given by various persons.


A.D. 1776.

Lord North, the Chancellor of the University, presented to the Library
the observations made by Dr. James Bradley, while Astronomer Royal, at
Greenwich, 1750-62. These had been given to him by Mr. John Peach,
son-in-law to Dr. Bradley, while a suit was pending between the Board of
Longitude on behalf of the Crown and Mr. Peach respecting his right to
their possession. The claim of the Crown had been first made in 1765, on
the ground that they were the papers drawn up by Bradley in discharge of
his public and official duties, but the executor, Mr. Sam. Peach,
refused to resign them except for some valuable consideration. But after
his death, his son, Mr. John Peach, who married Dr. Bradley's daughter,
presented them to Lord North, with the understanding that the latter
should give them to the University, on condition that they should be
forthwith printed. They were, consequently, immediately put into the
hands of Dr. Hornsby, the Savilian Professor of Astronomy, for
publication; but the work progressed very slowly, in consequence of his
ill-health, and a remonstrant correspondence ensued between the Board of
Longitude, the Royal Society, and the University, which was printed by
the Board, together with a statement of the whole case and of the steps
taken by them for the recovery of the papers, in 1795. Several letters
from Sir Joseph Banks, as President of the Royal Society, to Price the
Librarian, in 1785, on the slow progress of the work, are preserved in a
volume of MS. Letters to Librarians, recently bound up by Mr. Coxe. The
first volume at length appeared in 1798, in folio, and the second,
edited by Prof. A. Robertson, in 1805, with an appendix of observations
made by Bradley's successor, Rev. Nath. Bliss, and his assistant, Mr.
Charles Green, to March, 1765, which had been purchased by the Board of
Longitude, and were presented by them to the University, in March, 1804.
Some further remains of Dr. Bradley were, after Dr. Hornsby's death,
found among the papers of the latter, and these (having been restored to
the University by his family, on application, about 1829) were published
in 1831, under the editorship of Prof. S. P. Rigaud, in one vol.
quarto, entitled _Miscellaneous Works and Correspondence of Rev. J.
Bradley_. In 1861, a fresh application for the return of the
Observations was made to the University, by Mr. Airy, the Astronomer
Royal, on the ground that they were the only volumes wanting in the
series preserved at Greenwich, and that they were frequently needed
there for reference. By a vote of Convocation, on May 2, this
application was acceded to, and thirteen volumes of Observations were
returned to what was certainly their legitimate place of deposit. Some
miscellaneous papers, making about thirty parcels, still remain in the
Library.


A.D. 1778.

_Carte's MSS._ See 1753.


A.D. 1780.

On Jan. 22, a Statute was passed which imposed an annual fee of four
shillings[260] on all persons entitled to read in the Library and all
who had exceeded four years from matriculation, as well as assigned to
the Library a share of the matriculation fees. The preamble of the
Statute alleges that the funds of the Library were so insufficient for
their purpose that of works of importance daily published throughout the
world 'vix unus et alter publicis sumptibus adscribi possit.' The
Statute also provided for the holding of regular meetings by the
Curators, and the issuing of an annual Catalogue of the books purchased
during the year, with their prices, together with a statement of
accounts. The commencement of the annual printed purchase-catalogues
dates in consequence from this year.

In a letter from Thos. Burgess, afterwards the Bishop of St. David's and
Salisbury, to Mr. Tyrwhitt, the editor of Chaucer, dated Corp. Chr.
Coll., Nov. 16, 1779, the plan for increasing the funds of the Library,
established by this Statute, is mentioned as a scheme 'much talked of,'
the defects of the Library being such as 'we are now astonished should
have been of so long continuance[261].' A paper in behalf of the
proposal was circulated among Members of Convocation, upon a copy of
which, preserved by Dr. Bliss with his set of the annual Catalogues, the
latter has noted that it was written by Sir William Scott, afterwards
Lord Stowell.

The exquisite portrait of Sir Kenelm Digby, supposed to be by Vandyke,
was given by Edw. Stanley, Esq. It is now in the Picture Gallery; and,
having recently been cleaned and covered with plate-glass, appears once
more in all the freshness of its original perfection[262].

The Sub-librarian at this time was John Walters, an undergraduate
Scholar of Jesus College. He published in this year a small volume of
_Poems_ ('written before the age of nineteen'), the chief portion of
which consists of a description of the Library, written with a warm
admiration of his subject, and by no means destitute of poetic feeling.
It numbers 1188 lines, and is illustrated with some well-selected notes.
In 1782, when B.A. and still Scholar of his College, he published
_Specimens of Welsh Poetry in English verse, with some Original Pieces
and Notes_. He took the degree of M.A. in 1784, and died in 1791[263].
We learn from a MS. note in a copy of his _Poems_, presented to the
Library by the present Principal of Jesus College, that he was the son
of John Walters, Rector of Llandough (author of a Welsh Dictionary,
1794), by Hannah his wife, and that he was baptized there, July 9, 1760.

[260] By the Statute passed in 1813, and by that on Fees passed in 1855,
an annual payment of _eight_ shillings was ordered to be made to the
Library out of the total sum (now L1 6_s._) paid by each graduate whose
name is on the University Books. But these individual fees, varying with
the numbers on the Books, were consolidated, in 1861 in one fixed annual
sum, from the University Chest, of L2800.

[261] Note by Dr. Bliss, in his MS. _Collectanea_, bequeathed by him to
Rev. H. O. Coxe.

[262] Another portrait of Sir Kenelm, which hangs in the Library, was
given, in 1692, by Mr. William Pate, a woollen-draper of London. To this
Mr. Pate, Thos. Brown dedicated, in 1710, as 'his honest friend,' his
translation from the French of _Memoirs of the Present State of the
Court and Councils of Spain_.

[263] Nichols' _Lit. Anecd._ viii. 122.


A.D. 1785.

George III and Queen Charlotte visited the Library, from Nuneham, on
Oct. 13. Price, the Librarian, was in attendance, and kissed hands.

Several Assistants, whose names are not perpetuated in the Library
records, are found perpetuated by the inscriptions written by successive
generations on the old oak staircases which run from their studies to
the galleries above. In June of this year, Thomas Whiting, of Jesus
College (B.A. also in this year), does in this way transmit the memory
of his service to posterity. E. Thomas (_qu._ Evan Thomas, of All Souls'
College, B.A., 1793?) does the same in 1790.


A.D. 1787.

On May 31, the Reader in Chemistry, Thomas Beddoes, M.D., of Pembroke
College, issued a printed Memorial to the Curators 'concerning the state
of the Bodleian Library, and the conduct of the Principal Librarian.'
The utmost laxity appears from this statement to have prevailed with
regard to attendance, and to the hours of opening the Library; the
Librarian was always absent on Saturdays and Mondays, as on those days
he was occupied in journeys to and from a curacy eleven miles distant,
which he held together with a living more remote; and the Library which
should then in summer have been opened at eight was found unopened
between nine and ten, and unopened also after University sermons. The
Librarian is charged besides with having discouraged readers by neglect
and incivility, with being very careless in regard to the value and
condition of books purchased by the Library[264], and with having but
little knowledge of foreign publications. An anecdote is related
(amongst others) of his lending _Cook's Voyages_, which had been
presented by King Geo. III, to the Rector of Lincoln College, and
telling him that the longer he kept it the better, 'for if it was known
to be in the Library, he (Mr. Price) should be perpetually plagued with
enquiries after it[265].' In consequence of these complaints, the
Curators, in 1788, prepared on their part a new form of Statute, while
the Heads of Houses prepared another. This separate action led to a
paper war between the two bodies, in which the Regius Professors of
Divinity, Law, Medicine, Hebrew and Greek, (Randolph, Vansittart,
Vivian, Blayney and Jackson) appeared on the Curators' side of the
question, and, as the Hebdomadal Board persisted in pressing their own
scheme, they at length (with the exception of Blayney) adopted the
strong step, on the day when the rival plan was proposed in Convocation
(June 23, 1788), of formally protesting before a notary public against
this violation of their privileges. The consequence was that the Statute
was withdrawn, and the proposal for a new code abandoned by both
parties. The chief points of difference were, that the Curators objected
to the proposal being put forward as 'cum consensu Curatorum' instead of
'ex relatione Curatorum,' to the increase of the Librarian's stipend to
L150, to the appointment of two Sub-librarians instead of one, and to
the leaving the appointment of these in the hands of the Librarian (in
accordance with Bodley's own Statute) instead of assigning it to the
Curators.

Eleven Arabic and Persian MSS. were given by Turner Camac, Esq., co.
Down.

A first part of a Catalogue of the Oriental MSS., comprehending those in
Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac, AEthiopic, Arabic, Persian, Turkish and Coptic,
was issued in this year, in folio. It was compiled by John Uri, a
Hungarian, who had studied Oriental literature under Schultens, at
Leyden, and who was recommended for this purpose to Archbp. Secker, by
Sir Joseph Yorke, then Ambassador in the Netherlands. Many years were
occupied in the preparation of this volume, as Uri appears to have
commenced his work in 1766, his signature occurring in the 'Registrum
admissorum' under Feb. 17, in that year[266]. Sixty closely-printed
folio pages of corrections and additions are, however, supplied by Dr.
Pusey, in the second part of the Catalogue, which he completed after Dr.
Nicoll's death and published in 1835. In his preface to this part, Dr.
Pusey remarks that Uri frequently copied with carelessness; and that the
whole series of Arabic MSS. was found to need re-examination from the
discovery that all kinds of cheats and impositions had been played upon
all the purchasers of Eastern MSS., Pococke alone excepted, by the
cunning sellers with whom they dealt, particularly in the passing off of
supposititious works for genuine[267]. And upon carrying out this
re-examination, the following was found to be the result:--

    'Varias errorum formas deprehendi, titulis nunc charta coopertis,
    nunc atramento oblitis, nunc cultro paene abrasis; auctorum porro
    nominibus paullulum immutatis quo notiora quaedam referrent; numeris
    etiam, quibus singula volumina signata sunt, permutatis, quo quis
    opus imperfectum pro integro habeat, paginis denique pauculis operi
    alieno a fronte assutis.'

[264] Among other instances the purchase (in 1784) of Sir John Hill's
_Vegetable System_, at the cost of L140, is mentioned.

[265] It appears incidentally, from this pamphlet, that three o'clock
was the dinner-hour at almost every College at that time.

[266] He died suddenly at his lodgings in Oxford, Oct. 18, 1796, aged
upwards of seventy (_Gent. Magaz._, vol. lxvi. p. 884.)

[267] The late Dr. Simonides was evidently by no means the first in his
art, although probably _facile princeps_.


A.D. 1789.

The Anatomy School, on the Library staircase, was fitted up in this year
as a room for receiving the Greek and Biblical MSS., and
fifteenth-century editions of classics. In 1794 it was ordered that it
should be distinguished by the name of the _Auctarium_, a name which it
still retains. Mr. John Thomas, of Wadham College, (B.A. 1790, M.A.
1793) was employed in 1790 in arranging the room and making a list of
its contents.

Many early editions of the classics were purchased at the sale of the
library of Mapheo Pinelli, at Venice. To enable these purchases to be
made, the Curators made a public application for loans, to which a
liberal response was returned, as noted under the following year.

The increased attention which began to be paid to the Library about this
time is thus mentioned in a letter from Mr. Dan. Prince, the Oxford
bookseller:--

    'Our Bodleian Library is putting into good order. It has been
    already one year in hand. Some one, two or three of the Curators
    work at it daily, and several assistants. The revenue from the tax
    on the Members of the University is about L460 per annum, which has
    existed 12 years. This has increased the Library so much that it
    must be attended to, and a new Catalogue put in hand. They have
    lately bought all the expensive foreign publications. A young man of
    this place is about making a Catalogue of all the singular books in
    this place, in the College libraries as well as the Bodleian.... We
    have a young man in this place, his name is Curtis, who was an
    apprentice to me, who has hitherto only dealt in books of
    curiosities, in which he is greatly skilled, superior in many
    respects to De Bure, Ames, or his continuator. He has been employed
    five or six years in the Bodleian Library, and since at Wadham,
    Queen's and Balliol. He purposes to publish a Catalogue of little or
    not known books in Oxford, particularly in Merton, Balliol and
    Oriel[268].'

[268] Nichols, _Lit. Anecd._ iii. 699, 701.


A.D. 1790.

A very large number of _Editiones principes_ and other early-printed
books were purchased at the sale at Amsterdam of the library of P. A.
Crevenna. The first entire Hebrew Bible, printed at Soncino in 1488, was
purchased for L43 15_s._; and Fust and Schoeffer's first _dated_ Latin
Bible (Mentz, 1462) for L127 15_s._ To enable the Library to make the
purchases of this and the preceding year, benefactions were received to
the amount of nearly L200, and upwards of L1550 were lent by various
bodies and individuals. The repayment of the loans was completed in
1795.

L120 were received for duplicates sold to Messrs. Chapman and King.
Other small receipts from similar sales are found under the years 1793,
1794 and 1804.


A.D. 1791.

From this year onwards until 1803, inclusive, the name of Mr. Edward
Lewton, of Wadham College (B.A. 1792, M.A. 1794), is found as that of an
Assistant employed upon the Catalogues. Further benefactions to the
amount of L232, for the purpose of aiding the purchase of early-printed
books, were received in this year. The list of all the donors is printed
in Gutch's edition of Wood's _History and Antiquities_, vol. ii. part ii.
p. 949.


A.D. 1792.

The collections of notes and various readings made by Joseph Torelli, of
Verona, in preparation for his edition of Archimedes, were deposited in
the Library, (F. _infra_, 2. _Auct._). They were given to the University
after his death (in 1781) by his executor, Albert Albertini, partly
through the instrumentality of Mr. John Strange, envoy to Venice, upon
condition that the University undertook the publication. The work was
consequently printed at the University Press, and issued in a handsome
folio volume in this year.


A.D. 1793.

A magnificent copy of Gutenberg's Bible, not dated, but supposed to have
been printed about 1455, fresh and clean as if it had just come from the
hands of the men of the New Craft, carefully set at their work, was
bought for the very small sum of L100. It is exhibited in the first
glass case in the Library. This is the edition often called the
_Mazarine Bible_, from the circumstance that the first copy which
obtained notice was found in the Mazarine Library at Paris.


A.D. 1794.

The _Editio princeps_ of the Bible in German, printed by Eggesteyn about
1466, was bought for L50.

A chronological Catalogue, in two folio volumes, of a very large and
valuable collection of pamphlets (which had hitherto been kept in the
Radcliffe Library), extending from 1603 to 1740, was made in 1793-4, by
Mr. Abel Lendon, of Ch. Ch. (B.A. 1795, M.A. 1798.)

Mr. Rich. S. Skillerne, of All Souls' (B.A. 1796, M.A. 1800), was
employed in the Library.

With a view to the formation of a new Catalogue, the Curators at the end
of the annual list made a first application for returns of such books
existing in the several College libraries as were not in the Bodleian,
in order thereby to accomplish what would be a most useful work, and is
still a great _desideratum_, a General Catalogue of all the books in
Oxford.


A.D. 1795.

A brief list (filling sixty small octavo pages) was printed at the
Clarendon Press, of the _Editiones principes_, the fifteenth-century
books, and the Aldines, then in the Library. The name of the compiler
does not appear. It is entitled, 'Notitia editionum quoad libros Hebr.,
Gr. et Lat. quae vel primariae, vel saec. xv. impressae, vel Aldinae, in
Bibliotheca Bodleiana adservantur.'

Four cabinets of English coins were presented by Thomas Knight, Esq., of
Godmersham, Kent. Among them was an ornament (now exhibited in the glass
case near the Library door) said to have been worn by John Hampden when
he fell at Chalgrove Field[269]. It consists of a plain cornelian set in
silver, with the following couplet engraved on the rim:--

    'Against my King I do not fight,
    But for my King and kingdom's right.'

The Curators renewed a request, made ineffectually some time before,
that the several Colleges would make out returns for the Library of all
such books in their own collections as did not appear in the Bodl.
Catalogue. In the year 1801 they acknowledged the receipt of such lists
from Magdalen[270], Balliol, Exeter, and Jesus; Oriel sent a list
subsequently (in 1808?); but these were all that were ever forwarded.

[269] Lord Nugent, in his _Memorials of Hampden_, erroneously mentions
this as being preserved in the Ashmolean Museum. He also repeats two
mistaken readings first given in Miss Seward's _Anecdotes_, iv. 358 (a
volume dedicated to Price, the Librarian), where a small woodcut of the
ornament is given.

[270] A complete Catalogue of the Library of this College, compiled by
Rev. E. M. Macfarlane, M.A., of Linc. Coll., was issued by the College,
in three handsomely-printed quarto volumes, in 1860-62. The books of all
writers belonging to the College, are entered separately in an Appendix
in vol. iii.


A.D. 1796.

A few _incunabula_ and Aldines were purchased at Goettingen.

The annual list of donations was, for the first time, printed in this
year. It does not include, however, a large gift which was partly
received now, the presentation having been made in the year preceding.
It was the gift by Rev. Dr. Nath. Bridges of the MSS. collections made
by Mr. John Bridges for his _History of Northamptonshire_. They number
thirty-seven volumes in folio, eight in quarto, and one in octavo; and
consist chiefly of extracts from Public Records and from the Episcopal
Registers of Lincoln, the volumes in quarto containing Church notes for
the several parishes. Some account of them is given in Mr. Whalley's
preface to vol. i. of Bridges' _History_, published in 1791.


A.D. 1798.

The distinguished historical antiquary, Sir Henry Ellis, D.C.L., was
appointed in this year, by his friend the Librarian, to be one of the
Assistant-librarians; commencing thus, while still an undergraduate
Fellow of St. John's (which College he had entered in 1796) the studies
and pursuits which eventually led to the post, so long and honourably
held by him, of Principal Librarian and Head of the British Museum. In a
letter with which the author of this volume was recently favoured by him
('_jam senior, sed mente virens_,') Sir Henry mentions that the Rev.
Henry Hervey Baber, of All Souls' College (B.A. 1799, M.A. 1805), who
was afterwards one of his colleagues in the Museum, and who now (_aetat._
92) is Vicar of Stretham, in the Isle of Ely, was his senior in the
Bodleian, as Coadjutor-under-librarian, by a year or two. In consequence
of the insufficiency of the statutable staff, the place of the one
Under-librarian was at this time, and subsequently, shared by two
occupants. In 1800 Sir H. Ellis signed, in conjunction with Mr. Price,
the return printed in the first Record Commission Report relative to the
Historical MSS. possessed by the Library.


A.D. 1799.

Some MSS. papers of the eminent French divine, Pet. Franc. le Courayer,
were bequeathed by Rev. Bertrand Russel. Courayer's portrait,
representing him in his alb, was given by Courayer himself in 1769.


A.D. 1800.

The chief purchases in this year were of English and foreign maps,
purchases which were continued in 1802 and 1804. For Maraldi's and
Cassini's _Atlas of France_, in 2 vols., no less than L104 was paid! The
interest now taken in French politics was also shown by the purchase of
a set of the _Moniteur_ from 1789, which was bought for L66.


A.D. 1801.

A large and valuable collection of MS. and printed music was received,
at the beginning of this year or the close of the preceding, by the
bequest of Rev. Osborne Wight, M.A., formerly a Fellow of New College,
who died Feb. 6, 1800[271]. The MSS. number about 190 volumes. They
contain anthems, &c., by Arnold, Bishop, Blow, Boyce, Croft, Greene,
Purcell, &c; a large number of the works of Drs. Philip and William
Hayes; with very many madrigals and motetts by early Italian and English
composers, and some of Handel's compositions. The printed volumes
consist chiefly of the original folio editions of Handel, Arnold's and
Boyce's collections, and the works of Playford, Purcell, Croft, Greene,
and other English composers. A MS. Catalogue of the whole was made by
Rev. H. E. Havergal, M.A., about 1846, when the collection was put in
order. The Library also possesses full band and voice parts of several
of the odes and other compositions by both Philip and William Hayes.
Besides his books Mr. Wight also bequeathed L100 in the 3 per cents. 'to
defray expenses.' Few additions have been made in the class of old music
since his gift. Some rare sets of madrigals have been purchased,
specially, in 1856, those of Morley, Watson, Weelkes, Wilbye, and Yonge,
for L24 14_s._ 6_d._; Mr. Vincent Novello gave, in 1849, MSS. of
Handel's _Te Deum in D_, and Greene's anthem, 'Ponder my words,' and in
the following year a MS. of part of the ancient Gregorian Mass, 'De
Angelis,' harmonized by Sam. Wesley, in 1812; the Professor of Music,
Sir F. Ouseley, Bart., gave some French _Cantates_ in 1856; and two or
three volumes have been added by the present writer.

[271] A short memoir of this gentleman is given in _Gent. Magaz._ for
1800, p. 1212, where it is said that 'he was eminently skilled in the
practice and composition of music, and was probably excelled by no one,
whether _dilettante_ or professor, as a sightsman in vocal execution.'


A.D. 1803.

An Arabic MS., in seven volumes, written in 1764-5, and containing what
is rarely met with, a complete collection of the Thousand and One Tales
of the _Arabian Nights' Entertainments_, was bought from Capt. Jonathan
Scott for L50. Mr. Scott published, in 1811, an edition of the Tales, in
six volumes, in which this MS. is described. He obtained it from Dr.
White, the Professor of Hebrew and Arabic at Oxford, who had bought it
at the sale of the library of Edward Wortley Montague, by whom it had
been brought from the East. It is noticed in Ouseley's _Oriental
Collections_, vol. ii. p. 25.


A.D. 1805.

In this year the last volume (numbered 142) of Dr. Holmes' Collations of
MSS. of the Septuagint-Version, was deposited in the Library. This great
and important work had been commenced in the year 1789; it was intended
to embrace collations of all the known MSS. of the Greek text, as well
as of Oriental versions; and for seventeen years, by the help of liberal
subscriptions, in spite of the difficulties interposed by the
continental wars, the collection of the various readings from MSS. in
libraries throughout Europe was carried on. And each year's work was, on
its completion, deposited in the Bodleian. During this period, annual
accounts were published of the progress of the work, which possess both
critical and bibliographical interest; and the results of the whole are
seen in the fine edition printed at the Clarendon Press, in five vols.,
folio, 1808-1827.

The MSS. of the distinguished classical scholar, James Philip D'Orville,
who died at Amsterdam, Sept. 14, 1751, were bought for L1025. After the
purchase was completed, a question arose whether the University of
Leyden were not, by the terms of his will, entitled to them after the
death of his son, but it was ascertained that this provision was only
made in case his son did not reach manhood. The collection numbers about
570 volumes, containing many valuable Greek and Latin Classics, together
with numerous collations of texts, and annotated printed copies.
Thirty-four volumes contain correspondence (autograph and in copy) of
Is. Vossius, Heinsius, Cuper, Paolo Sarpi, Beverland, and the letters
addressed to D'Orville by all the great scholars of his time. And
thirty-eight volumes, in folio and quarto, contain _Adversaria_ of
Scipio and Alberic Gentilis. There are also six Turkish and Arabic MSS.
The gem of the collection is a quarto MS. of _Euclid_, containing 387
leaves, which was written, '[Grk: cheiri Stephanou klerikou],' A.M.
6397 = A.D. 889. It contains a memorandum by one Arethas of Patras, that
he bought the book for four (or, most probably, fourteen,) _nummi_. A
Catalogue of the MSS., compiled anonymously by Dr. (then Mr.) Gaisford,
was printed in quarto, in 1806. D'Orville's signature occurs in the
Admission-book as having been admitted to read on Aug. 18, 1718.

A form of new Statute was put out on March 28, to be proposed to
Convocation in May; but it appears to have been withdrawn, as no fresh
Statutes were actually enacted until 1813. The staff was proposed to be
increased to the number which was adopted in the latter year, but with
smaller salaries; and the Library was to be open from nine to three,
throughout the year.


A.D. 1806.

Fifty pounds were paid for some 'Tibetan MSS.' of Capt. Samuel Turner,
E.I.C.S., who had been sent by Warren Hastings, on a mission to the
Grand Llama, in 1785. Of this mission he published an account, in a
quarto volume, in 1800. His MSS. consist chiefly of nine bundles of
papers and letters in the Persian and Tartar languages, written in the
last century, together with a few Chinese printed books. Capt. Turner
died Jan. 2, 1802; but as one of his sisters was married to Prof. White,
it was probably through him that the papers were now purchased.

A beautiful copy of the _Koran_ which had been in the library of Tippoo
Sahib (now exhibited in the glass case near the door) was presented,
together with another MS. from the same collection, by the East India
Company. Dibdin speaks of it as a work 'upon which caligraphy seems to
have exhausted all its powers of intricacy and splendour,' and adds the
following description:--

    'The preservation of it is perfect, and the beauty of the binding,
    especially of the interior ornaments, is quite surprising. The first
    few leaves of the text are highly ornamented, without figures,
    chiefly in red and blue. The latter leaves are more ornamental; they
    are even gorgeous, curious and minute. The generality of the leaves
    have two star-like ornaments in the margin, out of the border. Upon
    the whole this is an exquisite treasure, in its way[272].'

The _Catholicon_ of J. de Janua, printed at Mentz, in 1460, was bought
for L63.

The following singular memorandum, relating to this year, is preserved
on a small paper:--

    'Oxford, Aug. 29, 1806. Borrowed this day, of the Rev. the Bodleian
    Librarian, the picture given to the Library by Mr. Peters, which I
    promise to return upon demand.

                                          'JOSEPH WHITE.

  '_Mem._ Not returned, June 24, 1807.
              'Nor as yet, Oct., 1808. J. P. (_i.e._ J. Price).
              'And never to be ret^d.' (added at some later period.)

This picture must have been the portrait of Professor White himself,
which was painted and presented by Rev. Will. Peters, R.A., in
1785[273]. It has never been restored.

On the morning of Saturday, April 19, probably but little after nine
o'clock, the statutable time for the opening of the Library, some
zealous student stood at the door, but could get no further. No one
appeared to give him entrance; the Librarian himself never came on a
Saturday, and probably his Assistants were not scrupulous in
punctuality; at any rate, the expectant student stood and expected in
vain. But ere he departed, he denounced a 'Woe' which perpetuates to
this day the memory of his vain expectancy; he affixed to the door the
following text, which doubtless seemed to him naturally suggested:
'[Grk: Ouai hymin, hoti erate ten kleida tes gnoseos; autoi ouk
eiselthete, kai tous eiserchomenous ekolysate.]' The paper is now
preserved over the door of one of the Sub-librarians' studies, with this
note added: 'Affixed to the outer door of the Library by some _scavant
inconnu_, April 19, 1806.'

[272] _Bibliogr. Decam._ iii. 472.

[273] Gutch's _Wood_, II. ii. 979.


A.D. 1807.

A list of the books printed during the year at the University Press is
added to the annual account. This was not repeated.

A copy of the _Speculum Christiani_, printed by Will. de Machlinia, was
given by Rev. A. H. Matthews, of Jesus College.

Amongst the names of Assistants, written by them, _more Anglico_, on the
wood-work of their studies, occurs the name of 'Rob. Fr. Walker, New
Coll., Dec. 1807.' Mr. Walker (B.A. 1811, M.A. 1813) was subsequently
Curate of Purleigh, Essex, where he died in 1854. He was known as the
translator of a _Life of Bengel_, and other works, from the German. A
memoir of him was published by Rev. T. Pyne, from which the account
given by Dr. Bloxam in his _Register of Magd. Coll._ ii. 115-117, was
taken. In 1810, John Woodcock (B.A. 1817, M.A. 1818, Chaplain of New
College) appears, from the same evidence as Mr. Walker, to have been an
Assistant, one Will. John Lennox in 1808, and John Jones, (Ch. Ch.? B.A.
1808, M.A. 1815), in 1809.


A.D. 1808.

The Latin Bible printed by Ulric Zell, at Cologne, in two volumes, about
1470, was bought for L47 5_s._ The Bible printed at Rome, by Sweynheym
and Pannartz, in 1471, had been bought, in 1804, for L35; and in 1826 a
Strasburgh edition, printed with Mentelin's types, without date, was
obtained for L94 10_s._

A set of the Oxford Almanacks, from the commencement in 1674 to this
year, was given by a frequent donor, Alderman Fletcher[274].

[274] A limited number of copies of the engravings of these Almanacks,
from the original plates which remain in the University Press, were
re-issued in 1867, under the superintendence of Rev. John Griffiths,
M.A.


A.D. 1809.

The death of the eminent topographer and antiquary, Richard Gough, on
Feb. 20, 1809[275], brought into operation the bequest made to the
Library in his will, dated ten years previously. This consisted of all
his topographical collections, together with all his books relating to
Saxon and Northern literature, 'for the use of the Saxon Professor,' his
maps and engravings, and all the copper-plates used in the illustration
of the various works published by himself. The transmission of this vast
collection was accomplished by Mr. J. Nichols, the executor, in the
course of the year; and some of his correspondence on the subject is
printed in his _Illustrations of Literary History_, vol. v. pp. 556-561.
The collection (which numbers upwards of 3700 volumes) was placed in the
room formerly the Civil Law School, that room having been assigned to
the Library a few years previously, and fitted up (at a cost of about
L675) for the reception of various historical collections. In the same
room are now the Carte, Dodsworth, Tanner, Willis, Junius, and portion
of the Rawlinson, manuscripts, with other smaller collections; the name
proposed to be given to it, and by which it was designated in Gough's
will, was 'The Antiquaries' Closet.' Gough's library consists, firstly,
of a large series of maps[276] and topographical prints and drawings, in
elephant-folio volumes; of this a very brief outline-list is given in
the printed catalogue, but a full list in detail exists in MS[277].
Secondly, of printed books and MSS., arranged under the heads of General
Topography, Ecclesiastical Topography[278], Natural History, the several
Counties (with London, Westminster, and Southwark) in order[279], Wales,
Islands, Scotland, and Ireland. Thirdly, of 227 works connected with
Anglo-Saxon literature and that of the Scandinavian races generally.
Fourthly, of an extremely large and valuable series of printed
Service-books of the English Church before the Reformation, together
with a few MSS., chiefly _Horae_. The value of this series may be
gathered from the following statement of the Missals, Breviaries,
Manuals, Processionals, and Hours, which it comprises, besides which
there are Graduals, Psalters, Hymns, Primers, &c.

  _Missals_,  Salisbury use,                                     30
      "       York       "                                        4
      "       Rouen      "                                        1
      "       Roman      "                                        3
      "       'pro sacerdotibus in Anglia, &c. itinerantibus.'    1
  _Breviaries_ and _Portiforia_, Salisbury use,                  18
      "                 "        York       "                     2
      "                 "        Hereford   "                     1[280]
  _Manuals_, Salisbury use,                                      10
      "      York (MS.) "                                         1
  _Processionals_, Salisbury use,                                10
      "            York       "                                   1
  _Hours_, Salisbury use,                                        24
      "    Roman      " (besides several MSS.)                    1

Of several of these books there are more than single copies.

A fifth division of Gough's library consists of sixteen large folio
volumes of coloured drawings of monuments in churches of France, chiefly
at Paris, in Normandy, Valois, Champagne, Burgundy and Brie, and at
Beauvais, Chartres, Vendosme and Noyon. They form part of a large
collection extending through the whole of France, which was made by M.
Gagnieres, tutor to the sons of the Grand Dauphin, and given by him to
Louis XIV in 1711. Of this collection, now preserved in the Imperial
Library, twenty-five volumes were lost amid the troubles of the French
Revolution, between 1785 and 1801; but in what way, out of the
twenty-five, these sixteen came into Gough's hands, has not been clearly
ascertained. The collection is of great value, as most of the monuments
were defaced or destroyed by the revolutionary mobs. Gough's volumes
contain about 2000 drawings, of the whole of which facsimiles were made
in 1860 by M. Jules Frappaz, by direction of the French Minister of
Public Instruction, (who made application for the purpose, through Mr.
J. H. Parker, in 1859) for the purpose of so far supplying the
deficiency in the series at Paris[281].

The copy of the _British Topography_, which Gough had prepared for a
third edition (of which a considerable part of vol. i. had been printed,
but was burned in the disastrous fire at Mr. Nichols' printing-office in
Feb., 1808,) was bought by the Curators of Mr. Nichols in 1812 for
L150[282]. It has been recently bound in four very thick volumes. A
fifth volume contains the proof-sheets of that portion of vol. i. which
had been printed, extending to _Cheshire_, p. 446. The collections for
the first edition make three volumes.

By Gough's bequest the Library became also possessed (as mentioned
above) of the very valuable copper-plates which illustrated his
_Sepulchral Monuments_, and other works. In 1811, one hundred guineas
were paid to Basire, the engraver, for cleaning and arranging 380 of
these plates. Amongst these was the actual brass effigy of one of the
Wingfield family in the fifteenth century, from Letheringham Church,
Suffolk, of which an engraving is found in the _Monuments_. The brass is
now exhibited in the glass case of miscellaneous objects of curiosity in
the Picture Gallery.

The Catalogue of the collection was issued from the University Press, in
a quarto volume, in 1814. It was chiefly compiled by Dr. Bandinel, to
whom fifty guineas were paid for it, in 1813; but Dr. Bliss has
noted[283] that the first 136 pages were prepared by himself. In the
_Bibliographical Decameron_ (vol. i. p. xcv.) Dibdin has made honourable
mention of the 'perseverance, energy, and exactness' with which he found
Dr. Bandinel working on a very hot day in the year 1812, in the
arrangement of the collection, 'in an oaken-floored room, light,
spacious, and dry.'

Some account and survey-books, belonging to University and Magdalen
Colleges, which came to the Library among Gough's MSS., were restored by
vote of Convocation on March 9, 1814.

       *       *       *       *       *

The MSS. which the well-known traveller, Rev. Edw. Dan. Clarke, LL.D.,
had collected during his journeys through a large part of Europe and
Asia, were purchased from him in this year for L1000. A first portion of
a Catalogue, comprising descriptions of fifty volumes, of which fifteen
are in Latin, two in French (Alain Chartier, one being the printed edit.
of 1526), and the rest in Greek, was published in 1812, in quarto, by
Dr. Gaisford, who printed in full some inedited Scholia on Plato and on
the Poems of Gregory Nazianzen. A second part of the Catalogue,
containing a description of forty-five volumes in Arabic, Persian, and
AEthiopic, was issued by Dr. Nicoll, in 1814. The special feature in the
collection is a MS. of Plato's Dialogues, from which the Scholia are
printed in the Catalogue, written (on 418 vellum quarto leaves) by a
scribe named John (who styles himself _Calligraphus_) in the year 896,
for Arethas, a deacon of Patras, for the sum of thirteen Byzantine
_nummi_. The D'Orville MS. of Euclid was also written for this Arethas
(see p. 208).

[275] A very full memoir of him is to be found in the _Lit. Anecd._ vol.
vi. pp. 262-343, and 613-626. His miscellaneous library was sold by
auction in 1810. Two drawings in sepia, by F. Lewis, of his house at
Enfield, were bought in 1861.

[276] One of these is a very curious manuscript map of England and
Scotland, executed in the fourteenth century, which now hangs, framed
and glazed, in the eastern wing of the Library. It was bought by Gough
at the sale of the MSS. of Mr. Thomas Martin, of Palgrave, Suffolk, in
1774. A facsimile (engraved by Basire) and a description are given in
the _British Topography_, 1780, vol. i. pp. 76-85. Another object of
interest among the maps is a piece of tapestry, in three fragments,
containing portions of the counties of Hereford, Salop, Staffordshire,
Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Gloucestershire, Middlesex, &c. They are
said by Gough, in a MS. note in his collections for a third edition of
his _Topography_, to be parts of the three great maps of the Midland
Counties, formerly at Mr. Sheldon's house at Weston, Long Compton,
Warwickshire, which are the earliest specimens of tapestry weaving in
England, the art having been introduced by William Sheldon, who died in
1570. They are described in vol. ii. of the _Topography_, pp. 309-310.
They were bought by Lord Orford at a sale at Weston for L30, and
presented by him to Earl Harcourt, whose successor, Archbishop Harcourt,
gave them to the Museum at York (where they now are) in 1827. In
Murray's _Handbook for Yorkshire_, they are said to have been made in
1579. One guinea was given by Gough for his fragments.

[277] This list was drawn up about 1844-6 by Mr. Fred. Oct. Garlick,
then an assistant in the Library (afterwards of Ch. Ch., B.A., deceased
1851).

[278] Mr. A. Chalmers gave, in 1813, the second volume of a copy of
Wharton's _Anglia Sacra_, with MSS. notes by White Kennett, of which the
first volume was in this division of Gough's library. But both volumes
had been bought by Gough for L1 1_s._ at the sale of J. West's library
in 1773, at which sale he procured, besides, several other books with
Kennett's notes. There are also volumes with MSS. notes by Baker (the
'socius ejectus') Cole, Rowe Mores, and other well-known antiquaries.

[279] The County Histories are in many instances enriched with various
notes and papers in print and MS. The Berkshire MSS. have been increased
in the present year (1868) by the addition of the collections of the
late Will. Nelson Clarke, D.C.L., of Ch. Ch., author of the _History of
the Hundred of Wanting_ (4^o. 1824), which have been presented to the
Library by Mr. Coxe, to whom they were given by his cousin, the
collector, when the latter relinquished the idea of writing a history of
Berks. They consist of a Parochial History of the county, transcripts of
Heralds' Visitations and of early records, and miscellaneous note-books
and papers.

[280] The splendid and, as it is believed, unique vellum copy of the
_Hereford Missal_ ('ad usum eccl. Helfordensis,' fol. Rouen, 1502) which
the Library possesses, came to it from Rawlinson among the books of T.
Hearne, to whom it had been given by Charles Eyston, Esq., of East
Hendred, Berks. (Hearne's pref. to Camden's _Annales Eliz._ 1. xxvii.)
This Hereford volume is described, together with many of Gough's books,
in a book by Ed. Frere, entitled _Des Livres de Liturgie des Eglises
d'Angleterre imprimes a Rouen dans les_ xv. _et_ xvi. _Siecles_, 8^o
Rouen, 1867.

[281] See _Gent. Magaz._ for 1860, p. 406.

[282] So in the Library Register of accounts. Nichols (_Lit. Hist._ vol.
v. p. 559) says L100.

[283] In his MS. _Collectanea_, in the possession of Rev. H. O. Coxe.


A.D. 1810.

In March, the Prince Regent forwarded to the University four rolls of
papyrus, brought from Herculaneum, burned to a state resembling
charcoal, together with engravings of rolls hitherto deciphered, and
many facsimile copies, in pencil, of inedited rolls. A committee was
appointed from the Curators of the Library and the Delegates of the
Press, at the beginning of the year 1811, to have the charge of this
gift, and L500 were granted towards publication. Two volumes of
lithographed facsimiles were in consequence published at the Clarendon
Press, in 1824-5. Some further selections from these papers have
recently been published by a German scholar, Dr. Th. Gompertz.

On Nov. 15, it was resolved in Convocation to restore to the Chancery at
Durham, on the application of the Bishop of Durham, the MS. Register of
Richard Kellow, Bishop of Durham, 1310-16, containing also a portion of
the Register of Rich. Bury, 1338-42, which had come to the Library among
Rawlinson's collections, and was the only volume wanting at Durham in an
unbroken series of Episcopal Registers, of which this was the first. It
was borrowed in 1639/40, as it appeared, by an agent of the Marquis of
Newcastle, for the purpose of production in some law-suit affecting his
property; remained through the Civil War in his hands; fell subsequently
into those of the Earl of Oxford, and was bought by Rawlinson from
Osborne the bookseller, in whose sale-catalogue of the Harleian Library
in 1743 it was numbered 20734.

In this year Dr. Philip Bliss, the editor of Wood's _Athenae_, appears to
have entered the Library as an assistant, the entries in the register of
books received from Stationers' Hall being partly made by him, in his
very clear and neat hand. In 1812 he drew up short catalogues of the St.
Amand MSS. and of a portion of the Rawlinson collection (the _Poetry_,
the _Letters_, and the commencement of the _Miscell._) for which a
payment was made to him of L21. He afterwards quitted the Library for
the British Museum, but returned in 1822, as Sub-librarian, for a short
time.

His life-long friend, Dr. Bandinel, entered the Library also in this
year. To him, for a list of a further portion of the Rawlinson MSS., L26
5_s._ were paid in 1812.


A.D. 1811.

Only eighteen books were purchased in this year! The list, scantly
filling one page, is consequently the _minimum_ in the series of annual
catalogues.


A.D. 1813.

The Rev. John Price, B.D., the Librarian, died on Aug. 11, aged
seventy-nine, after forty-five years of office. A short biographical
notice is given in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for Oct., 1813, p. 400,
and a fuller account, together with many letters, and an engraved
portrait, with facsimile signature, (from a sketch taken in 1798, by
Rev. H. H. Baber), in vols. v. and vi. of Nichols' _Illustrations of the
Lit. Hist. of the 18th Century_. The following character of him with
regard to his discharge of his official duties is there given (vi. 471),
which in some respects forms a strong contrast to the representation of
Prof. Beddoes in the year 1787 (_see_ p. 197). 'In the faithful
discharge of his public duties in the University, he acquitted himself
with the highest credit, and deservedly conciliated the esteem of others
by his readiness to communicate information from the rich literary
stores over which he presided, and of which he was a most jealous and
watchful guardian. He was, from long habit, so completely attached to
the Library, that he considered every acquisition made to its contents
as a personal favour conferred upon himself.' It was chiefly owing to
his assiduous attention to Mr. Gough and his frequent correspondence
with him, that the Library was enriched with the bequest of the latter's
splendid topographical collections. But there is not much existing to
tell of personal work in the Library during his long tenure of office,
and the fact that nothing was done till near the close of that period
towards arranging and cataloguing the Rawlinson MSS., seems to prove
that there was no great activity in the Library under his management.
This is corroborated also by the wonderful difference which is
immediately seen in the annual catalogue of purchases; the Catalogue for
1813 grows at once from the two folio pages of the preceding year to
seventeen, while the sum expended becomes L725 in the place of
L261[284]. And the list of books forwarded from Stationers' Hall, and
hitherto received only twice yearly, at Lady-day and Michaelmas, becomes
in 1815 largely increased, while in the year 1822 the number of yearly
parcels is increased to eight. At the present time, as for a long time
past, books are received monthly.

The Rev. Bulkeley Bandinel, M.A. (D.D. in 1823), of New College, was
elected Librarian by Convocation on Aug. 25. He had been appointed
Sub-librarian in 1810, by Mr. Price, who was his godfather; and for a
short time previously had been a Chaplain in the Royal Navy, having
served with Adm. Sir James Saumarez on board the 'Victory,' in the
Baltic, in 1808.

The appointment of a new Librarian was followed by the enacting of a new
Statute, passed by Convocation on Dec. 2, which provided for the
increase of the Librarian's stipend to L400, exclusive of his share of
fees from degrees; for the appointment of two Sub-librarians, instead of
one, and these not under the degree of M.A., with salaries of L150; of
two assistants, Bachelors of Arts or undergraduates, with salaries of
L50; and of the Janitor, with a salary of L20. An additional annual
grant, calculated at L680, equal to that which resulted from the
provision made by the Statute of 1780, and to be paid, like that, out of
the yearly fees of graduates whose names are on the books, was
sanctioned, with the triple object of providing for this enlarged staff,
for the commencement of a new Catalogue, and for repairs hitherto
defrayed out of the general University funds. The state of the roof and
ceiling were said to be such as to justify an apprehension that they
must at no distant period be entirely constructed anew; happily this
reconstruction was only carried out with respect to the Picture Gallery,
and the roof of the Library remains as a precious relic still.

The hours at which the Library should be open, were fixed to be from 9
to 4 in the summer half-year, and 10 to 3 in the winter; the only change
since made has been the enacting, in 1867, that nine o'clock shall be
the invariable hour of opening on all ordinary days[285].

The junior assistants in the Library in this year were Mr. Francis
Thurland, of New College (B.A. 1812, M.A. 1814), and Mr. Sam. Slack, of
Ch. Ch. (B.A. 1813, M.A. 1816).

[284] Among the purchases is a set of the _Gentleman's Magazine_ to the
year 1810 for L52 10_s._

[285] This alteration of hours had been previously proposed in a Statute
which was to have been submitted to Convocation on Dec. 11, 1812, but
which appears to have been withdrawn ere the day came, probably because
this larger measure of revision of the old Statutes was already in
contemplation. A blank is left in the Convocation Book under that date,
by the then Registrar, Mr. Gutch; and his successor, Dr. Bliss, has
added a pencil-note to the effect that he supposes from the blank not
being filled up, that the proposal was previously abandoned. The Statute
of 1769 had required that the Library should be open in summer from 8 to
2 and from 3 to 5, but it was stated in some remarks which accompanied
the proposed enactment that these injunctions had 'long been disregarded
in practice,' and that the Library had been open throughout the year
from nine to three o'clock. But it was added that 'experience' had
'shewn that there is no occasion for requiring the attendance of the
Librarians before ten in the winter season.'


A.D. 1814.

The nomination of the Rev. Henry Cotton, M.A., then Student of Ch. Ch.,
now the venerable Archdeacon of Cashel, as Sub-librarian, was approved
in Convocation on March 9. Of the interest which he took in his work, of
his qualifications for it, and of the advantages which the
bibliographical world has derived from it, his _Typographical Gazetteer_
and _List of Editions of the English Bible_, afford abundant
testimony[286]. He remained in the Library eight years, quitting it when
his friend Dr. Laurence, on his appointment to the Archbishopric of
Cashel, carried him with himself to Ireland.

During his continuance in the Library, a descriptive Catalogue of the
_Editiones principes_ and _Incunabula_ was projected by him and Dr.
Bandinel; but only one specimen page in octavo was printed, of which a
copy has been preserved by Dr. Bliss, with his set of the annual
catalogues.

Alex. Nicoll, M.A., of Balliol College (a native of Aberdeen), was
appointed Sub-librarian at the early age of twenty-one; the nomination
was approved in Convocation on April 27. He at once devoted himself to
the study of Oriental languages, and became a proficient in Hebrew,
Arabic, Persian, Syriac, AEthiopic, and Sanscrit. His facility in
acquiring languages must have been truly marvellous, for, in addition
to these Eastern tongues, and although his death occurred at the early
age of thirty-six, it is said that 'he spoke and wrote with ease and
accuracy, French, Italian, German, Danish, Swedish, and Romaic.' In 1822
he was, much to his own surprise, appointed, at the age of twenty-nine,
to the Regius Professorship of Hebrew, by Lord Liverpool, on the
recommendation of Dr. Laurence, who vacated that post in consequence of
his appointment to the see of Cashel. Nicoll held the Professorship for
only seven years, dying on Sept. 24, 1828. The records of his labours in
the Bodleian are found in the Catalogue of Clarke's Oriental MSS.
noticed under the year 1809, and in his second part of the General
Catalogue of Oriental MSS., published in 1821, _q. v._

The total receipts and expenditure of the Library were for the first
time fully stated in the annual accounts. Hitherto the practice had been
to omit the Bodley endowment and the Crewe benefaction, &c., which were
devoted to salaries, repairs and other ordinary expenses (including also
the occasional purchase of MSS.), and only to report the amount received
from University fees and expended on printed books and incidental
charges.

[286] In a clever and amusing little squib of four pages, which he
printed anonymously in 1819, and which is preserved in the
Library-collection of University papers, professing to be a 'Syllabus'
of treatises on academic matters, to be printed at the University Press
in not more than thirty vols., elephant quarto, Mr. Cotton satirized
himself and his colleagues, doubtless with the more readiness because
with no reason. '21. De Bibliothecario et ejus adjutoribus. _Captain._
What are you about, Dick? _Dick._ Nothing, sir. _Captain._ Tom, what are
you doing? _Tom._ Helping Dick, sir.' Treatise 24 has for its title the
few but emphatic words, '_De Dodd_.' Lest some future delver in Oxford
antiquities should be lost in a maze of conjectures as to the
personality and history of this worthy, so evidently then well known,
let it here be told that Dodd was the _Clerk of the Schools_.


A.D. 1815.

_Cedunt arma togae!_ The effect which the cessation of the war produced,
in diverting to quiet academic channels the stream of youth which
hitherto had flowed in the turbid currents of continental strife, is
shown by the large increase of the Library receipts derived from
matriculation fees. These, which previously fell below (and often far
below) L250, rose in 1814, on the first sign of peace, to L424, and in
this year, on its final establishment, to L633.

In January, Mr. John Calcott, of Lincoln College (B.A. 1814, M.A. 1816,
B.D. 1825; Fellow of Linc.; deceased 1864) was appointed _Minister_ in
the room of Mr. Francis Thurland, of New College, resigned. Mr.
Calcott, however, only held the office for one year, being succeeded, in
Feb. 1816, by Mr. Sam. Fenton, of Jesus College (B.A. 1818, M.A., Ch.
Ch. 1821).


A.D. 1816.

A very important MS., with relation to Scottish history, was placed in
the Library on Dec. 5, in this year. It is a transcript (from the
originals,) by Col. J. Hooke, agent in Scotland for James II[287], of
all his political correspondence between the beginning of the year 1704
and the end of 1707. It forms two folio volumes, but is unfinished, as
the second volume ends with the commencement of a letter from James
Ogilvie, of Boyn, to M. de Torcy, Dec. 26, 1707. A brief narrative of
Hooke's negotiations, which contains copies of a few of the letters here
given, was published in France, in the French language, and a
translation was printed in a small volume at Dublin in 1760; but the
great mass of the correspondence is as yet inedited. The volumes came to
the Library in pursuance of a bequest from the Rev. J. Tickell, Rector
of Gawsworth, Cheshire and East Mersea, Essex, who died at Wargrave,
Berks, July 3, 1802. The bequest was to take effect upon the death of
his wife, which occurred towards the close of 1816[288].

The Curators reported, at the end of the annual list, that considerable
progress had been made towards the formation of a new general Catalogue.
Further progress was reported in the following year; in which year also
Dibdin[289] announced that the Catalogue would be finished, in four
folio volumes, by Messrs. Bandinel and Cotton under the superintendence
of Professor Gaisford[290]. He adds, 'The Prince Regent hath
munificently given a considerable sum towards the completion of these
glorious labours.' There is no record in the annual accounts of any such
donation; but in 1823 and 1824 payments amounting to L420 were made to
the Librarian, Sub-librarians, and Assistant, for their work on the new
Catalogue[291], out of 'the Prince Regent's benefaction.' On the
proposition of the Chancellor, Lord Grenville, in 1814, Mr. Vansittart,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, had expressed his willingness to apply
to Parliament for a grant of L5000 for the purpose; probably this idea
was abandoned for the more easily practicable one of a grant from the
Privy Purse.

Four Greek MSS. were presented in this year by Rev. ---- Hall, Chaplain at
Leghorn[292]; a copy of Lucan's _Pharsalia_, with MSS. collations by
Joseph Addison, by the Warden of Merton College; and a large collection
of books in Oriental literature, printed in Bengal, by the East India
Company.

[287] Hooke in 1685 was one of the Chaplains attending Monmouth in his
rebellion! _Lockhart Papers_, 1817, vol. i. p. 148.

[288] _Gent. Magaz._ vol. lxxv. ii. 569.

[289] _Bibliogr. Decam._ iii. 429.

[290] Portions of the Letters A F and P which had been thus prepared
were subsequently printed, but the whole work was then for some years
suspended, and afterwards commenced _de novo_. And nearly thirty years
elapsed before it was finally completed.

[291] Previous grants amounting to L260, had been made in 1820.

[292] Three of these are described in Mr. Coxe's Catalogue, cols.
812-14.


A.D. 1817.

The large Canonici collection of MSS. was obtained from Venice in this
year, for the sum of L5444, a purchase unprecedented in greatness in the
history of the Library[293]. The collection was formed by Matheo Luigi
Canonici, a Venetian Jesuit, who was born in 1727 and died in Sept. 1805
or 1806. Indefatigable in his passion for antiquities, he first formed a
Museum of statues and of medals at Parma, but, in consequence of the
Jesuits being expelled from the State, this was sold to the government.
He then at Bologna set himself to collect religious objects of interest,
and had succeeded to some extent, when the rector of his society
observed to him that such a collection was little suitable to a poor
monk, and he consequently disposed of it to a Roman prince. Finally, at
Venice, he commenced the gathering of a library, in which it is said, as
one evidence of its extent, there were more than four thousand Bibles
written in fifty-two languages[294].

The MSS. purchased by the Bodleian amount in number to about 2045.
Dibdin, almost immediately upon the acquisition, noticed it thus[295]:--

    'They have recently acquired a very curious and valuable collection
    of MSS., which formerly belonged to an ex-Jesuit Abbe, who intended
    (had he lived to have seen the restoration of the order of the
    Jesuits) to have presented them to the Jesuits' College at Venice.
    Neither pains nor expense were spared among his brethren, in all
    parts of the world, to make the collection, on that account, as
    perfect as possible.'

In Greek there are 128 volumes, chiefly of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, with a few of earlier date, including two _Evangelistaria_
assigned by Montfaucon to the ninth century. Of Latin classical authors
and Mediaeval poets there are 311 volumes; some of those of the former
class are of great age and value, notably a Virgil of the tenth century
(No. 50). Ninety-three MSS. form the class of Latin Bibles; the finest
of these are, one written in 1178 for the church of SS. Mary and Pancras
in Ranshoven, and another, in five very large folio volumes, written and
illuminated in France, in the years 1507-1511. Of Latin ecclesiastical
writers and Fathers there are 232 volumes; and of Latin miscellanies
(chiefly in medicine, philosophy and science, theology, and _belles
lettres_, with scarcely anything of an historical character), 576
volumes. Of all these classes a catalogue was published by Mr. Coxe in
1854, forming part iii. of the new general Catalogue of MSS.

Another division consists of Liturgical books. In this class there are
now 400 volumes, but about 130 of these were added from the Rawlinson
collection. They consist chiefly of _Horae_, Breviaries, Missals, and
Psalters, with a few other service-books; most of those which belonged
to Canonici being 'secundum usum Romanum.' No catalogue of this series
has, as yet, been made.

A sixth division comprehends 300 Italian MSS. (including five in
Spanish) of which a very elaborate catalogue was compiled, as a labour
of love, by the Count Alessandro Mortara, during the years of his stay
in Oxford[296]. His MS. was bought after his death from his executor the
Abate Giuseppe Manuzzi, of Florence, for L201, in the year 1858; it was
afterwards put to press under the care of the accomplished Italian
scholar, and intimate friend of Count Mortara, Dr. H. Wellesley, the
late Principal of New Inn Hall, and appeared, with an Italian preface by
him giving some account of the whole collection, in one volume quarto
(158 pages,) in 1864.

The last portion of the collection consists of 135 Oriental MSS.,
chiefly valuable Hebrew books on vellum. One of these (No. 78) is a copy
of Maimonides' Commentary on the Law, in fourteen books, which is dated
1366. Seven of the Biblical volumes are noticed in De Rossi's _Variae
Lectiones Veteris Testamenti_. The few Arabic MSS. are described in Dr.
Pusey's Continuation of Nicol's Catalogue.

A curious story of the recovery, amidst these books, of some leaves
belonging to a printed vellum Bible already in the Library, will be
found related under the year 1750. A few other MSS. from Canonici's
library were sold by auction, with some from Saibante's, in London, in
1821. And many relating to Italian and Venetian history, which were at
first retained by one of the heirs, passed afterwards into the hands of
the Rev. Walter Sneyd, of Baginton, Warwickshire, their present
possessor. A MS. volume of notices of the Canonici library, drawn up by
Signor Lorenzi, of Venice, was bought by the Bodleian, in 1859, for ten
guineas[297].

A MS. of Suidas, of the fifteenth century, was purchased for L220 10_s._
Another acquisition was a French translation, made in 1417, by Laurens
de Preme, of the _Ethics_, _Politics,_ &c., of Aristotle[298]. Some
specimens of the Javanese language were given by Capt. L. H. Davy.

Among printed books, the most noticeable purchase (besides the _Edd.
Pr._ of Livy, 1469, Lactantius, 1465, &c.) was that of a vellum copy of
the first edition of the Hebrew Pentateuch, printed at Bologna in 1482,
for L17 10_s._ Some sets of controversial and political tracts, with
other books, which had belonged to Thomas Brande Hollis and Dr. John
Disney, were bought at the sale of the library of the latter.

[293] The money was raised by loans of L2000 from the Radcliffe Trustees
and L3644 from the University Bankers. They were both repaid by the year
1820.

[294] De Backer's _Bibliotheque des ecrivains de la comp. de Jesus_;
quatr. serie, p. 93. 8vo. Liege, 1858.

[295] _Bibliogr. Decam._ iii. 429.

[296] See under the year 1852.

[297] The first MSS. of Dante which the Library possessed, came in the
Canonici collection; they are in number fifteen. This fact is worth
mentioning, on account of an extraordinary story told by Girolamo Gigli,
in his _Vocabolario Cateriniano_, p. cciii. (a book the printing of
which was commenced at Rome in 1717, but which was suppressed, by bull,
before completion), that in the Bodleian Library at 'Osfolk,' there was
a MS. of the _Divina Commedia_, which, from being employed in enveloping
a consignment of cheese (and so imported into England by a mode of
conveyance said to have been usually adopted by Florentine merchants,
with a view of spreading at once a knowledge of their luxuries and their
literature), had become so saturated with a caseous savour as to require
the constant guardianship of two traps to protect it from the voracity
of mice. Hence, according to this marvellous travellers' story, the MS.
went by the name of _The Book of the Mousetrap_! (See _Notes and
Queries_, i. 154.)

[298] Bodl. MS. 965.


A.D. 1818.

A return was made to the House of Commons of such books received since
1814, in pursuance of the Copyright Act, from Stationers' Hall, as it
had not been deemed necessary to place in the Library. The list is but a
trifling one, consisting chiefly of school-books and anonymous novels,
with music; but, nevertheless, it is sufficient to show the great need
of caution in rejecting any books excepting such as are of the simplest
elementary character, and the advantage of erring rather on the side of
inclusiveness than exclusiveness. Miss Edgeworth's _Parents' Assistant_,
Mrs. H. More's _Sacred Dramas_, Mrs. Opie's _Simple Tales_, and an
edition of _Ossian_, were all consigned to the limbo of 'rubbish.' But
the Cambridge Return (which is much more detailed than that from
Oxford[299]) shows a recklessness of rejection which speaks little for
the judgment of the Librarians for the time being. Besides school-books
and music, a large number of pamphlets figure in the list, including
some by Chalmers and Cobbett; the _Theology_ includes Owen's _History of
the Bible Society_; the _History_ includes _Memoirs of Oliver Cromwell
and his Children_; the _Poetry_, Byron's _Siege of Corinth_, L. Hunt's
_Story of Rimini_, and Wordsworth's _Thanksgiving Ode_; and the
_Novels_, [Peacock's] _Headlong Hall_, one by Mrs. Opie, and--_The
Antiquary_! The far wiser plan is now carried out in the Bodleian of
rejecting nothing; even the elementary works that do not need entering
in the Catalogue, are so kept that access can be had to them at all
times and examination made; and the music is from time to time sorted
and bound. And this plan was commenced in the year of which we are
writing; for, (in consequence, of course, of this return being called
for by the House of Commons,) the Curators ordered, on May 27, that
_all_ publications sent from Stationers' Hall should in future be
entered and preserved.

A very valuable and curious series of original editions of Latin and
German tracts, issued by the German Reformers between 1518 and 1550, in
eighty-four volumes, was bought for L95 15_s._ Additions have been made
to this collection at various times subsequently, so that now it
probably comprises as complete a gathering of these controversial
publications, so easily lost or destroyed from their small extent and
often ephemeral character, as can anywhere be found. A kindred
collection (although not of like value or interest) was obtained through
the gift by Mr. A. Mueller, a well-known bookseller at Amsterdam, of a
series of tracts, in sixty-two volumes, and chiefly in the Dutch
language, on the controversy with the Remonstrants in 1618-19. A MS.
Catalogue, by Mr. Mueller, dated March 3, is kept in the Librarian's
study. Besides the books, Mr. Mueller gave a few coins, including one
struck on leather during the siege of Leyden in 1574, and some natural
curiosities, which latter are now preserved in the New Museum. A _black
negro baby_, preserved in spirits (!) has, however, unaccountably
disappeared; let us hope it was decently buried. Seventeen panes of
painted glass, probably by disciples of Crabeth, who painted the windows
in the Church of Gouda, also formed part of this very miscellaneous
donation; these, most probably, are included among the curious fragments
which decorate some of the Library windows.

Six Persian MSS. were given by the late venerable Principal of Magdalen
Hall, and Lord Almoner's Reader in Arabic, Dr. Macbride. The signature
of this gentleman, who has only been removed by death while these sheets
have been passing through the press, occurs in the Admission-book of the
last century, as having been admitted to read in the Library, while
still an undergraduate of Exeter College, on May 10, 1797.

_Alderman Fletcher's illustrated copy of Gulch's Wood._ See under 1610.

Mr. John Walker, Queen's College (B.A. 1820; Chaplain of New College,
M.A., 1823), succeeded Mr. Fenton as _minister_ in July.

[299] The minuteness of specification is such that '_Turner's Real Japan
Blacking, a Label_' is duly entered.


A.D. 1819.

A copy of the extremely rare Polish version of the Bible, made by the
Socinians at the expense of Prince Nicholas Radzivil, and printed in
1563, was bought for L45[300]; and a folio Psalter, printed by Fust and
Schoeffer in 1459, (finished Aug. 29), on vellum, for L70. The second
vellum printed book in the Library is a copy of Durandus' _Rationale_,
printed by the same printers in the same year, but completed on Oct. 6.
This was bought in 1790 for L80 10_s._ Large additions were made to the
collection of Aldines.

The name of Lady Hester Stanhope occurs among the benefactors as
presenting an Arabic MS. of the Romance of Antar, in thirty volumes.

[300] The rarity of this edition was caused by its being bought up and
destroyed by the sons of Prince Radzivil.


A.D. 1820.

From Messrs. Payne and Foss was bought, for L150, the famous MS. of the
Greek New Testament called, from its former possessor, the 'Codex
Ebnerianus.' It is a small quarto, containing 425 leaves of fine vellum,
in excellent condition and well written, and ornamented with eleven rich
paintings, besides occasional arabesque borders, &c. It comprehends all
the books of the New Testament except the Apocalypse, and is assigned in
date to the twelfth or thirteenth century. The former owner, whose name
it perpetuates, Jerome William Ebner von Eschenbach, of Nuremberg,
obtained it, it is said, when first brought from the East 'ex singulari
Numinis providentia.' While in his possession, a small descriptive
volume, comprising forty-four pages and an engraved facsimile, was
published by Conrad Schoenleben, under the title of _Notitia egregii
codicis Graeci Novi Testamenti manuscripti_, &c. 4^o. Norib. 1738. This
was incorporated by De Murr in his _Memorabilia Bibliothecarum
publicarum Norimbergensium_, published in 1788, part ii. p. 100, who
added thirteen well-engraved plates of the illuminations, binding and
text. It was formerly bound in leather-covered boards, ornamented with
gold, with five silver-gilt stars on the sides, and fastened with four
silver clasps. This cover being much decayed, Ebner cased the volume in
a most costly binding of pure silver, preserving the silver stars, and
affixing on the outside a beautiful ivory figure (coaeval with the MS.)
of our Saviour, throned, and in the attitude of benediction. Above the
figure, Ebner engraved an inscription in Greek characters, corresponding
to the style of the MS., praying for a blessing upon himself and his
family.

A MS. of Terence, of the eleventh or twelfth century, which also
belonged to Ebner, was bought from Payne and Foss, at the same time, for
ten guineas. It is described in De Murr, _ubi supra_, pp. 135-7.

Fifty Greek manuscripts were bought for L500, which had formerly been in
the possession of Giovanni Saibante, of Verona. The library of this
collector is noticed in Scipio Maffei's _Verona Illustrata_ (fol. 1731),
part ii. col. 48[301]. The MSS. purchased by the Library are described
in Mr. Coxe's Catalogue, cols. 774-808.

A collection of Arabic tracts and papers, which had formerly belonged to
Dr. Kennicott, was given by Shute Barrington, Bishop of Durham.

[301] Some MSS. which had belonged to Saibante, together with some of
the Abate Canonici's collection, which had been brought to England by
the Abate Celotti, were sold by auction, in London, in 1821. The sale of
a further portion, which had passed into the hands of P. de' Gianfilippi
(also of Verona), took place at Paris in January, 1843.


A.D. 1821.

The great event of this year was the reception of the famous and
extensive collection of English dramatic literature and early poetry,
formed by Edmund Malone[302]. It was bequeathed by him on his decease
(May 25, 1812) to his brother, Lord Sunderlin, with the expression of a
wish that, if not retained as an heirloom in the family, it should be
deposited in some public library. In fulfilment of this wish, Lord
Sunderlin communicated to the University, in 1815, his intention to
transfer the collection to the Bodleian so soon as Mr. James Boswell, to
whom it was entrusted in order to assist him in the preparation of a new
edition of Malone's _Shakespeare_, should have finished his use of it.
That edition being at length issued in 1821, the library was sent to
Oxford in the same year. The character of the collection is too well
known to need description; suffice it to say that it contains upwards of
800 volumes, of which by far the greater number are distinguished by
their rarity. There are first quartos of many of Shakespeare's plays,
and second editions of others[303]; of his collected works there are
both the first and second folios. Barnfield, Beaumont and Fletcher,
Chapman, Decker, Greene, Heywood, Ben Jonson, Lodge, Massinger, Rich.
Taylor the water-poet, and Whetstone are amongst those who are most
fully represented. There are also a few MSS. A Catalogue of the
collection, in folio (52 pp.), with a life of Malone by Boswell
(previously printed in _Gent. Magaz._ and Nichol's _Lit. Hist._), was
published in 1836; and, in 1861, Mr. J. O. Halliwell printed fifty-one
copies of a small _Hand-list_ of the early English literature preserved
in it. Various volumes of Malone's own MSS. collections have been
subsequently added by purchase; viz. in 1836 some papers relating to the
life and writings of Pope; in 1838, his collections for the last
edition of his _Shakespeare_ and for the illustration of ancient
manners, together with a portion of his literary correspondence; in 1851
a volume of letters written to him by Bishop Percy, between 1783 and
1807; in 1858 three octavo volumes of collections made by him at Oxford;
and in 1864 a volume of letters to him from Dr. Johnson, Mrs. Siddons,
and others. A large series of pamphlets, chiefly relating to Irish
history and to literary matters, comprised in seventy-five volumes, was
also purchased in 1838[304]. Almost all his books are uniformly bound in
half-calf, with 'E. M.' in an interlaced monogram on the back; a very
few have a book-plate consisting of his coat-of-arms within a square of
books, with the inscription (in imitation of Grolier's) 'Edm. Malone et
amicorum,' and a motto from the _Menagiana_.

A curious instance of the variableness and uncertainty of the prices of
books is afforded by the purchase-list of this year, when contrasted
with prices paid at the present time. A copy (wanting the preliminary
leaves and a few others) of one of the Antwerp editions of Tyndale's New
Test. in 1534, (which had belonged to Mr. Benj. Ibott, and is mentioned
in Herbert's _Ames_, vol. iii. p. 1543) was bought for nineteen
shillings; Mr. Stevens in 1855 priced another imperfect copy at fifteen
guineas. But, on the other hand, L63 were given in this year for the
rare _Ed. Pr._ of Virgil, printed by Sweynheim and Pannartz in
1469[305]. A somewhat similar instance occurred also in 1826, when
Daye's edition of the Apocrypha, printed in 1549 (being vol. iv. of his
edition of the Bible in that year), was obtained for fifteen shillings,
while L73 10_s._ were paid for an edition of Virgil printed at Venice
about 1473.

The very rare German Bible, printed at Strasburgh about 1466, was bought
for L42, and a perfect copy of the first edition of the Bishops' Bible,
in 1568, for seven guineas[306]. A volume of interest in typographical
history was presented, in the first book printed in New South Wales. It
is entitled _Michael Howe, the last and worst of the Bush Rangers of Van
Dieman's Land; narrative of the chief atrocities committed by this great
murderer and his associates during a period of six years in Van Dieman's
Land_: it extends to thirty-six small octavo pages, and was printed at
Hobart Town, by Andrew Bent, in Dec, 1818[307].

The Catalogue of the Oriental MSS., commenced in the year 1787 by Uri,
was continued in this year by the publication by Mr. Nicoll of the first
part of a second volume, containing notices of 234 additional Arabic
MSS. His premature death occurred before the publication of the second
part, which he had printed as far as p. 388; this was completed and
edited (with nine lithographic plates of specimens of Arabic MSS.) by
his successor in the Hebrew Professorship, Dr. Pusey, in 1835. It
contains altogether descriptions of 296 Arabic volumes, together with
copious additions by Dr. Pusey to Uri's first portion, which are noticed
above, p. 199.

The Parish Registers of Newington, Kent, and of Bures, in Suffolk, which
had come into the Library among Dr. Rawlinson's books, were restored to
their respective parishes by a decree submitted to Convocation on Nov.
9. In the Register of Convocation itself, by a singular omission, no
mention of the former of these parish books is made (although included
in the proposal), and the restoration of that of Bures is alone
recorded. But by enquiry addressed to the Vicar of Newington, it has
been ascertained that one of the Registers contains a memorandum of its
having been returned by vote of Convocation on the day in question.

By a vote of Convocation on July 7, the rooms on the first floor of the
Schools' quadrangle, which were formerly used as the Hebrew and Greek
Schools, were assigned to the Library; the former (on the south side)
now contains, in two rooms, the Bodley, Laud, and other collections of
MSS.; the latter (on the north side), also in two rooms, the foreign and
English periodicals[308].

On May 25, a plan for warming the Library was, for the first time,
adopted. It consisted in introducing hot air simply at two small
gratings at one end of the Library, from pipes communicating with a
stove placed (with the consent of Exeter College) where the furnace of
the present apparatus is situated, in the wall between the north-west
corner of the Library and the Ashmolean Museum. As a means of warming
the Library generally the system was wholly ineffectual, no benefit
being experienced except by those who remained in the immediate vicinity
of the gratings. It remained, however, in use until 1845, when pipes
were laid down through a considerable part of the Library for the
purpose of warming it by steam. This plan, however, did not give
satisfaction, either on the ground of safety or of effectiveness. In
1855 Mr. Braidwood, the late distinguished head of the London Fire
Brigade, was brought down to survey the apparatus and to examine
generally how the Library could best be secured against fire; and, by
his advice and that of Mr. G. G. Scott, the pipes were enclosed in slate
casings, so as effectually to hinder contact with any inflammable
materials, and two fire-proof iron doors were inserted at the entrances
to the great Reading-room, in order to cut it off from the rest of the
building[309]. But in 1861 steam was discarded for the safer and more
effectual system, now in use, of warming by hot water; new pipes (cased
in slate) were laid down by Messrs. Haden and Son, and were carried
through the Examination Schools on the ground-floor of the quadrangle,
as well as through the Library.

In Feb. Mr. J. P. Roberts, New College (B.A. 1821, M.A. 1826, now Minor
Canon of Chichester) was appointed _minister_, _vice_ Mr. P. Barrett,
Wadham College (B.A. 1828); and Mr. Robert Eden, of St. John's College
(Corp. Chr. Coll. B.A. 1825, M.A. 1827, now Vicar of Wymondham,
Norfolk), was appointed _vice_ Walker. From this time there appear to
have been two assistants, although it was not until 1837 that that
number was formally allowed by Statute.

[302] Malone was the son of an Irish Judge. He was born in Dublin, Oct.
4, 1741, was educated at Trin. Coll. Dublin, where he took the degree of
M.A., and became a barrister, but soon retired from legal practice.

[303] For notices of the purchase of several early quartos, wanting in
this series, see 1834.

[304] These are now incorporated with the large collection called
_Godwyn Pamphlets_. A copy of Wood's _Ath. Oxon._ with MSS. notes by
Malone, was given by Mr. B. H. Bright in 1835.

[305] Various other _editt. princ._ were bought in this year, with some
Aldines. Also a collection of modern Greek works printed at Venice.

[306] Offor's copy sold for L41; Lea Wilson's for L61 10_s._

[307] The present writer has in his possession an early newspaper
printed in New Zealand, the _Auckland Times_, No. 41, for Apr. 6, 1843,
not merely curious in relation to the history of the colony, but also as
a typographical relic. Its crowning interest is to be found in its
colophon (if such a classical word may be applied to the imprint of a
newspaper), which states that it was '_Printed in a mangle_.'

[308] In Lascelles' Account of Oxford, published in this year, it is
said that the printed books in the Library were computed at 160,000, and
the MSS. at 30,000.

[309] Mr. Braidwood's report was printed in 1856, together with one from
Mr. Scott, on the extension of the Library, and the means of rendering
it fire-proof.


A.D. 1822.

In July, the Rev. Dr. Bliss returned to the Library as Sub-librarian, in
the room of Mr. Nicoll, appointed Regius Professor of Hebrew. And in
October the Rev. Rich. French Laurence, M.A., of Pembroke College,
succeeded Dr. Cotton, who quitted Oxford for Ireland.

'Tuesday, August 6, 1822, I was at the Library the whole day, and not a
single member of the University came into the room, excepting Mr. Eden,
the assistant. Oxford race-day.' This note occurs in vol. x. of Dr.
Bliss's MS. antiquarian and miscellaneous memoranda. Considering that
the time of the year was well-nigh the middle of the Long Vacation, it
does not seem surprising that on one day there should have been no
academic readers in the Library, even if there may have been academic
riders on the race-course. The two occurrences have so little
correspondence with each other that one would hope that the zealous
Sub-librarian (who has deemed the same want of readers worth
commemorating also in another note) assigned _non causa pro causa_.


A.D. 1823.

By the exertions of the brothers J. S. and P. B. Duncan, Esqs., Fellows
of New College, distinguished for their efforts to promote the study of
the Arts and Sciences in the University, a subscription-fund was raised
for the purpose of adorning the Picture Gallery with plaster models of
some of the finest buildings of Greek and Roman antiquity. The result
was that in the present year the following series, by Fouquet, of Paris,
was placed in the Gallery, at a total cost of about L400:--The Arch of
Constantine, the Parthenon, the Temple of the Sybil at Tivoli, the
Maison Carree at Nismes, the Erechtheum and Lantern of Demosthenes at
Athens, the Theatre of Herculaneum, and the Temple of Fortuna Virilis at
Rome.

A large number of works by foreign authors, chiefly theological, was
bought (for L375) at the sale at Leyden of the library of Jonas Wilh. Te
Water, professor of Eccl. Hist. in that University. A separate
catalogue, occupying twenty-three folio pages, was issued of these
books.

Mr. E. P. New, of St. John's College (B.A. 1822, M.A. 1825, B.D. 1831),
was appointed in December to assist in the compilation of the new
Catalogue; but how long he remained in the Library does not appear.


A.D. 1824.

A collection of valuable original papers relating to affairs in Church
and State, which had belonged to Archbishop Sheldon, were sold by his
great-nephew, Sir John English Dolben, of Finedon, Northamptonshire, to
the Library for L40 5_s._ They are now bound in six volumes, of which
three are lettered _Sheldon_, and three _Dolben_. Of the first three,
two contain letters from English, Welsh, Scotch and Irish Bishops, and
the contents of the other are miscellaneous; of the second three, one
contains miscellaneous letters and papers commencing at 1585, another
has similar papers from 1626 to 1721, and the third contains
miscellaneous ecclesiastical letters and documents. Some of the letters
are addressed to the Archbishop's secretary, Miles Smyth, Esq. A short
letter from Sir John Dolben to Dr. Bandinel, relating to his disposal of
these papers, dated Oct. 12, 1824, is preserved in Bodl. MS. Addit. ii.
A. 32. He had previously given, in 1822, a fine copy of a quarto Bible
which had belonged to Sheldon, containing (1) the Prayer-Book and
Metrical Psalms, printed at Cambridge in 1638, (2) the Old Test.,
printed by Field at London in 1648, and (3) the New Test., Cambr. 1637.
At the end are some memoranda by the Archbishop of the births, baptisms,
and deaths of members of the Sheldon and Okeover families, and of the
legitimate children of Charles II and the Duke of York. The Library more
than a century before had received benefactions from a member of the
same family of Dolben; Gilbert Dolben, of Finedon, having given some
printed books in 1697, together with a manuscript of Gower. And twenty
vols. of Chamberlaine's _State of Great Britain_ were given by Mr. J. E.
Dolben in 1796. An additional volume of the Sheldon correspondence was
given to the Library in 1840, by Dr. Routh, the President of Magdalen
College. It is a copy-book of business-letters written by the
Archbishop. In a note to Dr. Bandinel which accompanied the gift, and
which is now fixed in vol. i. of Burnet's autograph copy of his _Own
Times_, Dr. Routh says:--

    'The President takes the opportunity of sending a volume containing
    the first draught of letters sent by Archbp. Sheldon to different
    persons, together with a few other contemporary papers. They were
    put into the President's hands by the late Sir John English Dolben,
    and as the University purchased of that gentleman what were commonly
    called the Sheldon Papers, he thinks they cannot be deposited
    anywhere more suitably than in the Bodleian Library.'

To the annual catalogue for this year was attached a special list,
filling thirty-two folio pages, of the books (upwards of 1500 in number)
which were bought at the Hague, at the sale of the library collected by
the distinguished Dutch scholars and lawyers, Gerard and John Meerman.
The sale-catalogue is a volume of more than 1200 pages. The books bought
for the Library were chiefly such as supplied deficiencies in foreign
history and law, together with some Greek[310] and Latin MSS., for the
most part patristic and classical. The sum expended was L925. Some rare
Spanish historical books (in which class of literature, thanks to Dr.
Bandinel's care in keeping it steadily in view, the Library is now very
rich) were bought at the sale of Don J. Ant. Conde.

But the chief distinction of this year lies in the acquisition, by
bequest of Mrs. Elizabeth Dennis Denyer (widow of Mr. John Denyer, of
Chelsea, who died in 1806) of a most valuable collection of early
editions of the English Bible, numbering altogether about twenty-five.
To show the rarity and worth of this collection, it will be sufficient
to mention but a few of the volumes which it contains. _Imprimis_,
Coverdale's first edition, 1535[311], and his second edition, 1537;
Cranmer's, in April, 1540 and in 1541, and by Grafton in 1553;
Matthew's, by Becke, in 1551; Tyndale's New Testament, in 1536, and
another of his earliest editions; Hollybush's English and Latin
Testament, 1538, and Erasmus' Testament, 1540. Besides the Biblical
collection, Mrs. Denyer also bequeathed twenty-one English theological
works, nearly all printed before 1600; including a beautiful copy of
Fisher on the Penitential Psalms (by Wynkyn de Worde) and books by
(amongst others) Bale, Bonner, Brightwell, Erasmus, Hooper, Joye, and
Tonstall.

Mr. L. E. Judge, New College (B.A. 1827, M.A. 1830; Chaplain; deceased
1853), succeeded Mr. Roberts, in March, as assistant; but in July of the
next year retired, and was succeeded by Mr. W. Bailey, also of New
College (B.A. 1829).

[310] These, in number thirty-eight, are described in Mr. Coxe's
Catalogue, cols. 724-773. An eighth-century copy of Eusebius'
_Chronicon_ is among the Latin MSS.

[311] Wanting title and map. A title had been supplied by Mrs. Denyer,
who in several instances had supplied deficiencies very successfully in
pen and ink; a perfect facsimile, however, by Mr. J. Harris, which might
pass for the original, were not the minute mark '_Fs. T. H._' seen on
the back of the page, has since been substituted. It is a marvel of
caligraphic skill. Another imperfect copy came to the Library among
Selden's books.


A.D. 1825.

The sale at Paris of the library of L. M. Langles, the keeper of the
Oriental MSS. in the Bibl. Royale, afforded a large accession of books
in that branch of literature which was his specialty.

Mr. Sim. J. Etty, New College (B.A. 1829, M.A. 1832, now Vicar of
Wanborough, Wilts), was appointed assistant in the room of Mr. Eden. Mr.
Etty remained in the Library until the year 1834. The Catalogue of
_Dissertationes Academicae_, which appeared in 1832, was in a great
measure his work.

Two MSS. intended of old for the Library by Sir K. Digby, were bought in
this year. To the account of them given at p. 58 _supra_, it should be
added that the library left in France by Digby on his death (from which,
no doubt, these volumes came) was bought back by George, Earl of
Bristol, and finally sold by auction at London, in April and May, 1680.
Sixty-nine MSS. were included in this dispersion. It should further be
added to the previous notice that it was at Laud's instance, and through
him as Chancellor of the University, that Digby presented his collection
to the Library. A letter from the Archbishop, which accompanied the
gift, is printed in Wharton's collection of his _Remains_, vol. ii. p.
73.


A.D. 1826.

There is not much to notice in the acquisitions of this year. A few
Persian and other Oriental MSS. were purchased, and more in the two
following years; and some Burmese MSS. were given by Sir C. Grey, Chief
Justice of Calcutta. A curious volume of manuscript and printed papers
relative to the siege of Oxford, 1643-46, was presented by Mr. W.
Hamper, of Birmingham. In January, the Rev. Chas. Hen. Cox, M.A.,
Student of Ch. Ch., was appointed Sub-librarian in the room of Mr.
Laurence.


A.D. 1827.

A very large collection of Academic Dissertations published in Germany,
amounting to about 43,400, was bought at Altona for L332 16_s._ Of these
a folio catalogue was published in 1834, which, by a singular error,
bears on its title the date 1832, as the year in which this accession
came to the Library. In 1828, 160 volumes of the same character were
added, and other large additions were made in 1836 and 1837, but
particularly in 1846, when no fewer than 7000 were purchased[312].

Mr. Henry Forster, New College (B.A. 1832, M.A. 1834; Esquire Bedel of
Divinity; deceased 1857), succeeded Mr. Bailey, in March, as Assistant.

[312] There is scarcely an imaginable subject in law, theology, or
history, on which something may not be found in this vast collection.
The _something_ may often be meagre and superficial, but it is still
oftener curious, and even in the former case it may be useful as
pointing to sources of further information. In days of Ritual
controversy, one party or another may be glad to know that in 1725,
George Henry Goetz, D.D., wrote on the interesting question whether a
clergyman might do duty in his dressing-gown,--_Num Verbi ministro toga
cubicularia_ (Schlaffpeltze) _induto officio sacro defungi liceat?_
Those who know what curses were invoked of old upon the heads of
stealers of books, may be interested in hearing what one Pipping had to
say on the subject in 1721, in his _Diss. de Imprecationibus libris
ascriptis_; while the title of Sam. Schelging's discourse in 1729, _De
Apparitionibus mortuorum vivis ex pacto factis_, will have attraction
for not a few. Sometimes the dryest subjects were lightened up at the
close with ponderous jokes, or unexpected turns were given to the matter
in hand; _e.g._ those worthy Germans who had gone to sleep at Jena, in
1660, during the reading of a dissertation _De Jure et Potestate
Parlamenti Britannici_, by one J. A. Gerhard, (who must have taken
unusual interest in the history of the English Rebellion,) were wakened
up at the end by the discussion of the following novel questions in
law:--'Casus ex jure privato.

'I. Titius ducit uxorem Caiam. Caia, elapso uno vel altero anno,
transmutatur in virum. Q. an Caia haec, soluto per hanc metamorphosin
matrimonio, possit repetere dotem? Dist.

'II. Sempronia, defuncto marito Maevio, nubit Titio. Maevius divina
potentia in vitam resuscitatur mortalem. Q. an Maevius hic, secundum
vivus, uxorem Semproniam et bona sua repetere possit? Aff.'

It was usual for the friends of the candidate who defended the thesis of
the Dissertation (generally written for him by the _Praeses_) to attach
some complimentary letters or verses. In the case of those published at
Upsal, the zeal of the encomiasts frequently breaks out into wild
compositions in Hebrew, Greek, French, German and English, affording in
the latter instance (and it may be in others) very curious specimens of
the language. A laborious trifler, named P. Wettersten, compliments a
friend, who had read at Upsal, in 1742, a dissertation by Prof. Peter
Ekerman on the antiquities of a small town called Norkoping, with a kind
of acrostic in twenty-five lines on the verse, 'Nunc erit et seclis
Norcopia clara futuris,' which, starting from the centre of the page,
may be read upwards, downwards, and in every form of mazy irregularity;
every way, in short, except the right.


A.D. 1828.

A collection of 153 Northern MSS., chiefly in the Icelandic and Danish
languages, formed by Finn Magnusen, was purchased from him for
L350[313]. A catalogue (56 pp. quarto) was published in the year 1832.
Amongst them are many early and curious volumes in poetry and history.
Other collections of MSS. were sold by the same collector to the British
Museum and to the Advocates' Library at Edinburgh.

A large number of Aldines were obtained at the sale of the collection of
M. Renouard, the Aldine bibliographer, which took place in London, June
26-30. And the rare first edition of John Knox's _Historie of the Church
of Scotland_ was purchased for sixteen guineas.

Some additional rooms on the second story of the Schools' quadrangle, on
the north and east sides, which went by the names of the Schools of
Geometry and Medicine, were permanently attached to the Library, by vote
of Convocation, on June 5.

On June 26, the nomination of the Rev. Stephen Reay, M.A., of St.
Alban's Hall (afterwards B.D., and Laudian Professor of Arabic in 1840),
as Sub-librarian in the room of Mr. C. H. Cox, was approved in
Convocation. Mr. Reay was appointed to the charge of the Oriental
department, his knowledge of Hebrew specially qualifying him for the
care of the yearly increasing mass of Rabbinical lore. To this branch he
added, and retained to the close of his life, the care of the 'Progress'
Room, or room containing the publications, foreign and English, which
appeared in parts. And on Dec. 20, the Rev. John Besly, M.A., Fellow of
Balliol (afterwards D.C.L., and Vicar of Long Benton, Northumberland,
deceased April 17, 1868, aged sixty-eight), was confirmed as Mr. Reay's
colleague, in the place of Dr. Bliss.

[313] Some notes by G. J. Thorkelin on Northern Antiquities were bought
in 1846.


A.D. 1829.

The great Hebrew collection, which at present forms so distinguished a
feature in the contents of the Library, was virtually commenced in this
year by the purchase, at Hamburgh (for L2080), of the famous Oppenheimer
library, consisting of upwards of 5000 volumes, of which 780 are
MSS[314]. Many Hebrew works had, it is true, come with Selden's library,
in 1659; but little or nothing had been done since that period to
advance upon that beginning. The additions made in this department from
1844 up to about the year 1857, are said, in Dr. Steinschneider's
introduction to his catalogue (_col._ 50), to have numbered no fewer
than about 2100 volumes[315].

David Oppenheimer, Chief Rabbi at Prague, devoted more than half a
century to the formation of his library. On his death, Sept. 23, 1735,
it came into the possession of his son, a Rabbi at Hildesheim, and
thence into the hands of Isaac Seligmann at Hamburgh. Several catalogues
were issued during this period, the last being one in octavo, at
Hamburgh, in 1826, an index to which, compiled by Dr. J. Goldenthal, was
printed at the expense of the Library in 1845. The collection would have
been dispersed by auction, had it not been bought _en masse_ for Oxford.
It possesses extreme interest and value in the eyes of Jewish students,
insomuch that for a series of years the Library was never without
several foreign visitors engaged in its examination. A very elaborate
catalogue of all the printed Hebrew books contained in it, and
throughout the whole of the Library, was compiled by Dr. M.
Steinschneider during the years 1850-1860, and printed at Berlin, where
it was published in the latter year in a very thick quarto volume. The
book is divided into two parts: the first containing a description of
the Biblical, Talmudical, liturgical and anonymous volumes; the second
containing the works of miscellaneous authors, in the alphabetical order
of their names. Prefixed is a brief list of the Hebrew MSS. in the
Library, with the numbers at present attached to them, and references to
the catalogues in which they are described. Of several rare books in the
Oppenheimer library there are duplicate copies, varying in condition and
ornamentation; of some there are copies on red, yellow, and blue paper.
Distinguished amongst all is a copy of the Talmud, printed in 1713-28,
in twenty-four folio volumes, entirely on vellum. 'Perhaps,' says
Archdeacon Cotton, 'this work is the grandest and most extensive vellum
publication extant[316].'

Mr. Robert Bowyer, miniature painter to Queen Charlotte, who had devoted
a considerable part of his life to the collection of drawings and
engravings illustrating the Holy Scriptures, put forward a proposal for
their purchase by subscription with a view to their being deposited in
the Bodleian. Their number amounted to nearly seven thousand (including
113 drawings by Loutherbourg), described as being in fine condition and
of great value; and they were inserted as additional illustrations in a
copy of Macklin's folio Bible, which was enlarged thereby from its
original extent of seven volumes to forty-five. Hence the collection
passed, and passes, under the name of Bowyer's Bible. Mr. Bowyer, who
had spent upon it upwards of three thousand pounds, proposed to dispose
of it for L2500, and a committee was formed in London, upon which
appeared the names of many distinguished persons, to raise a
subscription for the purpose. But upon Mr. Bowyer's despatching an agent
to Oxford, the matter met with so little encouragement here, the
Librarian, in particular, being (as Dr. Bliss has noted upon his copy of
the original proposal) unfavourable to it, that the project fell to the
ground. The reasons why Oxford made so little response do not appear;
probably the value set upon the collection was deemed to be greatly
exaggerated. After the death of Mr. Bowyer (June 4, 1834, aged
seventy-six) the Bible came into the hands of one Mrs. Parkes, of Golden
Square, by whom it was disposed of, in 1848, in a lottery (together with
a few other prizes) for which four thousand tickets were issued at one
guinea each. The successful speculator was Mr. Saxon, a
gentleman-farmer, near Shepton Mallet. In 1852 it was in the hands of
Messrs. Puttick and Simpson, the well-known book-auctioneers, for sale.
By them it was announced for an auction on Feb. 26, 1853, and was
disposed of, about that time, to Messrs. Willis and Sotheran, the
booksellers, for about L500. Since then it has been announced for sale
at Manchester.

[314] One MS. which had strayed from Oppenheimer's library previously to
its transfer to the Bodleian, was purchased and restored to its place in
1847.

[315] A notice of the Oppenheimer collection, and of the other Hebrew
portions of the Library is given in the preface to vol. iii. of Fuerst's
_Bibliotheca Judaica_, 8^o. Leipz. 1863, pp. 42-51. The _Catalogus
Interpretum S. Script._, by Thomas James, in 1635, is here metamorphosed
into one by Thomas _Jones_, in 1735.

[316] _Typographical Gazetteer_, p. 349.


A.D. 1830.

A copy of the rare edition of Luther's translation of the Bible, printed
at Wittemberg in 1541, was bought, through Messrs. Payne and Foss, for
fifty guineas, at the sale, in London, of the library of the Archdeacon
de la Tour, of Hildesheim, which was said to have been formerly the
property of the English Benedictine Monastery of Landspring, and which
was then, it appears, in the possession of Mr. -- Solly. It contains some
texts on the fly-leaves in the autograph, and with the signatures, of
both Luther and Melanchthon, which seem to have been unnoticed at the
time of the sale. A facsimile of a part of Luther's inscription is
given in plate xxxi. in Mr. Leigh Sotheby's _Illustrations of the
Handwriting of Melanchthon_[317]. The book is now exhibited in a glass
case, in one of the windows of the Library.

[317] A copy of this edition, with MS. notes by Luther, Melanchthon,
Bugenhagen and Major, was sold to the British Museum, at Hibbert's sale
in 1829, for L267 15_s._!


A.D. 1831.

In December of this year, Viscount Kingsborough[318] presented a
magnificent copy (being one of four which were printed on vellum) of his
_Antiquities of Mexico_, or coloured facsimiles, executed at his
expense, in seven folio volumes, of Mexican paintings and hieroglyphics
preserved in the libraries of Paris, Berlin, Dresden, Vienna, Rome,
Bologna, and Oxford (in Laud's and Selden's collections), together with
preliminary dissertations. This sumptuous book is exhibited near the
entrance of the library, in a case made expressly for its reception.

On June 30, the nomination, as Sub-librarian, of Rev. Ernest Hawkins,
M.A., of Balliol, afterwards Fellow of Exeter, (of late well-known for
his labours in the cause of Missions, as Secretary to the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel), was approved by Convocation. He
succeeded Dr. Besly, who had taken the Balliol College living of Long
Benton, in Northumberland.

[318] This learned and spirited nobleman died, in 1837, in a debtors'
prison in Dublin, where he was confined for liabilities incurred on
behalf of his father, the Earl of Kingston.


A.D. 1832.

A twelfth-century MS. of Scholia on the _Odyssey_ was purchased for
L100. The collection of Bibles, which had during some time past made
some slow progress, was increased by copies of various early printed
versions in European languages, and its further enlargement was steadily
kept in view in succeeding years.

Six guineas were given for copies of Servetus' treatise _De Trinitatis
erroribus_ and his _Dialogi de Trinitate_, printed in 1531 and 1532,
which are of very great rarity, in consequence of their having very
generally shared the fate of their author.


A.D. 1833.

Some precious Shakespearian volumes, consisting of the _Venus and
Adonis_ of 1594 and 1617, the _Lucrece_ of 1594 and 1616, with a
subsequent edition of 1655, and the _Sonnets_ of 1609, were presented by
the well-known collector, Mr. Thomas Caldecott, who had been formerly a
Fellow of New College. They are now incorporated with the Malone
collection. Several MSS. of Sir William Jones were presented by the
brothers Augustus and Julius C. Hare. An interesting and large
collection of tracts on the Roman Catholic disabilities, affairs in
Ireland, &c., in forty-five volumes, was purchased at the sale of the
library of Charles Butler, of Lincoln's Inn.

An anonymous pamphlet, entitled, _A Few Words on the Bodleian Library_,
appeared in this year; its author was Sir Edmund Head, M.A., Merton
College. The object was to urge the desirableness of allowing books to
be borrowed from the Library, after the example of Cambridge. One of the
arguments by which the author supported the proposal, viz. that College
tutors were unable to visit the Library in term time during the hours at
which it is open, has since been entirely removed by the attachment of
the Radcliffe Library as a Reading-room, which remains open until ten
o'clock at night. The pamphlet was reprinted in the Report of the
University Commission in 1852.


A.D. 1834.

Numerous purchases were made during the sale of Mr. Heber's library.
Amongst these were some rare English tracts of the Reformers, Bale,
Becon, Tyndal, Knox, &c; a large and valuable collection of booksellers'
catalogues and sale catalogues of books and coins between 1726 and
1814[319]; and a mass of some 1100 or 1200 plays, published in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries[320]. Numerous early Shakespeare
editions were also obtained; _inter alias_, the first edition (1594) of
the first part of the _Contention betwixt the Houses of Yorke and
Lancaster_, for L64; _Richard III_, 1598, L17; fourth edit. of _Henry
IV_, 1608, L12 12_s._[321], &c. The greater part of the collection of
editions of Horace up to the year 1738, formed by Dr. Douglas, a
collection which was used in the preparation of the edition published at
London, by James Watson, in 1760, was bought for L20. It consists of
twenty-seven vols. in folio, thirty-nine in quarto, and 248 in octavo
and smaller sizes. Dibdin (_Introd. to the Classics_) says that the
whole collection consisted of 450 editions. A Prayer-Book of 1707, with
MSS. collations by Rev. John Lewis, of Margate, of alterations in
editions between 1549 and 1637, was bought for L8 8_s._ One of the
chief gems in the Picture Gallery was bequeathed by James Paine, Esq.,
being the portrait of his father, James Paine, the architect[322], while
instructing his son in drawing, by Sir Joshua Reynolds. This beautiful
picture has retained its freshness of colour far more perfectly than
most others of Sir Joshua's paintings; and it has recently, under the
direction of the present Librarian, been carefully cleaned, and
protected with glass and a curtain, that its brilliancy may incur no
risk of deterioration. But this year is chiefly distinguished in the
Annals of the Library by the bequest of the


DOUCE COLLECTION.

Francis Douce, the donor of this magnificent library (who died on March
30, in this year), is said to have been induced to make this disposition
of his treasures through the courteous reception afforded to him by Dr.
Bandinel, upon the occasion of a visit to Oxford, in 1830. The
gatherings of a lifetime with which the Bodleian was thus enriched,
consist of 393 manuscripts, ninety-eight charters, about 16,480 printed
volumes, a very large collection of early and valuable prints and
drawings, and some coins[323]. For the most part, the books which thus
came were of classes in which the Library was then deficient. Nearly all
the finest specimens of Missal-painting which it now possesses are found
among the Douce MSS., several of which are exhibited in a glass case at
the further end of the Library. Chief among these are three volumes of
_Horae_, one executed, perhaps by G. da Libri, at the beginning of the
sixteenth century for Leonora Gonzaga, Duchess of Urbino, a second
belonged to Mary de Medici, and the other was completed in 1527 for B.
Sforza, second wife of Sigism. I of Poland. These are priceless gems,
rivalled only by such as the Bedford Missal. In the same case is a
Psalter on purple vellum, probably of the ninth century, which came from
the old Royal Library of France, and which, from this circumstance and
its age, has sometimes been called Charlemagne's Psalter. The printed
books are rich in history, biography, antiquities, manners and customs,
and the fine arts[324]. In Bibles (English and French), Horae, Primers,
Books of Common Prayer and Psalters, the collection is very strong.
Among the Psalters is a copy of Archbishop Parker's rare metrical
version. Early French literature is also a conspicuous feature, in which
the Library had previously been very deficient. Of fifteenth-century
typography there are no fewer than 311 specimens. The finest of these is
a magnificent copy of Christoforo Landino's Italian translation of
Pliny's Natural History, printed on vellum by Nic. Janson, at Venice, in
1476. It is enriched with exquisite illuminated borders at the
commencement of each book, a specimen of which, together with a
description of the volume, is given in Shaw's _Illuminated Ornaments_,
pl. xxxviii[325]. There are also a large number of fragments of works by
early English printers, including two by Caxton, which are unique. One
of these is a portion (two quarters of an octavo or duodecimo sheet) of
an edition of the _Horae_, conjecturally assigned by Mr. Blades to 1478,
and the other is of an edition of the _Booke of Curtesye_, probably
printed in 1491, consisting of two quarto pages. There is also one of
the two known copies of a curious placard, issued by Caxton, inviting
those who were disposed to buy 'ony pyes of two and thre comemoracions
of Salisburi vse' to come to him at Westminster, and they should have
them 'good chepe[326].' The other copy is in the possession of Earl
Spencer. A very different, but still very curious, item is a large
collection of chap-books and children's penny books of the last century
and commencement of the present; and two folio volumes are filled with
black-letter ballads. A catalogue of the library was published in one
volume, in folio, in 1840; the part containing the printed books was the
work of Mr. H. Symonds, of Magdalen Hall (B.A. 1840, M.A. 1842, now
Precentor of Norwich), and that which describes the Fragments, the
Charters and the Manuscripts was drawn up by Rev. H. O. Coxe. From the
year 1839 until the commencement of 1842, Mr. Thomas Dodd, formerly a
well-known London dealer in prints, and author of the _Connoisseur's
Repertory_, was employed in making a catalogue of the Douce prints and
drawings. This catalogue still remains in MS. Four very grand studies of
heads, drawn either by Raffaelle or Giulio Romano, have recently been
framed and hung at the western end of the Library.

On June 25, Convocation sanctioned the transfer to the Library of the
room immediately over the entrance in the gateway-tower of the Schools,
(now called the _Mason Room_) which had been hitherto assigned as the
'Savile Study,' on condition that a small room in the adjoining
south-east angle of the quadrangle should be prepared at the expense of
the Bodleian for the reception of the MSS. and printed books,
instruments, &c., which were given to the University by Sir Henry Savile
for the use of his Professors. This is the room in which the Savile
library (which includes also some books given by Dr. Wallis and Sir
Christopher Wren) is still preserved, under the charge of the Savilian
Professors of Geometry and Astronomy.

On July 5, Convocation confirmed the nomination of Rev. William Cureton,
M.A., of Ch. Ch. (afterwards so well known for his Syriac studies,
which gained him the patronage of the Prince Consort and a Canonry at
Westminster), to the Sub-librarianship vacated by Rev. E. Hawkins.

Mr. Edmund Grove, of Magdalen College (who never graduated), was
appointed Assistant in April, _vice_ Mr. Stephen Exup. Wentworth, of
Balliol (B.A. 1833, M.A. 1835). Mr. Wentworth appears to have succeeded
Mr. Forster in 1832.

[319] Another collection of sale catalogues in forty-five vols. was
purchased in 1836.

[320] Another collection, in twenty-eight vols., of plays chiefly dating
from 1630 to 1707, was bought, in 1842, for L6 17_s._

[321] In 1837 _Romeo and Juliet_, printed by Smethwicke, n. d., was
bought for L9 10_s._; in 1840, _Richard III_, 1605, for L21, and
_Hamlet_, 1611, for L10 10_s._; and in 1841 the first edit. 1595, of
part iii. of _Henry VI._ was bought at Chalmers' sale for L131!

[322] Mr. Paine died in France in 1789, aged 73 years. The picture was
painted by Reynolds in June, 1764. Among the buildings erected by Paine
were Brocket Hall, Herts; Wardour Castle, Wilts; and Richmond Bridge.

[323] To the British Museum Mr. Douce bequeathed his own Diaries and
Notebooks, to remain sealed up until Jan. 1, 1900, in order that all of
his own and the succeeding generation may have passed away before the
personal histories which they undoubtedly contain are brought to light.

[324] In the majority of instances the books bear MS. notes by Douce,
which often are valuable for the references they afford to other works
and sources of further information. A few specimens of some of the
fuller notes of this kind were contributed by the present writer to the
early volumes of the second series of _Notes and Queries_. One book,
viz. John Weever's _Epigrammes_, 1599, containing notes by Douce, which
had somehow escaped from his library before it came to Oxford, was
purchased in 1838, for L24 10_s._ A letter written by Douce in 1804,
dated from the British Museum, where he was for a short time Keeper of
the MSS., was bought in 1864, and a few other papers in 1866.

[325] In the same beautiful volume are facsimiles from three of Douce's
MS. _Horae_.

[326] A facsimile of this advertisement is given in the catalogue of the
Douce library.


A.D. 1835.

The original MS. of Burnet's _History of his Own Times_, with a copy
prepared for the press, a portion of his _History of the Reformation_,
and some other papers by him, was purchased, from a family descended
from the Bishop, for L210. An account of these MSS. may be found at p.
474 of the Appendix to Burnet's _History of James II_, being an extract
from the _Own Times_ which Dr. Routh edited, with additional notes, when
ninety-six years old, in 1852. The copy prepared for the press is
expressly mentioned in the catalogue for 1835 as forming part of the
purchase; and yet that copy appears from a passage in a letter from
Rawlinson, dated Aug. 18, 1743, to have been then in the hands of that
collector, whence it would have been supposed that it must have passed
at once into the possession of the Library. After mentioning the book,
Rawlinson says, 'I purchased the MSS. of a gentleman who corrected the
press where that book was printed, and amongst his papers I have all the
castrations[327].'

The MS. of Lewis' _Life of Wyclif_, with some additions by the author,
was bought for L4 14_s._ 6_d._ Various other MSS. by Lewis were already
in the Library among Dr. Rawlinson's collections. The purchases of
printed books were chiefly amongst early editions of Classics (Juvenal,
Ovid, Virgil, &c), Fathers (Augustine, Jerome), Schoolmen, and a very
large series of fifteenth-century editions of the Decretals, Digest,
Institutes, and other works in Canon and Civil Law. These were obtained
at the sale of the famous library of Dr. Kloss, of Frankfort, whose
collection was so remarkably rich in books bearing MS. notes by
Melanchthon.

A curious collection of papers and pamphlets, printed and MS., relating
to Spanish affairs, and of much interest to students of Spanish history,
contained in thirty-two volumes in folio and eighty in quarto, was
purchased for L40. It was lot 4583 in Heber's sale, by whom it had been
bought at the Yriarte sale for more than L100.

[327] Ballard MS. ii. 88.


A.D. 1836.

Aubrey's collection of notes and drawings concerning Druidical and Roman
antiquities in Britain, together with some miscellaneous historical
notes, entitled by him _Monumenta Britannica_, in four parts (now bound
in two folio volumes), was purchased, for L50, of Col. Charles Greville.
Accounts of Avebury and Stonehenge, which are important from their early
date (the former being the earliest known), are to be found in these
curious and interesting volumes[328]. The remainder of Aubrey's MSS.
came to the Library in 1860, upon the transfer of the books from the
Ashmolean Museum. See _sub anno_ 1858.

A collection of about 300 tracts, relating to American affairs and the
War of Independence, in forty-one vols., formed by Rev. Jonathan
Boucher[329], was bought for L8 18_s._ 6_d._ These are now included in
the series of tracts called _Godwyn Pamphlets_, in continuation of those
which came, in 1770, from the donor so named. Another large gathering of
American tracts, collected by Mr. George Chalmers, when engaged in
writing his _History of the Revolt_, was bought in 1841 for L24 13_s._;
at the same time, the first and only volume of his _History_, which
itself was never actually published, was bought for L2 7_s._

_Sale Catalogues._ See 1834.

When the new Copyright Act was introduced into Parliament in this year,
it was proposed to allow L500 _per annum_ to the Bodleian, in the manner
adopted with regard to six other libraries, in lieu of the old privilege
of receiving a copy of every book entered at Stationers' Hall. The
Curators, however, on May 27, resolved that it would be highly desirable
to retain the privilege, but that, should an alteration be made, it
would be inexpedient to receive an annual grant by way of compensation;
and in consequence of this opinion, the proposed abolition of the
privilege was abandoned.

[328] A short description of them will be found in Gough's _Brit.
Topogr._ vol. ii. pp. 369-70, and a fuller account in Britton's _Memoir
of Aubrey_, 1845, pp. 87-91. Mr. Britton, however, strange to say, was
not aware that the volumes had been for nine years in safe custody in
the Bodleian, and consequently deplores their unfortunate disappearance!
He describes their contents from an abstract in the Gough collection.

[329] An account of Mr. Boucher, who quitted America on account of his
royalist principles, and afterwards was Head-Master of a well-known
school at Cheam, will be found in _Notes and Queries_ for 1866, vol. ix.
pp. 75, 282.


A.D. 1837.

The magnificent series of historical prints and drawings which is
called, from the name of its collectors and its donor, the Sutherland
collection, was presented to the University on May 4 in this year,
although it was not actually deposited in the Library until March,
1839[330]. The six volumes of the folio editions of Clarendon's _History
of the Rebellion_ and _Life_, and of Burnet's _Own Times_, are inlaid
and bound in sixty-one elephant folio volumes, and illustrated with the
enormous number of 19,224 portraits of every person and views of every
place in any way mentioned in the text, or connected with its
subject-matter[331]. The gathering was commenced in 1795 by Alexander
Hendras Sutherland, Esq., F.S.A.; on his death (May 21, 1820) it was
taken up by his widow[332], who spared neither labour nor money to
render it as complete as possible, and by whom its contents were,
consequently, nearly doubled. At length, desiring, in accordance with
her husband's will, that the results of her own and his labour should be
always preserved intact, Mrs. Sutherland presented the whole collection
to the Bodleian. Its extent may be in some degree appreciated when it is
mentioned that there are (according to Mrs. Sutherland's statement in
the preface to the Supplementary Catalogue) 184 portraits of James I, of
which 135 are distinct plates; 743 of Charles I, of which 573 are
distinct plates, besides sixteen drawings; 373 of Cromwell (253 plates);
552 of Charles II (428 plates); 276 of James II; 175 of Mary II (143
plates); and 431 of William III, of which 363 are separate plates[333].
There are also 309 views of London and 166 of Westminster. Amongst those
of London is a drawing on many sheets, by a Dutch artist, Antonio van
den Wyngaerde, executed between 1558-1563. It affords a view which
extends from the Palace at Westminster to that at Greenwich, both
included; and comprehends also Lambeth Palace and part of Southwark,
with the palace there of the Protector Somerset, in which the Mint was
situated. The whole amount expended on the formation of the series is
estimated at L20,000.

The collection is accompanied by a handsomely printed Catalogue,
compiled by Mrs. Sutherland, and published in 1837 in three volumes
quarto, two containing the portraits, and one the topography[334]. A
Supplement to this was printed in the following year, in the preface to
which Mrs. Sutherland records her transfer of the collection. She adds
that 'the University of Oxford, by the manner in which it has received
the collection, has afforded her the high gratification of witnessing
the fulfilment, in their utmost extent, of the wishes of its founder;
and in the liberal step which its future conservators have taken, to
insure a direct and easy means of reference to the prints, she finds
proof of their intention to comply with her own earnest desire, that the
books should be as freely open to those really interested in them as may
be consistent with their safe preservation. Under the superintendence of
the compiler, but at the expense of the University, a copy of the
Catalogue has been prepared, in which every print is marked with the
page which it respectively fills in the volumes; by means of this, every
difficulty of reference, and every doubt as to the print intended to be
described, is obviated, and the manuscript indices will be preserved
from the injury of constant use. In order to prevent the possibility of
disappointment in referring from this marked catalogue, every print
(with four exceptions only) of which the page has not been ascertained,
has been struck out, although probably several of the portraits not at
present found are still in the volumes.' The following letter of thanks
was addressed by Convocation to the donor[335]:--

    'To Mrs. Sutherland, of Merrow, in the County of Surrey.

    'MADAM,--We, the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the University
    of Oxford, feel ourselves called upon to acknowledge, in a public
    and formal manner, the splendid donation recently made by you to our
    Bodleian Library.

    'It is doubtless a source of much gratification to us that our
    University should have been selected by you as the fittest
    depository of so valuable a collection; but we are not, on that
    account, less disposed to appreciate and admire the feeling which
    has led you to make so considerable a sacrifice, and to relinquish
    the possession of what has been to you, for many years, an object of
    constant interest and occupation.

    'We shall prize the matchless volumes about to be committed to our
    care, not merely as being embellished with the richest specimens of
    the graphic art, but as possessing a real historical character; as
    enhancing, in no slight degree, the value of works which we have
    long been accustomed to regard as most important contributions to
    the annals and literature of our Country.

      'Given at our House of Convocation, under our Common Seal, this
      first day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
      hundred and thirty-seven[336].'

A few other books were sent by Mrs. Sutherland at the same time,
including Boydell's _Shakespeare_, Heath's _Chronicle_, Scott's edition
of Dalrymple's _Preservation of Charles II_, Faber's _Kit-Cat Club_,
Wilson's _Catalogue of an Amateur_, &c. And in 1843 she increased her
former gift by the presentation of copies of a large number of
illustrated, biographical, and historical works, many of which are in a
like manner enriched with additional engravings. Chief amongst these is
a copy of Park's edition of Walpole's _Royal and Noble Authors_,
enlarged from five vols. 8^o. to 20 vols. 4^o. by the insertion of
prints, portraits, and some of the original drawings. Similarly enlarged
copies of Dr. Dibdin's works are also included; together with framed
oil-portraits of Frederic, King of Bohemia, and of Mr. Sutherland.

A curious collection of rare Dutch tracts, in two vols., printed at
Amsterdam between 1637 and 1664, and relating to English, Irish, and
Scottish affairs, chiefly during the Civil Wars, was bought for L2
13_s._ And an enormous gathering of English pamphlets, on every kind of
subject, in prose and verse, between about 1600 and 1820, said to number
19,380 articles, and which had accumulated in the stores of the
well-known bookseller, Mr. Thomas Rodd, was bought of him for L101
14_s._ 6_d._ These exceeding, from their number, the powers of the then
very slender staff of the Library for arrangement and cataloguing,
remained piled up in cupboards for about twenty-five years. But a
general clearance out of all neglected corners taking place on the
appointment of the present Librarian to the Headship, they were then
sorted (to a certain extent), bound, numbered, and incorporated in the
general Catalogue; when they proved to be a valuable addition to the
pamphlet-literature, comparatively few of them being found to be
duplicates.

_Shakespeare_; _Romeo and Juliet._ See 1834.

_Sanscrit MSS._ See 1842.

A grant was made by Convocation of L400 annually, for five years,
towards the expense of the new Catalogue, the printing of which was
commenced in the summer. A statute also was passed providing that there
should be two 'ministri,' or assistants, with salaries regulated by the
Curators.

The Rev. Herbert Hill, M.A., Fellow of New College, was approved by
Convocation, on Oct. 26, as Sub-librarian, in the room of Mr. Cureton,
who removed in this year to the British Museum. Mr. Hill, however, only
held the office for one year. And Mr. Richard Firth, New College (B.A.
1839, M.A. 1849, now, and from 1850, a Chaplain in the diocese of
Madras), became _minister_ in the room of Mr. F. J. Marshall, New
College (B.A. 1834, M.A. 1837, Chaplain of New College, deceased 1843),
who had probably entered the Library in 1834 in the place of Mr. Etty.

[330] MS. note by Mrs. Sutherland in the Library copy of her catalogue.

[331] As early as 1819 the collection numbered 10,000 prints, bound in
57 volumes. Clarke's _Repert. Bibliogr._ pp. 574-577.

[332] Mrs. Sutherland died March 18, 1852.

[333] In Mrs. Sutherland's own copy of the catalogue (now in the
possession of E. L. Hussey, Esq., Oxford), some of these numbers are
enlarged in MS. as follows: Charles II, 557, being 432 plates; Cromwell,
379, 255 plates; William III, 436, 367 plates. Amongst the portraits,
there are frequently numerous copies of the same plate, being
impressions in all its different states. In a few instances
(particularly with regard to Charles I) some of the prints entered in
the catalogue have not been found in the volumes.

[334] Ten copies were printed of a larger and finer edition, for
presentation to various Libraries, but as only four of these (Bodleian,
Cambridge University, British Museum, and Bibl. Royale, Paris)
acknowledged the gift (the letters from which are preserved in one copy
of the catalogue), no more than five copies were printed of the
Supplement. Consequently those Libraries which did not return thanks for
the gift have now an imperfect book.

[335] It is here printed from the original (written in the beautifully
neat hand of the late Registrar, Dr. Bliss,) which is now in the
possession of a nephew of Mrs. Sutherland, Edw. Law Hussey, Esq., of
Oxford, M.R.C.S. It is sealed with the old University seal, described on
p. 1 of these _Annals_, enclosed in a gold box. The late Rev. R. Hussey,
Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical History, was one of the brothers of
Mrs. Sutherland.

[336] A very erroneous notice of the collection, written in a singularly
depreciatory tone, was inserted in an article in the _Quarterly Review_,
in 1852, vol. xci. p. 217. The writer appears to have confounded the
facts connected with Gough's preference of the Bodleian to the British
Museum (as told in Nichols' _Lit. Hist._), or possibly Douce's, with the
totally different circumstances of Mrs. Sutherland's gift, whose husband
had left the collection entirely at her disposal, provided only that it
were not dispersed.


A.D. 1838.

One of the 'curiosities of literature' was obtained by the purchase (for
L10 10_s._) of the _System of Divinity, in a Course of Sermons on the
first Institutions of Religion_, by Rev. Will. Davy, A.B., Vicar of
Lustleigh, Devon. It is a work in twenty-six volumes, of which only
fourteen copies were printed, entirely by the hands of the indefatigable
author himself, between the years 1795 and 1807. It is very roughly
executed, the author having purchased only just so much old and worn-out
type, as sufficed for the printing of two pages at once; accomplishing
in this way the work upon which he had set his heart, 'arte mea, diurno
nocturnoque labore' (as he says in a Latin preface), in consequence of
having failed to procure in any other way the publication of his book.
The copy in our Library is distinguished by having many additions
inserted, printed (in many cases with later and better type) upon small
slips[337].

A set of the _Monthly Review_, from the commencement to 1828, in 200
volumes, in which the names of the contributors are appended in MS. to
their several articles, together with a volume of Correspondence with
the Editor, Ralph Griffiths, LL.D., between 1758 and 1802 (now numbered
Bodl. MS. Addit. VII. D. 11), was bought for L42.

Among the donations were: 1. A collection of twenty-one Oriental works,
printed between 1808-1835 by the East India Company, presented by the
Directors, and, 2. A valuable series, MS. and printed, of the Statutes
of various Italian cities, presented by George Bowyer, Esq. (the present
baronet, who succeeded to the title in 1860), who also in the years
1839, 1842, and 1843, forwarded large additions to the printed series.
These volumes are now kept distinct as a separate collection. Altogether
there are seventy-eight printed volumes, besides four MSS.

On Nov. 15, a Statute was approved by Convocation which raised the
stipend of the Sub-librarians from L150 to L250.

From the year 1825 an annual folio Catalogue had been printed,
containing, in one list, all the accessions accruing in each year from
purchases, gifts, and the supply of new publications from Stationers'
Hall. The issue of these lists was discontinued after the appearance of
that for the years 1837 and 1838 jointly; except that in 1843 one for
that year was printed in octavo.

A form of declaration and promise for due use of the privilege of
admission to the Library, to be made by all graduates upon taking their
first degree, in lieu of the oath formerly required, was approved by
Convocation, on June 9[338]. In accordance with this form, which is
still used, each graduate now promises: 'Me libros caeterumque cultum sic
tractaturum ut superesse quam diutissime possint, et, quantum in me est,
curaturum ne quid Bibliotheca detrimenti aut incommodi capiat.' The same
declaration is subscribed in the Library by all non-graduates who are
admitted to read there, with the addition of a promise that they will
devote their attention 'ad studia et silentium.' The statutable penalty
for any wilful mutilation or abstraction of any book, or portion of a
book, is immediate expulsion from the Library and University, 'sine ulla
spe regressus.'

On the resignation of Rev. H. Hill, Sub-librarian, in this year, he was
succeeded by Rev. H. O. Coxe, M.A., of Worcester College, who had
previously worked for five years and a-half in the Department of MSS. in
the British Museum[339]. Mr. Coxe's nomination was approved by
Convocation on Nov. 16.

[337] Mr. Davy has had a rival, with much more success, within late
years in the Rev. Thos. R. Brown, M.A., Vicar of Southwick,
Northamptonshire. The Library possesses three works written and printed
by this gentleman in his own house. The first is entitled, _A Grammar of
the Hebrew Hieroglyphs applied to the S. Scriptures, containing the
History of the Creation of the Universe and the Fall of Man_, 8^o.
1840. This appears to have been partly _composed_ in type, literally as
well as technically, for the author says that 'a considerable part of
the mental composition is coeval with' the manual labour, which last was
entirely performed by himself. A second book appeared in 1841, _Elements
of Sanscrit Grammar_. A third, _A Dictionary, containing English Words
of difficult Etymology_, tracing them chiefly to Sanscrit roots,
appeared in two vols. 8^o. 1843. Of this the author certifies that
only nine copies were printed, and the one now in the Library was bought
of Mr. Lilly (who had it from the author) for L5 5_s._ in 1855. The
execution of all these volumes does the reverend printer great credit.
The Rev. Dr. J. A. Giles had also a private press for some time in his
house at Bampton, Oxon., which he taught some of the village children to
work, and from which issued some of the publications of the Caxton
Society, but the results were anything but satisfactory, although
probably quite as good as could be expected from such juvenile
compositors.

[338] A previous proposal of this alteration had been rejected by
Convocation on March 17, 1836.

[339] Mr. Coxe had a considerable share in the compilation of the folio
catalogue of the Arundel MSS. preserved in the Museum.


A.D. 1839.

An application was made by Magdalen College for the return of a copy of
the Statutes of the College, found among the Rawlinson MSS., but it was
refused by the Curators, on the ground that sufficient evidence was not
produced of its having ever been the property of the College.


A.D. 1840.

Ninety specimens of the Aldine press, together with other volumes
chiefly printed at Venice by A. de Asula, were purchased at the sale of
the library of Dr. Samuel Butler, Bishop of Lichfield. From the same
library was purchased, in the following year, a collection of portions
of more than twenty of the very earliest editions of Donatus' _De Octo
Partibus Orationis_, many of which were unknown; these had previously
come from the library of Dr. Kloss. A ninth-century MS. of St. Gregory's
_Sacramentary_ was purchased for L63; and early MSS. of Juvenal, Lucan,
&c. A fine and perfect copy of Caxton's _Dictes and Sayinges of the
Philosophres_, printed in 1477, was purchased for L50. It had previously
been sold, at Dr. Vincent's sale in 1816, for L99 15_s._; this sum,
which is marked in pencil on a fly-leaf, having been altered by some
practical joker, by the insertion of a figure, to L199 15_s._, Mr.
Blades has in consequence recorded that as being the price at which the
Library secured the volume[340].

The Rev. Rob. J. M'Ghee, Rector of Holywell, Hunts, deposited in the
Bodleian (as also in the University Library, Cambridge, and in that of
Trinity College, Dublin,) a collection of thirty-one volumes relating to
the controversy with the Church of Rome, and to the Moral Theology
taught at Maynooth. The volumes consist of editions of the Douay and
Rheims versions, of some Irish diocesan Statutes, of Bailly's _Theologia
Moralis_, and Delahogue's Dogmatic Treatises, and of various Irish
polemical pamphlets; and they are enclosed in a mahogany case, with
glass door. In consequence of reference having been made to this
collection by the donor, at a County Meeting held at Huntingdon, Dec.
28, 1850, upon the occasion of the 'Papal Aggression,' some slight
degree of public attention was called to it; and a controversial volume
was in consequence published by Mr. M'Ghee, in 1852, entitled, _The
Church of Rome; a Report on the Books and Documents on the Papacy,
deposited in the University Library, Cambridge_, &c.

_Shakespeare_; _Richard III_ and _Hamlet_. See 1834.

The first non-academic _minister_ was appointed in Mr. H. S. Harper
(_vice_ Mr. Firth), of whose valuable services and acquaintance with
details the Library still enjoys the benefit. Mr. Harper had acted for
three years previously as an under-assistant.

[340] As Mr. Blades' valuable work on _The Life and Typography of
Caxton_, 1863, gives most accurate descriptions of all the copies and
fragments of our great printer's works which are preserved in the
Library, it is only necessary to refer the reader to it for detailed
information. A notice of two, however, which were unknown to be Caxtons
at the time of Mr. Blades' investigations, will be found in the account
of Bishop Tanner's books, p. 155; and two fragments, among Douce's
books, are mentioned at p. 250.


A.D. 1841.

The very large and valuable MS. collections of the Rev. John Brickdale
Blakeway, relating to the history of Shropshire, were presented by his
widow. Mr. Blakeway was minister of St. Mary's Church, Shrewsbury, for
thirty-two years, and died March 10, 1826. He was long engaged in
gathering materials for a county history, and his collections now form
fifteen closely-written volumes in folio, nine in quarto, and two in
octavo, arranged, and lettered on their backs, according to their
several subjects, viz. Pedigrees, County History, Parochial History, &c.
A list of them is given at the end of the Annual Catalogue. They were
supplemented in 1850 by the purchase (for L42) of a copy of Mr. T. F.
Dukes' _Antiquities of Shropshire_ (4^o. Shrewsbury, 1844), divided into
two large volumes, and enriched by the author with many MS. additions
and copies of ancient deeds, and with upwards of 700 portraits and
original drawings of churches, fonts, &c. relating to almost every
parish in the county. As Mr. Blakeway's collections are not accompanied
with engravings or drawings, these volumes largely assist to make the
materials for the history of this county complete.

A parcel of 136 early French and Anglo-Saxon coins was presented by Her
Majesty the Queen, out of a mass of upwards of 6700 which were found in
digging at the bank of the river Ribble, at Cuerdale, in Lancashire, and
were adjudged to belong to Her Majesty in right of the Duchy of
Lancaster. The largest part of the Saxon coins were of the reigns of S.
Edmund of East Anglia (in number 1770) and of Alfred (793); of the
Continental, of Charles le Chauve (712) and, apparently, of Charles le
Simple (2942).

Some rare and interesting books issued by English printers about the
middle of the sixteenth century were acquired in this year; among them,
the _Boke of Common Prayer_, printed by Oswen, at Worcester, in 1552,
bought for the very moderate sum of L3 16_s._ Two rare American Psalters
were purchased, the one called _The Massachuset Psalter_, printed at
Boston in 1709, for L2, and the other, the Psalms in blank verse with
tunes, printed at Boston in 1718, for L1 19_s._

_Shakespeare_, _Henry VI._ See 1834.

_American Tracts._ See 1836.

_Donatus._ See 1840.

The hitherto somewhat narrow funds of the Library received in this year
a welcome increase by the bequest of the large sum of L36,000 in the
Three per Cents. from Rev. Robert Mason, D.D., of Queen's College,
deceased Jan. 5. He bequeathed also a further sum of L30,000 for a new
library to his own College. In commemoration of this munificent legacy,
one room, devoted to the reception of costly illustrated works, and
works of some degree of value or rarity in various languages, has been
styled the _Mason Room_ (see p. 251). The elegant model of the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, now exhibited in the Library, came by
his bequest, together with a painting of the Zodiac of Tentyra, in
Egypt, which is hung in the Picture Gallery.


A.D. 1842.

Seven Sanscrit MSS. had been given to the Library in 1837 by B. H.
Hodgson, Esq., the British Resident in Nepaul, before which time there
were but a very few works in that language scattered through some of the
various Oriental collections, and most of them recently acquired[341].
But in this year the real foundation of the present very large and
valuable collection was laid, by the purchase for L500 of the MSS.
obtained by Professor H. H. Wilson (_dec._ May 8, 1860) during his
residence in India, numbering 616 works and 540 volumes, of which 147
are MSS. of the Vedas. A brief list of them is attached to the Annual
Catalogue for 1842, and the whole are fully described in the catalogue
of the Sanscrit MSS., compiled by Theod. Aufrecht, M.A., now Professor
of Sanscrit in the Univ. of Edinburgh, the second and last part of which
was published in 1864. The greater part of Mr. Wilson's collection
consists of MSS. written in the last and present centuries.

Some small collections towards the history of Cheshire, made by Rev. F.
Gower, were purchased in this year and in 1846.

In printed books the chief purchase was a copy (at the price of fifty
guineas) of the original and hitherto unknown edition of the poems of
Drummond, of Hawthornden. It is in quarto, with a portrait, having the
letter-press only on one side of the page, and was printed at Edinburgh
by Andro Hart in 1614. There are three or four small corrections in
Drummond's own handwriting[342].

_Bowyer._ _Italian Municipal Statutes._ See 1838.

_Laing._ _Almanac by W. de Worde._ See 1755.

_Old Plays._ See 1834.

In March, Mr. J. B. Taunton, All Souls' College (B.A. 1843, M.A. 1848),
was appointed Assistant _vice_ Mr. F. E. Thurland, New College (B.A.
1841, M.A. 1846, now Rector of Thurstaston, Cheshire), who was made an
_extra_, in the place of Mr. Symonds, resigned. Mr. Thurland had,
probably, succeeded Mr. Grove in 1838 or 1839.

The stipend of the Librarian was increased by L150, by a statute which
passed on May 6. By the same statute an annual payment was ordered of
L20 to the Janitor, in lieu of fees hitherto taken for showing the
Library or Picture Gallery to Members of the University. These,
undergraduates as well as graduates, have now, if wearing their
academical dress, the right of free entrance for themselves and friends;
other visitors are admitted, by a regulation made five or six years ago,
at the very moderate fee of threepence each person. (See p. 134.)

[341] The gift of the first Sanscrit book (described in the
Benefaction-Register as being 'Gentuana lingua') by one John _Ken_, in
1666, is noticed at p. 113. The book is now numbered, Walker 214.

[342] A copy of Blackwood's _Martyre de la Royne d'Escosse_ (Edinb.
1587), among Rawlinson's books, has an autograph of Drummond: 'G[)u]i.
Dr[)u][=m]ond, a Paris, 1607.'


A.D. 1843.

The valuable collection of Oriental MSS. formed by the celebrated
traveller, James Bruce, of Kinnaird, was purchased for L1000. It
consists of ninety-six volumes, of which twenty-six are in Ethiopic, and
seventy in Arabic; there is also one Coptic MS. on papyrus. Included in
vol. iv. of an Ethiopic copy of the Old Testament is one of the three
copies of the Book of Enoch, which were brought by Bruce from Abyssinia,
and which were then (if they be not even still) the only manuscripts of
the book to be found in Europe. One of the three had been given by Bruce
himself to the University, in 1788, through the hands of Dr. Douglas,
Bishop of Salisbury; it is written on forty leaves of vellum, in triple
columns, and is now exhibited in the glass case near the entrance of the
Library. It was from this MS. that Dr. Laurence, afterwards Archbishop
of Cashel, first made the translation which he published in 1821, and
then subsequently, in 1838, published the original text. The second copy
('elegantissimum et celeberrimum') was given by Bruce to Louis XVI, and
is now in the Imperial Library at Paris. By the purchase of the third,
the Bodleian is, therefore, the possessor of two out of the three.

Two unsuccessful attempts had previously been made to dispose of the
collection by auction. It was first announced for sale by Mr. Christie,
for May 17, 1827, to be disposed of in one lot; and a list was issued,
abridged from the catalogue made by Dr. Alex. Murray, the editor of
Bruce's _Travels_. The issue of this proposed sale is recorded by Douce
in the following MS. note on his copy of the auction catalogue: 'These
MSS. were put in by the owner at L5500, and after an elaborate eulogium
on them by Mr. Christie, no bidding or advance took place, and they were
of course withdrawn. Had the owner offered them for L500, I should think
the same result would have happened.' The second attempt was made in
1842, when the MSS. were offered for sale by Mr. George Robins, on May
30, but it appears that even all the eloquence of that most moving of
auctioneers failed to elicit a bid corresponding to the expectation of
the seller; and so the collection fortunately remained intact, to be
disposed of to our Library in the year following.

A catalogue of the Ethiopic MSS. of the collection was issued in a small
quarto volume (eighty-seven pages), in 1848, as part vii. of the General
Catalogue of MSS. It was compiled by a German scholar, well acquainted
with this branch of Oriental literature, Dr. A. Dillmann, and contains,
besides Bruce's books, three of Pococke's MSS., one of Laud's, one of
Clarke's, and three others; in all thirty-five.

Valuable materials for the history of Devon were secured by the purchase
(for L90) of the collections made for that purpose by Jeremiah Milles,
D.D., Dean of Exeter, and Pres. of the Soc. of Antiquaries. The library
of Dean Milles (who died Feb. 13, 1784) was sold by auction by Mr. Leigh
Sotheby, in April; and these collections, comprised in eighteen volumes
in folio, one in quarto, and one in octavo, formed a principal feature
in the sale.

In this year the new Catalogue of the general Library of printed books,
exclusive of the Gough and Douce libraries, and the collections of
Hebrew books and Dissertations, of which already special catalogues were
in print, was completed and published in three folio volumes. It had
been commenced in the year 1837, and was prepared by the Rev. Arthur
Browne, M.A., Chaplain of Ch. Ch. (now a retired Chaplain of the Royal
Navy), whose share comprises the letters P-R, and the commencement of S;
the Rev. Henry Cary, M.A. (son of the Translator of _Dante_, then
Incumbent of St. Paul's, Oxford, but now, by returning to his previous
profession of the Law, a barrister in Australia), who is responsible for
the letters F-K, and part of L; and Rev. Alfred Hackman, M.A., Chaplain
and Precentor of Ch. Ch., and now Sub-librarian, who completed the
greater part of it, viz. the letters A-E, L (from _London_)-O, S (from
_Shakespeare_)-Z. The whole charges of the printing of the Catalogue
amounted to L2990 12_s._[343]; the previous cost of compilation was
about L2000.

_Bowyer._ _Italian Municipal Statutes._ See 1838.

_Sutherland._ _Illustrated Books._ See 1839.

[343] MS. note by Dr. Bliss.


A.D. 1844.

Sir William Ouseley, the editor of the three volumes entitled _Oriental
Collections_ (brother to Sir Gore Ouseley, whom he accompanied when he
went as ambassador to Persia in 1810), gathered, during some forty years
spent in accumulation, about 750 Oriental MSS., chiefly in Persian, but
including also a few in Arabic, Sanscrit, Zend, &c. Of these, in 1831 a
catalogue (in 24 pp. quarto) was issued by the owner, who wished to
dispose of them collectively, but no purchaser was then found, and they
consequently remained in Sir William's possession. After his death,
however (in Sept. 1842), they were again proposed for sale _en masse_,
and the Library became a purchaser in this year for the sum of L2000.
Many of the volumes are specimens of the best styles of Persian writing
and illumination, while others are of great antiquity and rarity. The
printed Oriental collection was also increased by various works printed
in the East Indies in 1830-1839, which were presented by the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, and by some Sanscrit and Mahratta books given by Rev.
G. Pigott, Chaplain at Bombay.


A.D. 1845.

This year is rendered noticeable in the later annals of the Library by
the fact that not a single MS. was purchased during its course. But a
very valuable collection of Arabic, Persian and Sanscrit MSS. formed by
Brigadier Gen. Alex. Walker, during his service in India, was presented
by his son, Sir Will. Walker, of Edinburgh[344]. These are kept as a
distinct collection, like other donations or purchases of similar
extent; the Sanscrit portion is described in the catalogue compiled by
Prof. Aufrecht. The collection of printed Hebrew books was increased by
the purchase (for L176 14_s._ 6_d._) of 483 volumes from the library of
the celebrated lexicographer, Gesenius, of Halle, who died Oct. 23,
1842, and whose library was sold by auction at Halle, in Jan. 1844. Two
curious collections of tracts were also bought; the one in English
consisting of 300 volumes, ranging from 1688 to 1766, and chiefly
treating of the case of the Non-jurors, the Bangorian controversy, and
the affairs of the city of London (for L22 10_s._); and the other in
French, consisting only of four small volumes, but containing a very
large number of '_Merveilles_,' strange histories of strange wonders,
between 1557 and 1637, of great rarity and singularity. These were
obtained at the sale of the library of Mr. Benj. Heywood Bright, No.
3796, for L13.

On Dec. 23, the present writer (then a Clerk of Magdalen College) was
appointed Assistant, _vice_ Mr. Taunton, after upwards of five years'
previous service as a supernumerary, having first entered the Library in
June, 1840.

[344] Gen. Walker, who in the beginning of the century was Governor of
Baroda, in Guzerat, died at Edinburgh in 1832. His MSS., in the words of
Prof. Aufrecht, 'integritate et antiquitate eminent.'


A.D. 1846.

The original MS., or first copy, of Wood's _History and Antiquities of
Oxford_, in English, was purchased for the moderate sum of L8 8_s._
Already the Library possessed the corrected copy, in the author's
autograph, in two large folio volumes, which had formed part of his
collection in the Ashmolean Museum, but were transferred to the
Bodleian as early as the year 1769. The volume now obtained had been in
the possession of Edw. Roberts, Esq., of Ealing, a letter to whom from
Mr. Joseph Parker, of Oxford, is inserted, dated July 4, 1827, in which
he mentions the sale of the book to Mr. B. Roberts, and says that it was
purchased at a sale at Burford, in 1797 or 1798.

A curious and valuable account-roll of Sir John Williams, Knt., Master
of the Jewels to Henry VIII, which specifies all the treasures which
were in his custody, was bought for L25[345].

The department of Italian topography, antiquities and art was largely
enriched by the purchase from Rev. R. A. Scott (for L234 6_s._) of a
collection of 1426 volumes made by his brother the late George C. Scott,
Esq., during ten years' residence in Italy.

_Dissertations._ See 1828.

_Gower's Cheshire._ See 1842.

_Thorkelin._ See 1828.

[345] An original account, by the same Master of the Jewels, of the
plate and jewels received for the King's use from dissolved monasteries
in the years 1540-1542, is preserved in MS. _e Musaeo_, 57.


A.D. 1847.

A valuable MS. of Star-Chamber Reports, from June 17, 1635, to June 4,
1638, was purchased for L11. Several similar volumes of Reports are
among the Rawlinson MSS. Two curious collections of pamphlets were
bought; the one consisting of tracts, broadsides and proclamations
relating to the Gunpowder Plot, made by H. Glynn, Under-secretary of
State (L12 10_s._); the other, a series of State special Forms of
Prayer, from 1665 to 1840 (L10 10_s._)

Works relating to the history of America, in which the Library is now
very rich, begin in this year to form a specially noticeable feature in
the catalogue of purchases. Many rare tracts had been of old in the
Library, but much of the completeness of the present collection is due
to the energy of the well-known American bibliophilist, Henry Stevens,
Esq.


A.D. 1848.

A collection of Hebrew MSS., numbering 862 volumes and nearly 1300
separate works, was purchased at Hamburgh for L1030. It had been amassed
by Heimann Joseph Michael (born Apr. 12, 1792, deceased June 10, 1846),
who had devoted thirty years to the formation of his library. One
hundred and ten vellum MSS. are included in it, written for the most
part between 1240 and 1450. Michael's printed books amounted to 5471;
these were purchased by the British Museum. A short catalogue of the
collection, drawn up from the owner's papers, was issued at Hamburgh in
1848, with a preface by Dr. L. Zunz, and an index to the MSS. by Dr. M.
Steinschneider. They will ere long be re-catalogued, together with all
the other Hebrew MSS. in the Library, by Dr. Neubauer, who has now, in
the present year, commenced his important task.


A.D. 1849.

The valuable collection of Oriental MSS. formed by Rev. W. H. Mill,
D.D., Regius Professor of Hebrew at Cambridge, during his residence in
India as Principal of Bishop's College, Calcutta, was purchased from him
for L350. A small remaining portion of his collection, comprising
thirty-six volumes, was bought in 1858, after his death, for L35. In all
there are 160 volumes, of which 145 are in Sanscrit. These latter are
fully described in Prof. Aufrecht's Sanscrit Catalogue.

The chief purchases of printed books were made at the sale at Berlin, in
May, of the library of Professor C. F. G. Jacobs, the editor of the
_Anthologia Graeca_ (who died March 30, 1847), whence a large number of
classical dissertations, many of them authors' presentation copies, were
obtained[346], and at the sale of the library of Rev. Hen. Francis Lyte
(deceased 1847) which took place in July. A collection of 360 sermons,
published by Non-juring divines between 1688 and 1750, is an interesting
item in the year's list; another is a copy of Pliny's _Historia
Naturalis_, printed at Rome by Sweynheym and Pannartz in 1473, with a
MS. collation of three very early codices made by Ang. Politian in 1490,
which was bought for L21, at an extremely curious sale at Messrs. Leigh
Sotheby's, in Feb., of books 'selected from the library of an eminent
literary character' (M. Libri?).

The two statutable Assistants at this time and for one or two years
previously were Mr. J. M. Price, All Souls' College (B.A. 1849, M.A.
1852, now Vicar of Cuddington, Bucks,) and Mr. W. W. Garrett, New
College (B.A. 1849). The former of these was succeeded about 1850, by
the last undergraduate Assistant, Mr. J. C. Hyatt, Magd. Hall (B.A.
1852, now Perp. Curate of Queenshead, Yorkshire). Since then, in
consequence of the difficulty of reconciling attendance on College
lectures, &c. with attention to the continually increasing work of the
Library, the junior Assistants have been taken from the City instead of
from the undergraduate members of the University, as had been generally
the case hitherto.

In pursuance of an address from the House of Commons, Sept. 4, 1848, on
the motion of Mr. Ewart, various returns relative to public libraries
were obtained, which were printed by Parliament in 1849, State Paper,
No. 18. The following is the reply from Dr. Bandinel there printed:--

    'BODLEIAN LIBRARY,
    '_January_ 9, 1849.

    'SIR,--In compliance with your letter, dated Oct. 27, 1848, desiring
    certain Returns respecting the Bodleian Library, I have to state--

    '1. As to the number of books received under the various Copyright
    Acts, no distinct register of the books so received has been kept,
    but they have, at the end of each year, been incorporated into the
    general collection, so that I am unable to give the number of the
    books so received.

    '2. The number of printed volumes in the Bodleian Library amounts to
    about 220,000; but this statement will very inadequately express the
    real extent of the collection, as so many works have been bound
    together in one volume.

    '3. The number of manuscripts is about 21,000.

    '4. All graduates of the University have the right of admission to
    the Library; other persons must apply for admission to the regular
    authorities.

    '5. No register is kept of persons consulting the Library;
    accordingly, the number of students who have frequented it during
    the last ten years cannot be ascertained.

                                'I have, &c.
                                    'BULKELEY BANDINEL,
                                        '_Bodleian Librarian_.

    'George Cornewall Lewis, Esq.,
      'Under-Secretary of State, Whitehall.'

The estimate of printed volumes here given is believed to be as nearly
accurate as it was possible to make it, as considerable pains were taken
in forming the calculation. The number of separate printed books and
tracts may be reckoned as at least treble the number of volumes. With
regard to the reply to the fifth enquiry some explanation is requisite.
A register is kept of all the octavo and most of the quarto volumes
taken out for readers, of all the volumes from special and separate
collections, and of all the MSS.; but no account is kept of the folios
and other books on the ground-floor of the great room, which are
accessible to readers themselves, and frequently used by them without
the help of the assistants. Consequently, any return of the number of
readers entered on the register would not adequately represent the whole
number of students who use the Library, although, of course, it would,
with a margin for allowance, afford a very fair approximation. No
record, however, of separate _visits_ of readers is kept, as distinct
from the books required; so that although a reader may be at work for
days or weeks together, yet, if he continue to use only the same books,
one entry alone will be made of his name.

[346] A separate list of the books purchased at Jacobs' sale is appended
to the annual Catalogue.


A.D. 1850.

The Hebrew collection was still further increased in this year by the
purchase of sixty-two MSS., of which fifty-seven had been brought from
Italy; and in 1851, by the purchase of some printed books collected by
Dr. Isaac L. Auerbach, of Berlin, who had recently deceased. Every year
about this time[347] saw additions to this branch of the Library, made
chiefly through the agency of the late Mr. Asher, the well-known Jewish
bookseller of Berlin, and also through the late Hirsch Edelmann, a
learned Rabbi, who was for years a frequent reader in the Bodleian, from
whence he commenced the publication of a series of extracts (see under
the year 1693). Mr. Edelmann died a few years since in Germany. A series
of works illustrating the history, civil and ecclesiastical, the
geography, &c. of Hungary, Transylvania, Croatia, and other neighbouring
provinces of the Austrian Empire, amounting to 400 volumes, was
purchased for L78; and a similar but much larger collection, relating to
the history of Poland, numbering no fewer than 1200 volumes, was
purchased for L366. Three hundred and twenty volumes of early printed
works, some of which were fine specimens of _incunabula_, were obtained
at the sale of the duplicates from the Royal Library at Munich. It was
announced at the end of the Annual Catalogue that a special list of
these, together with a catalogue of the Hebrew MSS. noticed above, and
of the Hungarian and Polish collections, would be printed and circulated
in the following year; this, however, was not done.

A series of 600 English sermons, printed between 1600 and 1720, bound
separately, was purchased for L59.

Various specimens of the first beginning of printing in one of the
Friendly Islands, Vavau, consisting of the Bible in the Tonga language,
and of several elementary books, were presented by Capt. Sir Jas.
Everard Home, R.N. as also some elementary books printed at Apea by the
natives, under the direction of the Missionaries, for the use of the
natives of the Navigators' Islands.

_Dukes' Shropshire Collections._ See 1841.

[347] In 1845, about 320 printed volumes were purchased from a catalogue
issued at Berlin by A. Rebenstein, or Bernstein, and D. Cassel.


A.D. 1851.

At the sale of the books of the poet Gray, by Messrs. Sotheby and
Wilkinson, on Aug. 28, his copies of Clarendon and of Burnet's _Own
Times_ (vol. i.), with many MSS. notes written by him in the margins,
were bought for L49 10_s._ and L2 18_s._ respectively[348]. Perfect
specimens of facsimiles, which would defy detection, were obtained for
the completion of the Library copy of Coverdale's Bible; being
pen-and-ink copies of the title, from Lord Leicester's copy, and of the
map of Palestine, from Lord Jersey's copy, executed with admirable skill
by the late well-known facsimilist, Mr. J. Harris.

A Supplemental Catalogue of the printed books, comprehending all the
accessions which had been made during the years 1835-1847, was published
in this year, in one folio volume, under the editorship of the Rev.
Alfred Hackman, M.A., by whom the greater part of the earlier Catalogue
had been compiled, as mentioned at p. 268.

On March 27, Convocation voted an addition of L50 _per annum_ to the
stipends of the Sub-librarians.

_Recovery of Pococke MS. 32._ See p. 81.

_Malone's Correspondence._ See p. 232.

[348] The Clarendon had been previously sold at an auction on Nov. 29,
1845, by Messrs. Evans, with various other books which had belonged to
Gray.


A.D. 1852.

In the Report of the University Commission, which was issued in this
year, various suggestions were embodied which had been made by several
witnesses. Sir Edmund Head renewed his plan of allowing books to be
taken out of the Library by readers, and was supported by the opinions
of Professors Wall and Jowett; but the proposal was met with the strong
counter-testimony of Mr. H. E. Strickland[349], Prof. Vaughan, Dr. W. A.
Greenhill (at that time a constant reader in the Library), Prof. Donkin,
Mr. E. S. Foulkes, and others. And the Commissioners were not prepared
to report in favour of a plan which would at once lessen what was
described as being one of the great advantages of the place, namely, the
certainty of finding within its walls every book which it possessed. At
the same time, they were disposed to recommend a relaxation in some
instances of the strictness of the rule, and concurred in a suggestion
made by Dr. Macbride and Mr. Storey Maskelyne, that duplicates should be
allowed to circulate. Most, however, of the suggestions for extension of
facilities to readers, as well as of the reasons alleged for alteration
of system, have now been answered by the opening (through the liberality
of the Radcliffe Trustees) of the Radcliffe Library as a noble
reading-room for both day and evening. As the hours during which the
Library may be used extend now, in consequence of this addition, from
nine a.m. to ten p.m., it is at once apparent that the Bodleian presents
greater advantages to students than can anywhere else be enjoyed; to
which is to be added the readiness and quickness (specially testified
to, in 1852, by Dr. Greenhill) with which, under all ordinary
circumstances, readers are supplied with the books which they require.
The Commissioners in their Report called attention to a suggestion of
Sir Henry Bishop, then Professor of Music, for the establishment of a
classified musical library, which should comprehend, not merely the
music received by the Bodleian from Stationers' Hall, but all superior
foreign music as well, of every school and every age. Such collections
the Professor said were only to be found at Munich and Vienna.

The Report and Evidence upon the recommendations of the Commissioners,
which were issued by the Hebdomadal Board in the following year, did not
differ widely in testimony or suggestions from those of the Commission.
Dr. Pusey and Mr. Marriott agreed in deprecating the allowing removal of
books, speaking (as did several of the witnesses before the Commission)
from actual experience as constant readers in the place; and Dr.
Bandinel mentioned, in a paper of observations which he contributed, the
fact that he had been told by the Librarian of the Advocates' Library at
Edinburgh that between 6,000 and 7,000 volumes appeared to have been
lost there from the facilities afforded to borrowers. A comparative
tabular statement respecting the arrangements and rules of the libraries
at Berlin, Dresden, Florence, Munich, Paris and Vienna, drawn up by Mr.
Coxe from the Parliamentary Report on Libraries, which showed very
favourably in behalf of the Bodleian, was subjoined by Dr. Bandinel to
his evidence.

The great feature of this year was the acquisition of the Italian
Library of the Count Alessandro Mortara, consisting of about 1400
volumes, choice in character and condition, for L1000. The Count, who
was distinguished for his literary taste and knowledge of the literature
of his own country, had, although holding the nominal office of Grand
Chamberlain to the Duke of Lucca, taken up his abode in Oxford some ten
years previously, on account of his desire to examine the Canonici MSS.
and of his friendship with Dr. Wellesley, the late Principal of New Inn
Hall. He became a daily reader in the Bodleian, where the interest which
he took in the place, together with his polished, yet genuine, courtesy,
made him a welcome and popular visitor. It was upon returning to Italy
(where he died, June 14, 1855, at Florence), that he disposed of his
valuable collection. A catalogue, compiled by himself, with occasional
short notes, was issued with the purchase-catalogue for the year. He
also drew up a catalogue of the Italian MSS. in the Canonici collection,
which was published, in a quarto volume, in 1864. (See under 1817.)

Among miscellaneous purchases were a few volumes which were wanted to
make the Library set of De Bry's _Voyages_ complete, an imperfect copy
of the Oxford _Liber Festivalis_ (see 1691), and a large collection of
Dr. Priestley's writings (believed to have been made by himself), in
thirty-nine vols.

[349] Several important suggestions were made by this gentleman. One,
that the Library Books should all be stamped with a distinguishing mark,
is now in process of being carried out. Another, respecting the great
importance of collecting the most ephemeral local literature, especially
for the county of Oxford, and of procuring books printed at provincial
presses, relates to a subject which has received much more attention of
late years than formerly. A third, on the desirability, acknowledged (as
we have seen) in the last century, of having a general Catalogue
compiled of the books found in College Libraries which are wanting in
the Bodleian, has unfortunately as yet seen no accomplishment.


A.D. 1853.

A portion of the collection of Hebrew MSS. formed by Prof. Isaac Sam.
Reggio, at Goritz, amounting to about seventy-two volumes, was purchased
for L108. Many other MSS. in this class of literature occur yearly in
the accounts at this time. But the great acquisition of 1853 was the
_Breviarium secundum regulam beati Ysidori, dictum Mozarabes_, printed
_on vellum_ at Toledo, by command of Cardinal Ximenes, in 1502. L200
were given for this book, which is the only vellum copy known, and which
is in most immaculate condition. It is of extreme rarity even on paper,
as it is believed that only thirty-five copies were printed.

An imperfect copy of Caxton's _Chronicle_, 1480, was bought for L21; and
a large gathering of Norfolk tracts was obtained at the sale of Mr.
Dawson Turner's library.

It was in this year that Dr. Constantine Simonides visited the Library
in the hope of disposing of some of the products of his Eastern
ingenuity, but failed here, as also at the British Museum, although
successful in most other quarters. It is much to be lamented that the
talent and ability which he undoubtedly possessed in no small degree
were devoted to such unworthy purpose as his history discloses. The
story of his interview with Mr. Coxe, then Sub-librarian, is well known,
and was reproduced in an article in the _Cornhill Magazine_ for Oct.
1867 (p. 499); and as the version there given appears to be
substantially correct, it will be sufficient to borrow it from its
pages:--

    'On visiting the [Bodleian Library, Mr. Simonides] showed some
    fragments of MSS. to Mr. Coxe, who assented to their belonging to
    the twelfth century. "And these, Mr. Coxe, belong to the tenth or
    eleventh century?" "Yes, probably." "And now, Mr. Coxe, let me show
    you a very ancient and valuable MS. I have for sale, and which ought
    to be in your Library. To what century do you consider this
    belongs?" "This, Mr. Simonides, I have no doubt," said Mr. Coxe,
    "belongs to the [latter half of the] nineteenth century." The Greek
    and his MS. disappeared.'

An account of this visit was given in the _Athenaeum_ for March 1, 1856,
and a full narrative, including a letter from Sir F. Madden respecting
the dealings with Simonides on the part of the British Museum, is to be
found in S. L. Sotheby's _Principia Typographica_, vol. ii. pp.
133-136f[350].

[350] The death of Simonides, from the terrible disease of leprosy, was
announced as having occurred at Cairo in last year.


A.D. 1854.

A very interesting series of eighteen autograph letters from Henry Hyde,
the second Earl of Clarendon, was presented to the University by 'our
honoured Lord and Chancellor,' the Earl of Derby[351]. They are best
described in the following letter to the Vice-Chancellor, which
accompanied the gift, and which is now bound in the same volume:--

    'KNOWSLEY, _Oct._ 17, 1854.

    'MY DEAR SIR,--In looking over some old papers here the other day, I
    found (how they came here I know not) some original and apparently
    autograph letters, which appeared to me to be curious. They are
    private letters, addressed by Lord Clarendon, to the Earl of
    Abingdon, as Lord Lieutenant of Oxfordshire, during, and on the
    suppression of, the Duke of Monmouth's Rebellion. I have no doubt
    of their genuineness; and if from the connexion of the University
    with the writer[352], as well as the locality, you think they would
    be worth depositing in the Bodleian Library, I shall have great
    pleasure in offering them to the acceptance of the University for
    that purpose; and in that case would send with them a miniature
    pencil drawing of the Duke of Monmouth, which is not too large to be
    let into the cover of the portfolio which should contain the
    letters, and for the authenticity of which I can so far vouch that
    it has been in this house since 1729, at least; since it appears in
    a catalogue of the pictures and engravings here which formed the
    collection at that time.

    'I am, my dear sir,
        'Yours sincerely,
            'DERBY.'

The portrait in question, which is a beautifully executed drawing, in an
oak frame, marked on the back, 'Duke of Monmouth, by Foster,' is now
fixed, as desired, in the present morocco binding of the volume.

A collection of early editions of the Prayer-Book (including
Whitchurch's May and June editions of 1549 and that of 1552), of the
Metrical Psalter, and of Visitation Articles (amongst others, Edward the
Sixth's Articles of 1547, and Injunctions of the same year), with a few
miscellaneous books, was bought of the Rev. T. Lathbury, M.A., the
well-known writer on English Church history, for L300. Various rare
English books were purchased at Mr. Pickering's sale, and foreign
dissertations, &c. at that of the library of Professor Godfrey Hermann,
the Greek editor and commentator (who died Dec. 31, 1848), at Leipsic,
in April.

[351] A portrait of Lord Derby, in his Chancellor's robes, painted by
Sir F. A. Grant, was given by him to the University about 1858, and now
hangs in the Picture Gallery.

[352] The Earl was High Steward of the University.


A.D. 1855.

Three Greek Biblical MSS. of great antiquity were obtained from the
collection of Prof. Tischendorf, being Nos. 3-5 of the volumes
described in a small quarto catalogue issued (anonymously) by him of
_Codices Graeci_, &c. One of these three is of the ninth century,
containing the Gospel of St. Luke, with portions of the other Gospels,
which was bought for L125; another of the eighth century, containing the
whole of St. Luke and St. John, bought for L140; the third, also of the
eighth century, containing the greatest part of Genesis, for L108.

_Rev. T. R. Brown's Dictionary, &c. printed by himself._ See 1838.


A.D. 1856.

A volume containing two autograph letters of Luther was bought for L20,
together with a large collection of printed books (formed by --
Schneider, of Berlin,) relating to him and the German Reformation, with
various editions of his works, for L300. Another volume, with some small
additional papers in the Reformer's hand, was subsequently obtained.

The ever-increasing Bible collection received the addition of the very
rare _ed. princ._ of the Bohemian Bible, printed at Prague in 1488,
which was obtained for L17 10_s._, and a still more rare edition of the
Pentateuch, with New Test., &c. printed at Wittemberg in 1529, obtained
for eighteen guineas. A Roman Missal, printed 'ad longum, absque ulla
requisitione,' (_i.e._ in a kind of 'Prayer-book-as-read' form,) Lyons,
1550, was obtained for L20. It was arranged by Nicholas Roillet, Chanter
of the Church of S. Nicetius at Lyons, with the view of avoiding
difficulties and delays, 'sacerdotesque expectantibus molestos
reddentes, ipsosque erga dictos circumstantes scandalum generantes, qui
existimant illos non solum ignaros sed nescientes quid agendum vel
faciendam habeant;' and was issued with the papal _imprimatur_ of Paul
III. But as Pius V and Clem. VIII subsequently forbade any variation
whatsoever from the authorized Roman form, this Missal, like the
Breviary of Card. Quignones, was, with others, suppressed. And hence its
rarity.

Fifty guineas were given for a very large collection of Chinese works,
numbering altogether about 1100, which had been gathered by Rev. F.
Evans, for some time a missionary in China. Some of the Chinese books in
the Library have been subsequently examined and catalogued by Professor
Summers, of King's College, London.

On May 22, a new body of Library Statutes was confirmed by Convocation,
after a complete revision of the previous regulations. The principal
changes, besides the omission of various obsolete requirements, were the
adding five elected Curators, holding office for ten years, to the old
_ex officio_ body of eight; the providing for the removal of books to
the extra-mural 'Camera,' or reading-room, about to be added; the fixing
the stipend of the Librarian (including all the former fees and small
separate payments) at L700, and that of the Sub-librarians at L300, and
the assigning to the former a retiring pension after twenty years'
service of L200, and after thirty years', of L300, and to the latter,
after thirty years', of L150; and the making a few alterations with
regard to the times at which the Library should be closed, these times
being lessened by about one week in the course of the year.

A report from the eminent architect, Mr. G. G. Scott, on the means which
might be adopted for the enlargement of the Library, and for rendering
it fire-proof, dated in Dec. 1855, was printed in this year, together
with one from Mr. Braidwood on the warming apparatus (see under 1821).
Mr. Scott's report contained suggestions for the extension of the
Library throughout the whole of the quadrangle and adjoining buildings,
including the Ashmolean Museum, and proposed that the Divinity School
should be assigned as a reading room, for which the great degree of
light afforded by its large windows appeared peculiarly to fit it. The
subsequent assignment, however, of the Radcliffe Library as a
reading-room for the Library, removed the immediate necessity for any
other extension. In 1858 a paper on the subject, illustrated with a plan
of the Library, was printed by the late Dr. Wellesley, who, after
considering the various modes then suggested for the enlargement of the
Library, recommended the adoption (from the British Museum) of presses
running up direct from the ground through all the floors, by which the
dangers attendant upon the increase of weight of the wall-pressure would
be obviated.


A.D. 1857.

A collection of manuscripts, more interesting as to their history than
as to their actual contents[353], was presented by William and Hubert
Hamilton, in memory, and in accordance with the wish, of their
celebrated father, Sir William Hamilton. It comprises fifty-eight
volumes (thirty-nine in folio, sixteen in quarto, and three in octavo)
from the library of the Carthusian Monastery of Erfurt, famous as the
place of Luther's early abode. A short catalogue of them, by Joh. Broad,
was printed at Berlin in 1841, with a prefatory notice, from which we
learn that they were preserved at Erfurt until 1805, when the library
was broken up and dispersed on the occupation of the city by the French
army, who stabled their horses in the place where the books were
deposited, and burned many of them for fuel, while others were carried
away and secreted with a view to their safety. Some of the latter were
bought by the Count de Buelow, on whose death they were purchased from
the subsequent possessors by Broad, and finally sold by him to Sir W.
Hamilton. 'Nunc in eam terram demigrant,' says the bibliopolist, 'quae,
quodcunque alicujus pretii est aut materialium aut spiritualium rerum,
in suo gremio accumulare a Providentia Divina destinata videtur.'
Another collection of MSS., from the same library at Erfurt, was on sale
by Mr. J. M. Stark, the well-known bookseller (now of London), at Hull,
in 1855, who issued a small catalogue of them in duodecimo.

A valuable collection of Italian and Spanish MSS., amounting to about
forty-six volumes, came to the Library by the bequest of Rev. Joseph
Mendham, M.A., of Sutton Coldfield, who died Nov. 1, 1856. The most
important part of these is a series of twenty-eight volumes relating to
the Council of Trent, which were purchased at the sale of the Earl of
Guildford's library in 1830 by Thorpe, the bookseller, for L35, and
re-sold by him to Mr. Mendham in 1832 for fifty guineas. It was chiefly
from the materials afforded by these that Mr. Mendham drew up his
_Memoirs of the Council of Trent_, published in 1834. They are described
in Thorpe's Catalogue of MSS. on sale in 1831, and in the preface to Mr.
Mendham's book.

On June 18, the Rev. Robert Payne Smith, M.A., of Pembroke College, was
appointed an Assistant Sub-librarian for the Oriental department, in
consequence of the increasing infirmities of the aged senior
Sub-librarian, Mr. Reay.

[353] For the most part, they consist of mediaeval sermons and
theological treatises by writers of no great fame, together with some of
the works of Aquinas.


A.D. 1858.

On Oct. 30, an offer made by the Trustees of the Ashmolean Museum for
the transfer of the printed books, coins, and MSS. there contained to
the Bodleian, in order to facilitate the devotion of a part of the
building to the purposes of an Examination School, was accepted by the
Curators; but a similar offer with regard to the antiquities was
declined. The latter consequently remain in their old repository, but
the collections in Natural History were transferred to the New Museum.
It was not, however, until 1860, that the books were actually received
into the Library, where they now fill one small room. Altogether they
amount to upwards of 3700 volumes, forming five different series. First
are those of Elias Ashmole himself, numbering originally 2175, but
reduced by losses before the transfer to 2136, of which about 850 are
MSS[354]. This collection is extremely rich in heraldic and genealogical
matter, together with an abundance of astrology. The printed books are
chiefly scientific and historical; these, with the books in the
following collections, are now in process of incorporation into the new
General Catalogue of the Library. A list of the MSS. is given in
Bernard's catalogue, A.D. 1697; but a very elaborate and minute
account, forming a thick quarto volume, was drawn up by Mr. W. H. Black,
the well-known antiquary, and published in 1845. As this, however, was
destitute of an index, it remained comparatively useless until 1866,
when a full Index, edited by the writer of this volume, was published
under the direction of the Delegates of the University Press.

The next collection is that of Anthony a Wood, containing about 130 MSS.
and 970 printed volumes[355], which were bequeathed to the Museum by the
owner on his death in Nov. 1695. The former are of extreme value for the
history of Oxford and the neighbourhood; among the latter are most
curious sets of the pamphlets of the time, with the ballads, fly-sheets,
chap-books, almanacks, &c. just such 'unconsidered trifles' as most men
suffer to perish in the using, but a few, like Wood, lay by for the
amusement and information of future generations. There are also seven
volumes of his own correspondence, including letters from Dugdale,
Evelyn, &c. Of the MSS. a list is to be found in the old Catalogue of
1697; a fuller and better one, compiled by William Huddesford, M.A.,
the Keeper of the Museum, was printed in a thin octavo volume, in 1761,
which was reprinted by Sir Thomas Phillips, at Middlehill,
Worcestershire, in 1824. There are also bundles of charters and deeds,
chiefly monastic, but nearly all more or less mutilated or injured by
damp and dirt, so as to be partially useless.

The third collection is that of Dr. Martin Lister, physician to Queen
Anne, who died Feb. 2, 1711/2. Besides his books, he was the donor of
various other gifts to the Museum, in return for which he was created
M.D. of Oxford, in 1683. The books are chiefly medical and scientific,
and number in a written catalogue 1451 volumes (including thirty-two
MSS.), but thirty-five of these were missing when the transfer from the
Museum was made.

The collections of Sir William Dugdale, which form a fourth series,
number forty-eight volumes. A list of these is in the old Catalogue of
1697.

In the fifth place there are the MSS. of the well-known antiquary, John
Aubrey. These are about twenty in number, of which fifteen are in his
own hand, and are described in Britton's Life of him, printed for the
Wilts Topographical Society, pp. 88-123. Collections for the history of
Wiltshire, entitled _Hypomnemata Antiquaria_, form one of Aubrey's own
works[356], but unfortunately the second volume (marked with the letter
B) is missing. It was borrowed from the Museum, in 1703, by William
Aubrey, the author's brother, and was never returned. A paper on the
subject was inserted by Rev. J. E. Jackson, in 1860, in vol. vii. of the
Wiltshire Archaeological Magazine, and a reward for information as to the
present _locale_ of the missing volume was subsequently publicly
offered, but to no purpose, by the same gentleman. A small MS. of
_Horae_, which had belonged to Sir Thomas Pope, the founder of Trinity
College, is among Aubrey's books. A MS. of Matthew of Westminster, (now
_e Mus._ 149) had been given to the Library by Aubrey, in 1675, through
Ant. a Wood.

There are also five or six MSS. which were given to the Museum by
William Kingsley before 1700. Some few others, which were given by E.
Lhuyd and Dr. W. Borlase, together with a volume of W. Huddesford's
correspondence, are now incorporated with the Ashmole MSS., and are
described in Mr. Black's catalogue, as well as the latest gift of this
kind which was made to the Museum, _viz._ a little volume of _Private
Thoughts_, by Bishop Wilson, of Sodor and Man, which was presented in
1824 by Lieut. Brett, R.N.

Thirty-nine choice Persian and Arabic MSS., which had formed part of Sir
Gore Ouseley's collection, were bought from his son, Sir Fred. Gore
Ouseley, Bart., the present Professor of Music, for L500. The rest of
the collection came by gift, as will be seen under the following year.

At the sale (in June-Aug.) of the library of Dr. Bliss, a large number
of volumes (still kept separate) were purchased, including a volume of
original letters of Charles I, Clarendon, &c., and poems by Lord Fairfax
(see p. 97); together with many from the series of books of _Characters_
collected by Dr. Bliss, and from his like series, both of books printed
in London shortly before the fire of 1666, and of books printed at
Oxford. The Library obtained by his bequest his own interleaved copy of
the _Athenae_, with many MS. additions[357].

A copy of the octavo Bible printed by Barker in 1631 (not 1632, as
generally said), in which the word 'not' was omitted in the seventh
commandment, was bought for L40. For this error (which looks very much
like a wicked jest) the printer was fined 1000 marks by the High
Commission Court[358], and the edition was rigidly suppressed, all the
copies which could be found being condemned to the flames.

Another purchase was a large collection of political tracts in seventy
volumes, chiefly relating to foreign affairs, which had been formed by
Mr. -- Hamilton, of the Diplomatic Service.

[354] This number includes some fifteen or sixteen volumes given by
subsequent donors, but incorporated with Ashmole's own books.

[355] About fifty volumes out of Wood's whole number were missing when
the Library became possessed of them.

[356] These were printed by the Wiltshire Archaeological Society in 1862,
in one volume quarto, under the editorship of Rev. J. E. Jackson.

[357] A very valuable Index of notes and references on all kinds of
biographical, historical, and antiquarian matters, contained in forty
small covers, which had been the growth of the many years of Dr. Bliss's
literary researches, was bequeathed by him to Rev. H. O. Coxe, by whom
it is kept in the Library for the use of readers. Several references are
made to this Index in the earlier part of the volume.

[358] In Burn's _High Commission Court_, 1865, it is said (from the
Reports of proceedings in the Court) that the fine inflicted on Barker
was L200 and on Lucas L100. 'With some part of this fine Laud causeth a
fair Greek character to be provided, for publishing such manuscripts as
time and industry should make ready for the publick view; of which sort
were the _Catena_ and _Theophylact_ set out by Lyndsell.' Heylin's
_Cyprianus Anglicus_, p. 228.


A.D. 1859.

Numerous MSS., chiefly classical, patristic, or Italian, were purchased
at the sale of M. Libri's collection in London, in March. Amongst them
was a Sacramentary, of the commencement of the ninth century, which was
obtained for L43; and a copy of S. Cyprian's Epistles, also of the ninth
century, for L84. Four volumes of the correspondence of Scholars at home
and abroad with E. H. Barker, of Thetford, were also added to the
Library from the sale of Mr. Dawson Turner's library. They are now
numbered Bodl. MSS. 1003-1006. And the munificent gift of a very
valuable collection of 422 volumes of Arabic and Persian MSS. was
received from J. B. Elliott, Esq., of Calcutta. These chiefly consist of
the MSS. which Sir Gore Ouseley (who died Nov. 18, 1844,) obtained
during his diplomatic service in the East, commencing his collection
when stationed at Lucknow, and completing it while ambassador in
Persia; of which Mr. Elliott had been the purchaser. A small remaining
part had previously been bought by the Library, as noted under 1858. In
1860, Mr. Elliott added to his former gift a series of Eastern coins,
and various handsome specimens of Eastern weapons; the latter are now
exhibited in a case in the Picture Gallery. Five Sanscrit MSS. were
received from Fitz-Edward Hall, Esq., of Saugur, who, at the same time,
expressed his munificent intention of presenting hereafter the whole of
his large collection.

In this year, after considerable enquiry had been made respecting
different modes of cataloguing, and Mr. Coxe had reported on the
arrangements adopted in the great libraries at home and some of those
abroad, it was resolved by the Curators, upon that gentleman's
recommendation, that the plan in use in the British Museum should be
immediately introduced, for the purpose of commencing a new General
Catalogue of all the printed books (excepting the Hebrew, of which a
separate catalogue had been made) in the whole Library. By this plan,
three or five copies, according as the case may be that of a single or
double entry, are written simultaneously on prepared paper, as with a
manifold-copier, the transcribers writing out in this way the entries of
titles previously examined and corrected by the cataloguers. The
separate titles are then mounted, arranged in alphabetical order, and
bound in volumes. By this plan two copies of the Catalogue are at once
written with the labour of one, while surplus slips are also provided
for the formation hereafter of a classified catalogue as well. The use
of the Catalogue, however, is thus confined to the Library itself; and
the literary world in general must still refer to the printed Catalogues
of 1843 and 1851. A commencement of the new undertaking was made in this
year; but it was not until 1862 that the present staff (as to numbers)
of assistants was employed, and the work completely organized. At
present the letters A-E, G-H are catalogued; and the extent to which the
whole Catalogue will run may be estimated from the fact that the letters
B, C, and G fill sixty, sixty-five, and thirty-four volumes
respectively. All the books are seen and examined separately; anonymous
authors are, if possible, traced out; many errors in previous catalogues
are corrected, and the number of entries is very largely increased.


A.D. 1860.

The resignation of the Librarianship by Dr. Bandinel, after forty-seven
years of office in the capacity of Head, and a total of fifty of work in
the Library, forms a leading feature in the Bodley Annals of this year.
At the age of seventy-nine the natural infirmities of age were felt by
himself to be incapacitating him for the duties which he had so long and
so regularly discharged, while at the same time the continually
increasing pressure of work and enlargement of the Library, made those
duties much more onerous than they had been even a quarter of a century
before. And so he resolved to withdraw at Michaelmas from the place to
which he had been so heartily and entirely devoted, and which under his
headship had been doubled in contents. The parting was not without a
great struggle; it was the abandoning what had been the cherished
occupation of his life, and with the ceasing of that occupation he felt
a too-certain foreboding (which he expressed to the writer of these
pages) that the life would soon cease as well. A well-merited tribute
was paid to him by Convocation in June, in both increasing the amount of
his statutable pension, so that he retired on a full stipend, and in
specially enrolling him among the Curators of the Library. But he was
seldom seen in the old place after his resignation; on two or three
occasions only did he again mount the long flight of stairs which had of
late tried both his strength and breath severely; and then, when only
seven months had elapsed, on Feb. 6, 1861, he passed away. And little
more than a fortnight previously, on January 20, his old colleague,
Professor Reay, departed this life, at the age of seventy-eight. He also
had retired on his pension at Michaelmas, 1860, and had been succeeded
as Oriental Sub-librarian by Rev. R. Payne Smith (Assistant-librarian in
the same department since 1857), whose appointment was confirmed by
Convocation on Nov. 22. Memoirs of Dr. Bandinel and Mr. Reay are given
in the _Gentleman's Magazine_, (1861, pp. 463-6), which do justice, in
the case of the former, to his watchful solicitude for the Library and
his thorough acquaintance with it; and in the case of the latter
(evidently from intimate personal acquaintance), to his great kindliness
of heart, and simplicity and gentleness of character.

The Convocation for the election of Dr. Bandinel's successor was held on
November 6, when, with unanimous consent, the Rev. H. O. Coxe, M.A.,
Sub-librarian since 1837, was appointed to the office.

A most seasonable and valuable enlargement of the Library was effected,
by an addition which henceforth marks an aera in our Annals. On June 12,
Convocation thankfully accepted an offer from the Radcliffe Trustees
(which had been first mooted by Dr. Acland in 1856), of the use, as a
Bodleian reading-room, of the noble building hitherto under their
control, the existing contents of which had (for the most part) been
removed to the New Museum. Dr. Radcliffe's own original intention had
been the building an additional wing to the Bodleian rather than the
erecting a library of his own; and subsequently the idea had been
entertained of devoting his structure to the exclusive reception of
manuscripts[359]. Its appropriation, therefore, to the Bodleian upon
the removal of the library of medicine and natural history, was, in some
sort, a return to the founder's first design. And the return came most
seasonably, when the old walls of the Schools' quadrangle were well-nigh
bursting from a plethora of books, and still the cry 'They come' daily
caused fresh bewilderment as to whither those that came should go. It
was resolved that the new reading-room thus opportunely gained should be
appropriated to new books (arranged under a system of classification)
and magazines; that it should be called the 'Camera Radcliviana;' and
that it should be open from ten A.M. to ten P.M., thus affording the
facilities for evening use of the Bodleian which had often been desired
for those who were occupied in college work during the day. It was at
the close of the year 1861 that the building began to be filled by its
new occupants, and on Jan. 27, 1862, (the necessary alterations and
preparations having been completed in the short space of the Christmas
vacation) it was announced by the Vice-Chancellor to be open as a
Reading Room in connection with the Bodleian. A grant of L200 _per
annum_ towards the expense of management was made by Convocation on
Nov. 28, 1861, which was increased to L300 in 1865, the remainder of the
charge, consisting of the incidental expenses, being defrayed from the
general funds of the Library.

A large additional space for the reception of books was gained by the
closing up the open ground-floor (through which was the former entrance
to the reading-room), converting the spaces between the outer arches
into windows, and lining the walls within with book-shelves, thus
affording accommodation, according to the present reckoning, for about
50,000 volumes. The whole building may probably be reckoned as capable
of containing altogether about 75,000 volumes[360].

The terms on which the Radcliffe Trustees made their offer, and which
were accepted by the University, were these:--1. That the Radcliffe
Building should be a reading-room to the Bodleian, or be used for any
other purpose of the Bodleian Library. 2. That it should remain the
property of the Trustees, being esteemed a loan to the University. 3.
That no alteration should be made in the building without consent of the
Trustees or a Representative approved by them. 4. That the expense of
maintaining the building should be borne by the Trustees.

The transfer of this magnificent room afforded a rare opportunity for
developing the usefulness of the Library to which it is now attached,
and all who frequent it will acknowledge that that opportunity has been
well and worthily improved under the direction of the present Librarian.

On Oct. 25, leave was granted by Convocation for the lending two Laud
Manuscripts, 561 and 563, being copies of the _Historia
Hierosoylmitana_, by Albert of Aix, to the French Government.

At the sale of the library of Dr. Wellesley, Principal of New Inn Hall,
a copy of Boccaccio's _Corbaccio_, 1569, was purchased, on account of
its possessing the autograph of Sir Thomas Bodley, to whom it had been
given by the editor, J. Corbinelli.

A rare Salisbury _Primer_, printed at Rouen by Rob. Valentin in 1556,
was purchased for L22. Its title affords an amusing specimen of a
foreigner's mode of printing English; it runs thus--_This prymer of
Salisbury vse is se tout along with houtonyser chyng, with many prayers
& goodly pyctures._ It is intended hereby to be conveyed to the English
reader that, without any searching, he will find his prayers and psalms
set out in their proper order.

[359] In prosecution of this idea several valuable collections of
Oriental MSS. were obtained, which still form part of the stores of the
old Radcliffe Library. They consist of the Arabic, Persian, and Sanscrit
MSS. collected by -- Frazer and by Sale, the translator of the Koran,
which were obtained (as we learn from Sharpe's _Prolegomena_ to Hyde's
_Dissertationes_, 1767, vol. i. p. xvii.) through Professor Thomas Hunt,
at the suggestion of Dr. Gregory Sharpe; and of the collations of the
MSS. of the Hebrew Old Test. by Dr. Kennicott (Librarian 1767-1783),
together with his correspondence and miscellaneous _codices_. The
Sanscrit MSS. of Frazer and Sale are described in Prof. Aufrecht's
catalogue. Other collections in the Radcliffe Library are the classical
and historical (as well as medical) books of Dr. Frewin, a physician and
Camden Professor of Anc. History; and the law books of Mr. Viner,
founder of the Vinerian Professorship and Scholarships; together with
the works of J. Gibbs, the justly famous architect of the building in
which they were kept, and some coins bequeathed by Wise, the first
Librarian. Two volumes of Clarendon MSS. were bought for the Library in
1780, but were united some years since to the mass of those papers
preserved in the Bodleian. It was not until the year 1811 that the
Library was specially assigned to Medicine and Natural History. (See
_Report on the transfer of the Radcliffe Library to the Univ. Museum_,
by Dr. Acland, 1861.)

[360] An account of this assignment and arrangement of the Radcliffe
Library, as also of the transfer of the Ashmolean books to the Bodleian,
appeared in the _Athenaeum_ for Jan. 1865, p. 20.


A.D. 1861.

One hundred and four volumes of Tamil MSS. were purchased; as well as
four Samaritan MSS. of the Pentateuch, of the twelfth century, which had
been brought to England by a native of Samaria.

The Syriac MSS. of the well-known Orientalist, Dr. Bernstein, were
purchased by the Delegates of the Press, with a view to assisting in the
great work of a Syriac Lexicon, upon which Mr. (now Dr.) Payne Smith was
(and still is) engaged.

The printing of the Annual Catalogues of purchases was discontinued,
after the issue of the Catalogue for this year. Written registers are
now kept in the Library of all the books bought in the course of each
year; and only a list of benefactors, with the statement of accounts, is
annually printed for circulation in the University and amongst donors.


A.D. 1862.

A large collection of British Essayists and Periodicals was presented by
the late Rev. F. W. Hope, D.C.L., the munificent benefactor to the
University Museum, the founder of the Professorship of Zoology, and the
donor also of a large collection of engraved portraits and other
prints[361]. The collection was one which had been formed by John Thomas
Hope, Esq., the donor's father. It contains some 760 specimens of its
class of literature, belonging chiefly to the eighteenth century.
Special thanks for the gift were returned by Convocation, on Feb. 20. A
catalogue, which had been drawn up for Mr. Hope by Mr. Jacob Henry Burn,
containing notices in detail of the various publications, was printed at
the University Press, in 1865, in an octavo volume.

A Hebrew MS. of the Pentateuch, probably of the thirteenth century, was
bought for L32 10_s._ Some tracts relating to the period of the Great
Rebellion were bought at the sale of Dr. Bandinel's extensive Caroline
collection.

On March 4, the Curators accepted the gift of a bust of Rev. F. W.
Robertson, late incumbent of Trinity Chapel, Brighton, which had been
purchased by subscription. It is now placed in the Picture Gallery.

A large number of purchase-duplicates, which had accumulated during the
course of many years, were removed from the Library and sold by auction,
in London, by Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson, in May. Among them were
some of great rarity. The sale, which lasted five days, produced L766
2_s._ 6_d._; of which L110 5_s._ were given for a specimen of the St.
Alban's press, the _Rhetorica Nova_ of Gul. de Saona, printed in 1489.
A second and smaller sale, containing many English works of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, took place on April 12, 1865, at
which a copy of Chettle's _Kind-Harts Dreame_ (1593), produced L101, and
Decker's _Guls Horne-Booke_, 1609, L81. The proceeds of the whole sale
amounted to L750 18_s._ 6_d._

The Rev. Alfred Hackman, M.A., Chaplain and Precentor of Ch. Ch., and P.
C. of St. Paul's, Oxford, and an Assistant in the Library of twenty-five
years' standing, was approved by Convocation, on April 12, as Mr. Coxe's
successor in the Sub-librarianship; after a discussion, which led to the
abrogation by Convocation, in February, of a provision in the Statutes
forbidding the holding cure of souls in connection with that office or
that of Head-librarian without special licence from the Curators.

[361] These engravings are deposited in the gallery of the Radcliffe,
under the charge of a separate Keeper, the Rev. J. Treacher, M.A. They
do not belong to the Bodleian.


A.D. 1863.

Among the purchases made in this year were the following: Card. Ximenes'
rare treatise entitled _Crestia_, printed at Valentia in 1483 (L25);
Court-Rolls of Tamworth, Solihull, and other neighbouring places,
obtained from Mr. Halliwell; and a collection, in three thick folio
volumes, of placards, hand-bills, &c., relating to the town of Coventry,
formed by Mr. W. Reader, a printer in that place.

Capt. Montagu Montagu, R.N., who died at Bath, on July 3 in this year,
bequeathed a collection of about 700 volumes, in various branches of
literature, which was received at the Library about the beginning of
1864. There are about ninety editions and versions of the Psalter, with
works on Psalmody, including a metrical version by Capt. Montagu
himself; a large number of editions of Anacreon, Horace, Juvenal,
Phaedrus, Petrarch, Boileau, and Fontaine's _Fables_; a few MSS. of
Juvenal, Petrarch, &c. with a large series of autograph letters,
chiefly obtained at Upcott's sale. There are, besides, a number of
topographical and biographical works illustrated, _more Sutherlandico_,
with additional engravings, together with many parcels of separate
prints arranged for the same purpose. One item of particular interest
which accompanied the collection is a small sketch of Napoleon I, in
profile, admirably executed by the well-known Italian artist, Giuseppe
Longhi. It now hangs, framed and glazed, in the Library, together with a
letter from Longhi himself, in French, dated at Milan, June 4, 1828, in
which he narrates the occasion on which it was taken. He attended, in
1801, at Lyons, as a member of the 'Consulte Cisalpine,' for the
settling the affairs of the Republic of Italy, under the presidency of
the First Consul. It happened that during the delivery of a long
harangue, full of tedious flattery, Napoleon sat _vis-a-vis_ with the
orator; and Longhi saw that an opportunity for exercising the cunning of
his pencil had come. The light, which streamed in through the great
window of the Church (!) where they were assembled, brought out the
profile very clearly; there was little fear of being cut short by the
speaker's suddenly ceasing his declamation, or of being interrupted by
movement on the part of the unconscious subject of the operation, for
the latter sat immersed in thought upon matters far away, while
regarding the speaker with a pensive air; and so, while Napoleon sat
pondering, Longhi sat sketching. And everybody, he declares with a
pardonable pride, at Lyons and Paris, pronounced the likeness to be
excellent. A small bust of Napoleon, now placed in the great window,
came to the Library at the same time. A catalogue of Capt. Montagu's
books, comprising forty octavo pages, was printed and circulated with
the Annual Statement for 1864.


A.D. 1864.

The chief acquisitions in manuscript books were various Hebrew volumes
(for L159), and a series of letters to Malone from Dr. Johnson, Mrs.
Siddons, and others; and in printed books, a perfect copy of Cromwell's
Great Bible, printed by Grafton in 1539, which was bought of Mr. Fry,
the well-known collector, for L100.

A sixth part of the general catalogue of MSS. was issued, containing the
Syriac, Carshunic and Mendean MSS., in number 205, which had been drawn
up by Rev. R. Payne Smith, M.A., and to which several facsimiles were
appended. And the eighth part, containing the Sanscrit MSS., in number
854, appeared under the editorship of Theodore Aufrecht, M.A., now
Professor of Sanscrit in the University of Edinburgh. A first
_fasciculus_ of this had been issued in 1859.


A.D. 1865.

At the beginning of January, a sale was held in London by Messrs.
Sotheby and Wilkinson, of the stock of the late Mr. William Henry
Elkins, a bookseller, of 41, Lombard Street. At this sale, the Library
was the fortunate purchaser of what appears to be a genuine _Shakespeare
Autograph_. The book is Ovid's _Metamorphoses_, printed by Aldus, at
Venice, in October, 1502, in octavo; and on the title is the signature
'W^m. Sh^r.' in a hand bearing no resemblance whatever to that of
the Ireland forgeries, but not unlike that of the signature attached to
Shakespeare's will. Opposite to the title, on a leaf pasted down on the
original binding of the book, is the note, most certainly a genuine
memorandum of the date to which it professedly belongs, of which a
faithful facsimile is given with that of the autograph itself, in the
accompanying lithograph[362]. That the note itself is no forgery is
admitted by all who have examined it; the volume, therefore, is
certainly, by tradition, one which belonged to the poet. The only
question is, whether the name may not have been forged in consequence of
the existence of this note. To this, which is the opinion of some, it
may fairly be replied, that, seeing no contracted form of Shakespeare's
signature is known to exist, a forger would hardly have invented one for
the occasion, but would have given the name in full; while, on the other
hand, if the signature be real, what more natural than that a subsequent
owner should record the tradition that the indefinite 'Sh^r.' of this
unimportant title-page was no other than the very definite 'Shakspere'
himself? The names mentioned in the note are names, as every one knows,
connected with the poet's history. _Hall_ was the marriage name of his
daughter Susannah, to whom he left his house in Henley Street; and one
William Hall, a glover, appears from the Stratford Records printed by
Mr. Halliwell, to have had a house in that street in 1660. He,
doubtless, was the donor of the volume. Susannah Hall's daughter,
Elizabeth, was married to a Thomas Nash, who died in 1647; but though he
died without issue, the initials 'T. N.' may well stand for some member
of the family who bore the same names. That, therefore, a Hall should
possess the book, and subsequently give it to (most probably) a Nash,
goes far to establish its genuineness as a Shakespeare relic. In a full
account of the volume, supporting its pretensions, which appeared in the
_Athenaeum_ for Jan. 28, 1865 (p. 126), it was pointed out that the two
references to the story of Baucis and Philemon, which are found in
Shakespeare's Plays, show that he was not unacquainted with the
_Metamorphoses_. To this may be added a better proof of his knowledge of
Ovid's writings in the fact that two lines from the _Amores_ (I. xv.
35, 36) form the motto to the _Venus and Adonis_. As the volume is
somewhat dirty, and has a well-worn air, it may possibly have been used
by Shakespeare during those school-keeping experiences of which Aubrey
tells us; possibly, however, the wear and tear may be due to an older
owner, who has plentifully interspersed his MS. notes in, apparently, a
foreign hand, on many of the pages. Owing to a generally-entertained
suspicion throughout the auction-room on the occasion of the sale of the
volume, that the autograph must be a forgery, the Library became its
possessor for the small sum of L9[363]!

[Illustration:

  OVIDII METAMORPHOSE[Grk: O]N
  LIBRI QVINDECIM.

  W^m Sh^r.

  ALDVS

  This little Book of Ovid was given to me
  by W Hall who sayd it was once Will
  Shakspares

  T N

  1682

]

A small volume, containing several papers in the handwriting of Luther,
was bought for L45. The first edition of Coverdale's New Testament,
printed at Antwerp, by Matthew Crom, in 1538, was added to the Biblical
collection. Two interesting and important series of newspapers were
obtained; the one, a set (not quite perfect) of the _London Gazette_,
from 1669 to 1859, bought for L200[364]; and the other, a collection of
London newspapers, from 1672 to 1737, arranged in chronological order in
ninety-six volumes, obtained also for L200. This very curious collection
had been formed by Mr. John Nichols; its escape from destruction by the
disastrous fire at his printing-office in 1808, is mentioned at p. 99 of
the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for that year. It is accompanied by a MS.
index, drawn up by Mr. Nichols himself. Many unknown contributions by
Defoe to the journals of his time, have recently been traced in this
series by a gentleman who has made a special study of the Defoe
literature, Mr. W. Lee.

Considerable assistance in completing the Library sets of the Public and
Private Acts of Parliament was afforded, in this year, by the late Mr.
W. Salt.

Specimens of the first books printed in the Dyak language, which were
issued at Singapore in 1862, were given by Rev. J. Rigaud, B.D., of
Magdalene College.

On the appointment of Dr. Jacobson to the See of Chester, Mr. R. Payne
Smith became his successor in the office of Regius Professor of
Divinity. Professor Max Mueller, M.A., was thereupon nominated to take
Mr. Smith's place as the Sub-librarian in special charge of the Oriental
department, and the nomination was confirmed in Convocation on Nov. 7.

[362] The lithograph represents the lower half of the title-page.

[363] The purchase of it, as of a relic 'which there is little doubt is
genuine,' is noticed in an article on Books and Book-collecting in the
_Cornhill Magazine_ for Oct. 1867, p. 496.

[364] The only portions of the _London Gazette_ previously to be found
in the Library, were of the reign of Charles II; and these only came by
the transfer of the Ashmolean Library.


A.D. 1866.

There is not much to notice under this year, save that the _Vulgaria
quedam abs Terencio in Anglicam linguam traducta_, printed at Oxford
before 1483, was obtained, in a volume containing also two tracts
printed by J. de Westphalia, at the sale of the library of Mr. Thomas
Thomson, of Edinburgh, for L36. Although complete in itself, it appears
to have formed a part of a larger work, as the signatures run from n. to
q., in eights.


A.D. 1867.

The closing year of these memorials is distinguished by the acquisition
of a volume described by Archdeacon Cotton, in his _Typographical
Gazetteer_, as being 'of the very highest rarity.' It is a fine copy of
the _Breviarium Illerdense_, printed at Lerida, in Spain, in 1479, by
Henry Botel. Besides being remarkable from its rarity, there is special
interest attaching to the volume from the fact that it was printed at
the sole expense of the bell-ringer of the cathedral! The colophon
states that 'Antonius Palares, campanarum ejusdem ecclesiae pulsator,
propriis expensis fieri fecit.' The volume was bought from Mr. Boone
for L36.

A somewhat imperfect copy of the rare Bible printed at Edinburgh by
Arbuthnot and Bassandyne in 1579, being the first edition printed in
Scotland, was another purchase of the year; as were also two thick
volumes of recent transcripts of the Stuart correspondence, preserved in
the Imperial Library at Paris.

Within the last few years considerable attention has been paid by the
Librarian to the formation of a series of editions of the English Bible.
The number now collected is very large, and approaches very nearly to a
complete gathering of every edition before 1800, which has any claim to
regard either from date, imprint, variety of size, correctness, or
incorrectness. Early Quaker tracts have also been largely collected,
together with editions of Cotton Mather's works and those of John
Bunyan.

A portrait of the Prince of Wales, in academic dress, painted by Sir J.
Watson Gordon, was presented towards the close of the year to the
University by the Prince, in memory of his academic days, and now hangs
conspicuously at the entrance of the Picture Gallery, to which it forms
the latest addition.

Prof. Max Mueller having resigned his Sub-librarianship on account of
health, the Rev. J. W. Nutt, M.A., Fellow of All Souls' College, was
approved by Convocation, on June 25, as his successor in the charge of
the Oriental department.

The number of printed _volumes_ at present in the Library may be
estimated at nearly 350,000. It was returned to Parliament, in 1848, as
about 220,000; and with a view to this return a calculation as nearly
accurate as possible was then made. An estimate has now been made of the
additions received since that date; and from this it appears that some
79,500 volumes have been placed in the old Library and 45,000 in the
_Camera Radcliviana_, making a total for the whole collection of about
345,000 volumes. Within the same period about 5000 additional
manuscripts have been obtained, making a total of nearly 25,000. The
number was returned in 1848 as being about 21,000, but this appears to
have been somewhat in excess of the fact. The proportion was singularly
overestimated in 1819, for Clarke, in his _Repertorium Bibliographicum_
published in that year (p. 68), states that the Library contains upwards
of 160,000 volumes, of which 30,000 are manuscripts! The annual rate of
ordinary increase of printed books at present, apart, of course, from
the accession of any entire collection or special purchase, may be
reckoned at about 3000 volumes, exclusive of magazines, of which
two-thirds come from Stationers' Hall under the provisions of the
Copyright Act.

Floreat Bibliotheca.




APPENDIX A.


_Account of the Muscovite Cloak mentioned at p. 40. Extracted from vol.
vi. of B. Twyne's Collections (among the University Archives), f. 97._

'_Mr. Smyth's Relation of the Tartar Lambskinne garment in Bodleiana,
Oxon._

'Sir Rich. Lee, knight, about the later ende of the raigne of the late
Qu. Elizabeth, being by her Maiestie sent ambassador into Russia,
amongest other novelties of the cuntry found by the information of the
inhabitants, that in Tartaria, a cuntrie neere adioyning to Muscovia and
Russia, and vnder the gouernement of the Emperour of Russia, there did
some yeres growe out of the ground certaine livinge creatures in the
shape of lambes, bearinge wooll vppon them, very like to the lambes of
England, in this manner; viz., a stalke like the stalke of an
hartichocke did growe vp out of the ground, and vppon the toppe thereof
a budd, which by degrees did growe into the shape of a lambe, and became
a liuinge creature, resting vppon the stalke by the navell; and as soone
as it did come to life, it would eate of the grasse growinge round about
it, and when it had eaten vp the grasse within its reach it would die.
And then the people of the cuntry as they finde these lambes doe flea of
their skins, which they preserue and keepe, esteeminge them to bee of
excellent vse and vertue, especially against the plague and other
noysome diseases of those cuntries.

'Vppon this information, Sir Rich. Lee was very desirous to haue some of
the skyns of these Tartar lambes for his money, which at that time was
not to be gotten for money; for that whensoeuer any of those lambes were
at any time found, it was very rarely; and then also when they were
found, they were presented to the Emperor, or to some other great man of
the cuntrie, as a present of great worthe.

'At this time the Emperour had a gowne or longe cloake, made after the
fashion of that cuntrie with the skins of those Tartar lambes; which
garment the then Duke, and since Kinge, of Swethland was very desirous
to haue and offered great summes of money for, but could by no meanes
obtayne his desire.

'At this time also Sir Rich. Lee had an agatt of so great biggenesse
that he made thereof a pestle and a morter, whiche the Emperour hauinge
notice of, was desirous to haue for his money. Sir Rich. Lee,
vnderstandinge thereof, sent it to the Emperour as a present from him,
which the Emperour would not accept as a gift, neither would he haue it
but for his money. Sir Richard, beinge willinge the Emperour should haue
the pestle and the morter, yet lothe to playe the marchant at that time,
did therefore deliuer this pestle and morter, into the hands and
custodie of the Emperour's physitian to beate his physicke in it for the
Emperour; which manner of giuinge this pestle and morter did so please
the Emperour, as that he caused secret enquirie to be made whether there
were any thinge in those cuntries which Sir Richard was desirous to
haue, and by that means had notice that Sir Richard had endeuoured to
haue gotten some of their lambeskyns. Wherevppon the Emperour, after Sir
Richard had taken his leaue of him, and had receaued a great gift of him
as an Ambassador, and was departed one dayes iourney toward England, the
Emperour sent after him the before mentioned garment so made with their
Tartar lambeskyns as aforesaide, and with it some fewe skynnes loose,
and gaue them all vnto him freelie.

'Sir Richard Lee, travaylinge homewards, came to the Kinge of
Swethlandes court, who demaunded of him of diverse thinges of the
cuntrie of Muscovia; and, amongest other thinges, asked him whether he
had seene the aforesaid garment, and he answered, that he had not only
seene it, but had it in his possession; whereat the Kinge of Swethland
admired, sayinge he had longe laboured to get it for loue or money, but
could neuer obtayne it.

'Sir Rich. Lee in this iourney had not onely gotten this garment and
Tartar lambeskyns, but diverse other rich furres and other rarities of
great price; the greatest part whereof the Queene tooke of him, and
promised him recompence for them, which she neuer performed; which was
partly the cause that he concealed this garment from her duringe her
life. And when Sir Rich. Lee died himselfe, he by his will gaue it to
the Library in Oxford, to be kept as a monument there, beinge, as he
conceiued, the fittest place for a jewell of so great worth and
aestimation as that is or ought to be.

'Sir Rich. Lee was the neere kinseman of my wife; by reason whereof, I
was very familiarly acquaynted with him; and vppon conference had with
him about his trauayles at sundry times, I had the true relation of all
the premisses from his owne mouthe. And I comminge to Oxford to the Act,
and findinge this garment in Sir Tho. Bodley's studdie or closet,
without any expression made of the raritie or worth of this garment,
did discouer so much as I haue herein written to Mr. Russe, the Keeper
of the Library; at whose request I haue sett it downe, in writinge. And
in testimonie of the truthe thereof, I haue herevnto subscribed my name,
the 13th of July, 1624.

                                          'EDWARD SMYTHE.

  'Transcribed out of the originall with Mr. Russe.
  'This Mr. Smyth was a Counsellor of the Temple.'

It appears from this account that the box of scented wood ordered by the
Curators in 1614 had never been provided, and that the cloak was already
beginning to be neglected. Doubtless suspicion had been early excited as
to the truth of the traveller's story which had accompanied the gift,
and which could scarcely have obtained real credence later than the days
of Marco Polo or Sir John Mandeville. In the Ashmolean Museum a painting
is preserved which represents the _Agnus Scythicus_ in its fabled state;
a full-grown lamb poised on the top of a vegetable stalk, with its legs
dependent in the air[365]. But the key to the mystery is attached in the
label on the frame: '_Polypodium Barometz_. Linn.' It is, in truth, only
a large fern found in Tartary, of which the rhizoma is covered with the
woolly fungus-like growth, found in greater or less degree on many
species of ferns. If the plant be dug up and inverted, the roots being
uppermost and the fronds pendent, a strong imagination might find some
resemblance in the former to a wool-clad body, and in the latter to
limbs, while some of the young fronds with their spiral convolutions
might be compared to the horns of a ram, such as are duly represented in
the painting mentioned above. A specimen of the plant may be seen in the
greenhouses of the Botanic Garden, Oxford, where it is still known by
the name which the fable imposed, _Agnus Scythicus_. So great is the
woolly growth found upon one species of tree-fern in New Zealand, that
(as the writer was informed by Mr. Baxter, the Keeper of the Botanic
Garden) tons of it are yearly imported into this country for the purpose
of stuffing cushions. A finer and silkier substance is found on a fern
indigenous in Mexico.

[365] For acquaintance with this picture the author is indebted to Mr.
Rowell, whose scientific knowledge so well fits him for the post he
worthily holds as Under-keeper of the Ashmolean Museum. In Tradescant's
Catalogue of the first contents of this Museum as formed by himself,
published in 1656, occurs 'a coat lyned with _Agnus Scythicus_,' but it
does not now exist in the collection.




APPENDIX B.


_List of Books printed on Vellum, which have been added to the Library
since the year 1830[366]._

1460. _Clementis VIII Constitutiones, cum glossa Jo. Andreae._ Ed. Pr.
fol. Mogunt., Petr. Schoiffer de gernssheim. Bought in 1838 for 45_l._

1468. _Justiniani Institutiones._ Ed. Pr. fol. Mogunt. per Petr.
Schoyffer de Gernssheym. Bought in 1834 for 52_l._ 10_s._

1476. _Historia Naturale da Plinio, trad, per Chr. Landino._ fol. Ven.
Nic. Janson. The borders at the commencement of each book, with the
principal initial letters, are exquisitely painted and illustrated with
the portrait and arms of Ferdinand II of Sicily, to whom the work was
dedicated, as well as those of -- Strozzi, for whom this copy was probably
executed. Bequeathed by Mr. Douce. Exhibited in the glass case at the
end of the Library.

1480. _Breviarium Eduense_, 4to. by order of Card. John Rolin, Bishop of
Autun, 'Symon de Vetericastro eius Secretarius, parisius hoc breviarium
cum pluribus similibus imprimi fecit.' Bought in 1838 for 2_l._ 4_s._

1481. _Missale Parisiense._ Ed. Pr. fol. Par., Jo. de Prato et Desid.
huym. Bought in 1842 for 10_l._ 10_s._

1482. _Ordo Psalterii cum hymnis et canticis suis._ Small 4to. Ven. per
Nicolaum Girardenguz. From the Canonici collection.

1484. _Officium diurnum secundum morem monachorum congregationis Sancte
Justine, ord. S. Benedicti._ 8vo. Ven. per Bern. de Benaliis (&c.).
Bought in 1843 for 1_l._ 14_s._

1493. _Pars hyemalis breviarii fratrum Observantialium, ord. S.
Benedicti, per Germaniam._ 8vo. impensis Georii St[=o]chs ex Sulczbach,
civis Nurembergensis. Bought in 1841 for 14_s._

_S. A._ A small duodecimo book of prayers, in German, without any title;
with woodcuts. Printed with the types of Hans Schoensperger, of Augsburg.
Bequeathed by Mr. Douce.

1500, Aug. 14. _Heures a lusage de_ [_Tours_; the name left blank]. 8vo.
Paris, pour Anthoine Verard. With illuminations. Bought in 1844 for
6_l._

1502. _Breviarium secundum regulam beati Hysidori._ Fol. Toleti, jussu
Card. Fr. Ximenes, per Petr. Hagembach. Bought in 1853 for 200_l._ See
p. 280.

1505. _Breviarium secundum usum Herford._ 8vo. Rothom., per Inghilbertum
Haghe. Bequeathed by Gough.

1514. _Le Chevalier de la tour et le guidon des guerres; par Geoffroy de
la Tour-Landry._ Fol. Par., pour Guill. Eustace. Bequeathed by Mr.
Douce.

1522. _Libri quattuor magnorum Prophetarum; his adduntur Threni_, &c.
12mo. Par., Petrus Vidoveus. Given by Rawlinson.

1529. _S. Joannes Chrysostomus in omnes Epistolas S. Pauli_; Gr. 3 vols.
fol. Ven. Bought in 1843 for 45_l._

1629. _Rituale monasticum secundum consuetudinem congregationis
Vallisumbrosae._ Fol. Florent. Bought in 1843 for 7_l._ 17_s._ 6_d._

1642. _Bibliotheca Eliotae._ _Eliotis Librarie._ Londini, anno Verbi
incarnati M.D.XLII. A fragment, consisting of title, Proheme to Henry
VIII in English, address to the reader in Latin, and table of errata; in
all, five leaves.

1859. _Rotulus Clonensis, ex orig. in Registro Eccl. Cath. Clonensis,
editus cura Ric. Caulfield._ The first book printed at Cork on vellum,
and the only one so printed. Given by Dr. Caulfield in 1865.

1861. _The Souldier's Pocket Bible_; an exact reprint of the original
edition of 1643, with a prefatory note by George Livermore. 12mo.
Cambridge [U.S.], printed for private distribution. This copy was given
by Mr. Livermore to Archd. Cotton, and by him to the Library. It was
reprinted from a copy in the possession of the editor; only one other is
known to exist.

1866. [Heb: spr tgn] _Sepher Taghin_: Liber Coronularum, ex unico bibl.
Paris. cod. MS. a B. Goldberg descriptum, nunc primum edidit, adjectis
ad calcem libri aliquot exceptis ex alio codice ejusdem bibl. inedito,
J. J. L. Barges, S. Theol. facult. Paris. doctor. 8vo. Lut. Par.

1867. [Heb: m'sh nmym] Edited by Dr. B. Goldberg, from Pococke MS. 238.
8vo. Paris. The only vellum copy printed. Bought for 3_l._

_N. D. Geological Map of the Environs of Oxford_; by C. P. Stacpoole.
Bought in 1850 for 1_l._ 3_s._

       *       *       *       *       *

The following vellum-printed _Horae_ were all bequeathed by Mr. Douce:--

1498. _Les heures a lusaige de Rome._ 4to. Par., pour Simon Vostre.

---- ---- 4to. Par., per Gillet Hardouyn.

1498. _Hore secundum usum Sarum._ 8vo. Par., per Phil. Pigouchet.

1499. _Officium B. M. V. in usum Romane ecclesie._ 8vo. Lugd. Bon. de
boninis.

1501. _Hore Virg. Mar. secundum usum Romanum._ 8vo. Par., Thielman
Kerver.

[1501.] _Les heures a lusaige de Rome._ 8vo. Par., Simon Vostre.

1502. ---- By the same printer.

1504. ---- 8vo. Par., Anth. Chappiel.

1505. _Officium B. M. V. in usum Rom. eccl._ 8vo. Ven., Lucantonius de
Giunta.

1508. _Hore secundum usum Romanum._ 8vo. Par., Thielman Kerver.

---- ---- 8vo. Par., Guill. Anabat.

1511. ---- 8vo. Par., Theilman Kerver.

[1512.] _Les heures a lusaige de Rome._ 8vo. Par., per Joh. de Brie.

[1512.] _Heures a lusaige de Sens._ 4to. Par., Jehan de brye.

1514. _Orationes et hore in usum Romanum._ 4to. (Aug. Vind.) per Jo.
Schoensperger.

---- Another edition by the same printer in the same year, but without
name or date.

1517. _Horae ad usum Romanum._ 8vo. Par., Thielman Kerver.

1522. _Horae secundum usum Romanum._ 4to. Par., Thielman Kerver.

[1522.] _Les heures a lusaige de Rome._ 8vo. Par., par Germ. Hardouyn.

1526. _Horae secundum usum Romanum._ 8vo. Par., Thielman Kerver.

1527. _Hore in laudem B. V. Marie, secundum consuetudinem ecclesie
Parisiensis._ 8vo. Par., per Sim. du bois.

[1528.] _Horae, secundum usum Romanum, cum multis suffragiis et
orationibus de novo additis._ 8vo. Par., Germ. Hardouyn.

1529. _Horae in laudem, B. Mar., secundum usum Romanum._ 8vo. Par., apud
Gotofr. Torinum.

_S. A._ _Hore B. Marie._ 8vo. M. E. Jehannot.

_S. A._ _Hore secundum usum Romanum._ 8vo. Par., G. Hardouyn.

---- Another edition by the same printer.

_S. A._ _Les heures a lusaige de Rome._ 4to. Par., per Guill. Godar.

_S. A._ _Hore secundum usum Sarum._ 4to. Rich. Pynson.

_S. A._ _Les heures a lusaige Dangiers._ 8vo. [Par.] Simon Vostre.

_S. A._ _Heures a l'usaige de Soissons._ 8vo. [Par.] Simon Vostre.

_S. A._ _Heures de nostre dame en Francoys et en Latin._ 4to. Par.,
Anth. Verard.

_S. A._ _Heures._ 8vo. Par., Anth. Verard.

[366] Supplemental to the list appended to Archdeacon Cotton's
_Typographical Gazetteer_ in 1831. That numbered 180 separate books; the
present additions amount to fifty-four, of which all but nineteen are in
the Douce collection.




APPENDIX C.


_List of MSS. formerly in the possession of Cathedrals, Monasteries,
Colleges, and Churches in England, Scotland, and Ireland_[367].

  Aberdeen Cathedral. Ashmole, 1474.

  Abingdon. Digby, 39, 146, 227 (fine Missal, with Calendar).

  ---- John Crystall, Monk of. Rawlinson, C. 940.

  Alban's, St. Auct. F. II. 13;
    Bodl. 569;
    Laud Lat. 67;
    Laud Misc. 279, 358, 363, 370, 409;
    Rawlinson, C. 31;
    Rawlinson, Auct. 99 (obtained through Brother Hugh Legat, and given
      by Abbot John Stoke).

  ---- Sub-prior. Bodl. 467.

  ---- Sub-sacrist. Ashmole, 1796.

  Alvingham, Linc. Laud Misc. 642.

  Athdare, Kildare. Rawlinson, C. 320.

  Barking. Laud Lat. 19.

  Beauvale, or Bellavalle, Notts. Douce, 114.

  Bedford. The Minorites. Laud, 176 (given by John Grene, D.D. in 1471).

  Belvoir, Linc. E Mus. 249.

  Bilsington, Kent. Bodl. 127 (given by John, Vicar of Newchurch).

  Bordesley, Warwickshire. Bodl. 168.

  Boxgrave, Sussex. Rawlinson, A. 411.

  Bradsole, near Dover, Priory of St. Radegund. Rawlinson, B. 336.

  Bridlington. Auct. D. _infra_, II. 7;
    Bodl. 357.

  Byland, or Bellaland, Yorkshire. Bodl. 842 (bought from a carpenter);
    Laud Misc. 149.

  Canterbury, Ch. Ch. Bodl. 214, 379;
    Laud Misc. 165;
    Tanner, 18, 223;
    Rawlinson, C. 168 (Missal, given by Archbp. Warham).

  ---- W. Bonyngton, a monk, 1483. Rawlinson, B. 188.

  ---- Another monk. Bodl. 648.

  ---- St. Augustine's. Bodl. 299, 381, 391, 464, 600;
    E Mus. 223;
    Laud Lat. 65;
    Laud Misc. 225, 296;
    Wood Donat. 13;
    Ashmole, 1431;
    Barlow, 32;
    Hatton, 94;
    Maresch. 33;
    Rawlinson, C. 7, 117, 159.

  Carlisle Cathedral. Bodl. 728.

  ---- (a House at). Laud Misc. 582.

  Chichester Cathedral(?). Bodl. 142. ('de dono Seffri. Episc.')

  Cirencester, St. Mary's Abbey. Barlow, 48.

  Cokersand, Lanc. Rawlinson, C. 317.

  Coventry Cathedral. Digby, 33 (given by Rich. Luff, monk).

  ---- St. Mary's Priory. Auct. F. III. 9.

  Cropthorn, Worc. Rector in 1279. Rawlinson, B. N. Auct. 169.

  Croyland. Rawlinson, C. 531.

  Dore, Hereford. Laud, 138;
    E Mus. 82.

  Dover Priory. Bodl. 920 (Catalogue of the Library).

  ---- Hosp. of St. Bartholomew. Rawlinson, B. 335.

  Dublin, Cathedral of Ch. Ch. or Holy Trinity. Rawlinson, B. N. Auct.
    185 (a magnificent Psalter, written by direction of Prior Stephen
    de Derby; see p. 179).

  ---- Abbey of St. Thomas. Rawlinson, B. 500.

  ---- Hosp. of St. John Bapt. Rawlinson, B. 498.

  ---- St. Mary's Abbey, near Dublin. Rawlinson, B. 495, C. 60;
    Rawlinson, Misc. 1137.

  ---- Church of St. John Evang. Misc. Liturg. 337.

  Dulci Corde, or Sweet-Heart, Galloway. Fairfax, 5, (belonged to
    'Dervorgoyl de Bayll'[iol], the foundress of this house, and of
    Balliol College. Bought by Fairfax at Edinburgh in 1652).

  Dumfermline (?). Fairfax, 8.

  Dunbrothy, Wexford. Rawlinson, B. 494.

  Durham Cathedral (St. Cuthbert). Laud Lat. 12;
    Laud Misc. 368, 489;
    Rawlinson, C. 4.

  ---- Thomas Dune, a monk. Douce, 129.

  Edmund's, Bury St. Bodl. 216, 240, 297, 715, 737, 860;
    E Mus. 6, 7, 8, 9, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, 36, 112;
    Laud Misc. 742;
    Rawlinson, C. 697 (all between the 11th and 13th century);
    Misc. Liturg. 310 (_Martyrologium_; given by Rich. Fuller, Chaplain,
      and Rich. Aleyne, Kerver, in 1472. Bequeathed by Rawlinson).

  Ely. Laud, 112.

  Evesham. Auct. D. I. 15;
    Laud Lat. 31;
    Barlow 7 (_Officia Eccles._);
    Rawlinson, B. N. Auct. 16.

  Exeter Cathedral. Auct. D. II. 16, F. III. 6;
    Bodl. 579, 708 (these given by Leofric);
    Auct. D. I. 7 and 12 (given by Hugh, Archd. of Taunton), 9 (given
      by Adam de St. Bridget, Chanter), 13, 18;
    D. II. 8;
    D. _infra_, II. 9(?);
    D. III. 10, 11 (?);
    Auct. F. I. 15;
    Bodl. 92, 137, 147, 148, 149, 150, 162 (given by Richard Brounst,
      Vicar Choral), 206, 272, 273, 279, 286, 287, 289, 311, 314, 315,
      333, 335, 377, 380, 393,463 (given by the Executors of Bp. Lacy),
      482, 691, 707, 708, 717, 718, 720, 725, 732, 738, 744 (given by
      the Executors of Dr. John Snetesham), 748, 749, 786, 810, 829
      (given by the Executors of Bp. Lacy), 830, 865.
    Wood Donat. 15 (given by Executors of John Snetesham, D.D., Canon
      and Chancellor, 1448).

  Exeter. Hosp. of St. John Bapt. Laud, 156.

  Finchale, Durham. Laud Misc. 546.

  Ford, Devon. Laud Misc. 606.

  Fountains' Abbey. Ashmole, 1398, 1437;
    Laud Misc. 310, 619.

  Gainford, Durham. Thomas Heddon, Vicar. Rawlinson, A. 363.

  Garendon, Leic. Ashmole, 1516.

  Gisburne, Yorkshire. Laud Lat. 5.

  Glastonbury. Laud Lat. 4;
    Laud Misc. 128 (belonged to Thomas Wason, Abbot).

  Hanworth (Middlesex?);
    Richard, Rector. Rawlinson, B. N. Auct. 165.

  Hatfield Peverel, Essex. Rawlinson, B. 189 (given by John Bebseth),
    Prior.

  Hereford Cathedral. Rawlinson, C. 67.

  ---- Vicars Choral. Rawlinson, C. 427.

  ---- The Minorites. Hatton, 102.

  Hexham ('Hextildesham'). Bodl. 236.

  Hickling, Norfolk. Tanner, 194, 425.

  Holme Cultram, Cumb. (S. Mar. de Holmo);
    Hatton, 101.

  Jorevall, Yorkshire. Bodl. 514.

  Kenilworth, or Kelyngworth, Warw. Auct. F. III. 13 (bequeathed by John
    Alward, Rector of Stoke Bruerne).

  Kilmainham, Dublin. Hosp. of St. John Bapt. Rawlinson, B. 501.

  Kingswood, Wilts. E Mus. 62.

  Kirkstall. Laud Lat. 69;
    Laud Misc. 216;
    E Mus. 195.

  Langley, Norfolk. Bodl. 242 (_Registrum_).

  Leedes, Kent. Bodl. 406.

  Leicester, St. Mary of the Meadows. Laud Misc. 623, 625.

  Lesnes, or Lyesnes, or Westwood, Kent. Bodl. 656;
    Douce, 287.

  Lichfield Cathedral. Ashmole, 1518.

  London, St. Paul's Cathedral. Digby 89 ('Liber Magistri Thomae Lysiaux,
    decani Sancti Pauli').

  ---- The Carmelites. Laud Lat. 87.

  ---- 'Domus Salutationis Matris Dei, ord. Carthus.;' _i.e._ The
    Charter-House. Douce, 262.

  ---- Hosp. of St. Mary of Elsyng, now Sion College. E Mus. 113.

  Louth Park, Linc. Fairfax, 17.

  (Ludlow Parish Church. _Printed Book_, D. 2. 13. Art. Seld.[368])

  Maxstoke, Warwickshire. Bodl. 182.

  Merton, Surrey. Digby, 147;
    Ashmole, 1522.

  ---- John Ramsey, Canon of. Seld. _supra_, 39.

  Missenden, Bucks. Auct. D. I. 10;
    Bodl. 729.

  Mottenden, or Motynden, Kent. Bodl. 643 (bought by Brother Richard de
    Lansyng in 1467 for 26_s._ 8_d._)

  Muchelney, Somerset. Rich. Coscumbe, Prior. Ashmole, 189. ii.

  New Place, Sherwood. Laud Lat. 34;
    Laud Misc. 428.

  Norwich Cathedral (Holy Trinity). Bodl. 151, 787;
    Fairfax, 20;
    Douce, 366, (see _infra_, p. 329.)

  Nutley, or Notley Abbey, Bucks. Douce, 383, iii.

  Oseney, Oxford. Bodl. 655;
    Digby, 23 (bequeathed by Henry de Langley);
    Rawlinson, C. 939 (_Officia Eccles._).

  Osyth, St., Essex. Laud Misc. 329.

  Oxford, Balliol College. Bodl. 252.

  ---- Exeter College. Bodl. 42;
    Digby, 57[369].

  ---- (Hertford College. _Printed Tracts_ on the Bangorian
    Controversies, 8vo. I. 237, BS.)

  ---- Lincoln College. Bodl. 198 ('ex dono doctoris Thome Gascoigne').

  ---- Merton College. E Mus. 19 (given by William, Bishop of Chichester);
    Bodl. 50 (bequeathed by Thomas English), 689 and 757 (given by Henry
      Sever, Warden, in 1468), 700 and 751 (given by Richard Fitz-James,
      Bishop of Chichester);
    Digby, 155 (given by John Burbache), 216;
    Ashm. 835. (_Printed Book_ S. 9. 14. Th[370].).

  ---- St. Edmund Hall. Rawlinson, C. 900 (given by Hen. VIII).

  ---- St. Mary's College. Bodl. 637.

  ---- Staple Hall. Ashmole, 748.

  ---- The Minorites. Digby, 90 (given in 1388, by John de Teukesbury,
    with the assent of Thos. de Kyngusbury, 'Minister Angliae').

  ---- (name cut off), Bodl. 215.

  Paignton Parish, Devon. Rawlinson, C. 314 (Canons of Bishop Quivil).

  Pershore. Bodl. 209;
    Barlow, 3;
    Rawlinson, C. 81.

  Pesholme (? Will. Marschalle, Chaplain of). Bodl. 857.

  Peterborough Cathedral. Barlow, 22; (see _infra_, p. 328.)

  Pipewell, Northampt. Rawlinson, A. 388.

  Pleshey, Essex, Trinity College. Bodl. 316.

  Pontefract, Holy Trinity Hospital. Barlow, 49.

  Ramsey. Bodl. 883.

  ---- Welles, a monk of. Bodl. 857.

  Reading, St. Mary's Abbey. Auct. Digby, B. N. 11;
    Digby, 148, 200;
    Bodl. 125[371], 197, 200 (given by W. de Box), 241, 257, 550, 570,
      713, 730 (?) 772, 781, 848;
    Laud Misc. 79, 91, 725;
    Auct. D. I. 19;
    D. II. 12;
    D. III. 12, 15;
    Auct. F. III. 8;
    _infra_, I. 2;
    Rawlinson, A. 375.

  Robertsbridge, Yorkshire. Bodl. MS. 132 (written by Will. de
    Wodecherche, 'laicus quondam conversus Pontis Roberti[372]').

  Roche, or de Rupe, Yorkshire. Rawlinson, C. 329.

  Rochester Cathedral. Laud Misc. 40.

  Rossevalle, Kildare. Rawlinson, C. 32 (_Ordo servitii_).

  Salisbury Cathedral. Digby, 173 (given by Peter Fadir, Vicar
      Choral[373]);
    Bodl. 407, 516, 756, 765, 768, 835;
    Rawlinson, C. 400 (_Pontificale_, given by Bishop Martivall).

  Selby. Fairfax, 12.

  Sempringham. Douce, 136(?)

  Shene, Surrey, Carthusian Priory. Bodl. 797;
    Rawlinson, C. 57 (8vo. H. 36 Th. BS., a book printed in 1608, belonged
    apparently to some foreign branch of this house: 'Domus Shene
    Anglorum').

  Sherston, Wilts, The Church (in 1577). Bodl. 733.

  Shrewsbury, St. Chad. Rawlinson Misc. 1131. (_Martyrol._ and _Obit._)

  Sion, or Syon, Middlesex. Bodl. 630.

  Southwark, St. Mary Overy. Ashmole, 1285.

  ---- John de Lecchelade, a Canon. Rawlinson, B. 177.

  Stafford, St. Mary. Auct. F. V. 17;
    Hatton, 74.

  ---- The Minorites. Auct. F. V. 18.

  Stafford, St. Thomas, near. Auct. F. III. 10.

  Staindrop, Durham, The College. Rawlinson, A. 363 (given by Thos.
    Heddon, Vicar of Gainford, in 1515).

  Tattershall, Linc. Bodl. 419.

  Thorney, Cambr. Bodl. 680;
    Laud Misc. 364;
    Tanner, 10.

  Titchfield, Hants. Digby, 154.

  Towcester, Northampt., H. Malyng, Provost. Bodl. 731.

  Trentham, Staff. Laud Misc. 453.

  Tynemouth. Laud Misc. 657.

  Valle Crucis, De, Denbigh. E Mus. 3.

  Waltham. Laud Lat. 109;
    Laud Misc. 515;
    Rawlinson, B. N. Auct. 62 (given by Peter, Archdeacon of London);
    Rawlinson, C. 330.

  Wardon, Bedfordshire. Laud Misc. 447.

  Warter, Yorkshire. Fairfax, 9.

  Waverley, Surrey. Bodl. 527.

  Westminster Abbey. Rawlinson, C. 425 (_Pontificale_).

  Winchcombe, or Winchelcumbe, Glouc. Douce, 368.

  Winchester Cathedral ('Domus S. Swythini'). Bodl. 767.

  Windsor. Bodl. 208, 822.

  Witham, or Wytham, Somerset. Bodl. 801 ('Ex dono Joh. Blacman').

  Worcester Cathedral. Auct. F. _infra_, I. 3;
    Digby, 150(?);
    Bodl. 861 (removed in 1590), 868;
    Junius, 121.

  ---- 'Fratres Praedicatores.' Rawlinson, C. 780.

  York Minster(?) Rawlinson, C. 775.

  ---- Succentor(?) Douce, 225.

  ---- St. Mary's Abbey. Rawlinson, B. N. Auct. 11;
    Arch. A. Rot. 21; (see p. 329.)

  ---- Hosp. of St. Leonard. Rawlinson, B. 455.

[Many of Laud's MSS. came from a Carthusian Monastery near Mentz, and
from the Monastery of Eberbach, in the Duchy of Baden. It is worth
mentioning that No. 233 amongst his Miscellaneous MSS. belonged to John
Lydgate, and No. 576 to John Foxe. Several others had been previously in
the possession of Archbp. Usher, and of Lindsell, Bishop of
Peterborough.

No. 76 of Digby's MSS. was bought by Dr. John Dee, at London, May 18,
1556, 'ex bibliotheca Joh. Lelandi.']

[367] This list does not profess to be complete. But it is believed to
comprehend most of the MSS. which afford distinct evidence of former
ownership of this kind.

[368] _Picus Mirandula de Providentia Dei_, 1508. Given to the library
of the Church by Rich. Sparchiford, Archdeacon of Salop, Oct. 19, 1557.
It had previously belonged to Linacer.

[369] 'Hunc librum emit ... a magistro Philips, rectore collegii Exon,
a^o. Xi. 1468, una cum volvella solis et lunae.'

[370] _Galani Conciliatio Eccl. Armenae cum Romana_, 1650. It is
satisfactory to be able to add, that the Bodleian obtained this book, as
Bishop Booth obtained the Robertsbridge MS. (_infra_) 'modo legitimo;' a
memorandum records that it was 'bought of Fletcher the bookseller.'

[371] On the last leaf of this MS. there is a list, faintly written with
a style, of some twenty MSS. (including 'triplices cantus' for the
organ), written by one monk, to which the memorandum is added: 'Hec sunt
opera fratris W. de Wi[=c]b. per quadriennium apud Leom. (_i.e._
Leominster, a cell to Reading) commorantis.' The list commences, 'Nota
quod frater W. de Wi[=c]b. (_probably Wicumbe_), precibus domini J. de
Abbend. tunc precentoris, hortatu vero et precepto domino R. de Wygorn.
tunc supprioris, collectarium cotidianum secundum usum Rading correxit
et de duobus unum fecit.' The book may have belonged to either Reading
or Leominster.

[372] The usual anathema is subjoined on any one stealing the book from
the house of St. Mary 'de Ponte Roberti,' or in any part mutilating it;
which is followed by this self-exculpatory note on the part of a
subsequent possessor: 'Ego Johannes, Exon. episcopus, nescio ubi est
domus praedicta, nec hunc librum abstuli, sed modo legittimo adquisivi.'
This _John_ would seem to be John Booth, who was Bishop of Exeter from
1466 to 1479.

[373] The name of Peter Fader is found also in MS. Arch. Seld. B 26.




APPENDIX D.


_List of MSS. and Miscellaneous Objects of interest exhibited in the
Library._


GLASS CASE NEAR THE ENTRANCE OF THE LIBRARY.

1. A Telugu MS. on palm-leaves, brought from India by Sir Thos. Strange,
formerly Chief Justice of Madras, together with a style employed for
writings of this kind, and a pocket-knife. Given by Sir T. Strange's
daughter, Mrs. Edmund Foulkes, in 1864.

2. Drawings and engravings of Buddhist idols; brought from a Joss-house
in a Llama monastery in Pekin, in 1862, and given to the Library by
Lieut.-Col. Gibbes Rigaud, of the 60th Rifles.

3. Autograph book of distinguished visitors.

    This book commences at the year 1820. Among the autographs which
    it contains may be mentioned the following in particular:--

    Her Majesty the Queen, Nov. 8, 1832, with the Duchess of Kent;
    Dec. 12, 1860.

    The Prince Consort, June 15, 1841; June 4, 1856; Jan. 9, 1857 (in
    company with his three eldest children); Dec. 12, 1860.

    Prince of Wales, Jan. 9, 1857; March 27, 1860; June 18, 1863.

    Princess of Wales, June 18, 1863.

    Duke of Wellington, Oct. 20, 1835 (in company with Q. Adelaide);
    Sept. 14, 1839; June 15, 1841; Aug. 20, 1844.

    Gul. Gesenius, Aug. 5, 1820.

    Sir John Franklin, 1829.

    Sir D. Wilkie, June 14, 1834.

    Bishop Selwyn, June 30, 1837.

    Chevalier Bunsen, Jan. 24, 1839; Aug. 20, 1844.

    Princes of Ashantee, June 10, 1840.

    Henry Hallam, Oct. 16, 1840.

    Bishop of Malabar, Mar Athanasius Abdelmesih, June 12, 1841.

    M. Berryer, Nov. 23, 1843.

    W. H. Prescott, June 24, 1850.

    Alfred Tennyson, June 21, 1855.

    A Siamese Prince, June 29, 1858.

    Lord Brougham, June 20, 1860.

    Lord Palmerston, July 2, 1862.

    Queen Emma of Honolulu, Aug. 14, 1865.

    Chinese Ambassadors, June 7, 1866.

    Until the year 1861 it was also the custom for all graduates of
    Cambridge and Dublin who were admitted ad _eundem_ to enter their
    names in this book; it is to this custom that we owe possession of
    the signature of the ex-Metropolitan of New Zealand[374].

4. _New Testament_, said to be bound in a piece of a waistcoat of King
Charles I. See p. 53.

5. Another, bound by the Sisters of Little Gidding. See p. 53.

6. _Xiphilini Epitome Dionis Nicaei_; Gr. 4to. Par. printed by Rob.
Stephens, 1551. Bound in a handsomely tooled and gilt calf binding, in
the Grolier style, with the badge of Dudley, Earl of Leicester, viz. the
Bear and Ragged Staff, in the centre. Bequeathed by Selden.

7. _Bacon's Essays_; in a worked binding. See p. 51.

8. Specimen of the early _Block-books_, or books printed from engraved
blocks before the invention of moveable types; being the Apocalypse,
represented in a series of rudely-engraved scenes, with short
explanatory descriptions.

    This is a copy of the edition called by Mr. S. Leigh Sotheby, in his
    _Principia Typographica_, the Second; it belonged to Mr. Douce, who
    bought it for thirty-one guineas at Mr. Inglis' sale[375].

9. The first book printed from moveable types; being a very fine copy,
of the grand Latin Bible, printed by Gutenberg at Mentz about 1455. See
p. 202.

    A copy was sold at the auction of the library of the Duke of Sussex,
    in 1844, for the moderate sum of L190; when the same copy, however,
    was re-sold at the auction of the library of Dr. Daly, Bishop of
    Cashel, in 1858, it produced no less than L596.

10. A copy of the first book printed in the English language, being _The
Recuyell of the Histories of Troy_, printed by Caxton, most probably at
Bruges, about 1472.

    This copy wants three leaves; it was given to the Library in 1750,
    by James Bowen, a painter of Shrewsbury, well known as a local
    antiquarian. A second copy, which wants seven leaves, is also in the
    Library. A copy, wanting forty-four leaves, was sold at Utterson's
    sale in 1852 to the Earl of Ashburnham for L155.

11. The English Bible, translated by Myles Coverdale from the Vulgate,
and printed abroad in 1535.

    This copy of the first complete Bible printed in our language, is
    one of the largest and soundest known to be in existence, although,
    like almost all other copies, it wants the title. It was formerly in
    the possession of Selden. A facsimile title, engraved by Mr. Fry, of
    Bristol, from the Marq. of Northampton's copy, accompanies it,
    together with another leaf in facsimile, from the Earl of
    Leicester's copy. Another and more imperfect copy came to the
    Library among the books bequeathed by Mrs. Denyer. In 1854 a copy
    nearly perfect, having only two leaves in facsimile by Mr. Harris,
    was sold at Mr. Dunn Gardner's sale for the large sum of L364; and a
    very imperfect copy was sold for L190 in 1857.

12. Hieronymus (_rectius_, Rufinus) _de Symbolo Apostolorum_; printed at
Oxford in 1468. See p. 111.

13. Latin verses in the autograph of Milton. See p. 45.

14. The original MS. of Addison's _Letter_ (in verse) _from Italy to
Lord Halifax_.

    A Rawlinson MS.

15. Letter from Alex. Pope to H. Cromwell, Esq.; dated July 15, 1711.

    The same volume contains various other letters from the same to the
    same, which were printed by Curll in 1727; one by Dryden, three by
    J. Norris of Bemerton, three short notes from Young, and several
    letters by Ladies Hester Pakington and Mary Chudleigh. It belongs to
    the Rawlinson collection of MSS.

16. Letter from Archbp. Laud to Sir W. Boswell, the English Resident at
the Hague; dated from Lambeth, Nov. 26, 1638.

    It refers to libels printed in Holland, and particularly to one
    against Laud, supposed to be then printing at Amsterdam, entitled,
    _The Beast is Wounded_. 'I thanke God I trouble not myselfe much
    with these things; but am very sorry for the Publicke, which suffers
    much by them.' Bought in 1863 at a sale at the Hague for L7 17_s._,
    together with a letter on diplomatic business signed by Sir Thomas
    Bodley, and dated at the Hague, April 11, 1589, which is now bound
    in the same volume.

17. Archbp. Laud's formal Letter of resignation of his office as
Chancellor of the University, signed by himself, and dated from the
Tower, June 22, 1641. In Latin; on parchment.

    Endorsed by Ant. a Wood with this memorandum: 'Given to me by Rob.
    Whorwood, of Oxon, Gent., 29 Feb., 1679[376].'

18. Lord Clarendon's Letter, resigning the same office upon his going
into exile; written in a secretary's hand, but signed by himself. Very
touching and beautiful. It runs as follows:--

                          'For Mr. Vicechancellor of Oxford.

    'Good Mr. Vicechancellor,

    'Having found it necessary to transport myselfe out of England, and
    not knowing when it will please God that I shall returne againe; it
    becomes me to take care that the University may not be without the
    service of a person better able to be of use to them, then I am like
    to be; and I doe therefore hereby surrender the office of Chancellor
    into the hands of the said University, to the end that they make
    choyce of some other person better qualifyed to assist and protect
    them then I am, I am sure he can never be more affectionate to it. I
    desire you, as the last suite I am like to make to you, to believe
    that I doe not fly my Country for guilt, and how passionately soever
    I am pursued, that I have not done any thing to make the University
    ashamed of me, or to repent the good opinion they had once of me,
    and though I must have noe farther mention in your publique
    devotions (which I have alwayes exceedingly valued) I hope I shall
    be alwayes remembred in your private prayers as

                                'Good Mr. Vicechancellor,
                                    'Your affectionate servant,
                                          'CLARENDON.

    'Calice, this 7/17 Dec. 1667.'

19. A volume of the Papers of W. Bridgeman, Under-secretary of State to
James II (bequeathed to the Library by Dr. R. Rawlinson; _see p. 173_),
open at a leaf containing the original declaration written and signed by
the Duke of Monmouth, on the day of his execution, of the nullity of his
claim to the Crown.

    The following is a copy:--

    'I declare y^t y^e title of King was forct upon mee, & y^t it was
    very much contrary to my opinion when I was proclam'd. For y^e
    satisfaction of the world I doe declare that y^e late King told mee
    that Hee was never married to my Mother.

    'Haveing declar'd this I hope y^t the King who is now will not let
    my Children suffer on this Account. And to this I put my hand this
    fifteenth day of July, 1685.

                                                    'MONMOUTH.

    'Declar'd by Himselfe, & sign'd in the presence of us.

                                          'Fran. Elien. [_Turner_].
                                          'Tho. Bath & Wells [_Ken_].
                                          'Tho. Tenison.
                                          'George Hooper.'

    Beside it is placed the Proclamation of James II, ordering the
    apprehension of all persons dispersing the Declaration issued by
    Monmouth upon his landing in England; dated but one short month
    previously, June 15, 1685.

    The same volume contains two letters from Monmouth to the King,
    begging for his life, and one to the Queen. These have been
    frequently printed.

20. A Sanscrit roll, written at the end of the last century, containing
extracts from the _Bhagavadgita_; with paintings representing the
incarnations of Vishnu, &c.

    In a wooden case. One of the Frazer MSS.

21. A magnificent folio volume, containing a series of illustrations of
Scripture History from Genesis to Job; written about the beginning of
the fourteenth century.

    Each page contains, in double columns, four pairs of miniatures
    painted, in medallion-form, upon a gorgeous ground of gold; the
    first of each pair represents some historical scene, which the
    second treats allegorically, and applies to the condition of the
    Church or of individual Christians. Two other volumes are to be
    found in the British Museum, and in the Imperial Library at Paris.

22. A small oaken platter, bearing the following inscription: 'This
Salver is part of that Oak in which his Majesty K. Charles the 2d,
Concealed himself from the Rebells, and was given to this University by
Mrs. Laetitia Lane.'

    The donor was the daughter of Col. John Lane, the chief agent in the
    King's escape from Worcester; she died in 1709[377].

23. Specimen of Javanese writing, being a letter from a Javanese Chief
to the Resident of Soorabaya. The seal bears the date of 1780.

24. Small specimen of an Arabic MS.

25. A fragment in large Persian characters.

26. A specimen of Malabaric writing, upon a palm-leaf, three feet in
length. 'Aug. 9, 1630. Ex dono Jo. Trefusis, generosi Cornubiensis, e
Coll. Exon.'

27. A Russian painting upon a shell, representing a female saint called
S. Parasceve, [Grk: he hagia Paraskeue], who is found in the Greek
Menology, but whose history is believed by the Bollandists to be a pious
fiction.

28. A Hebrew _Bible_, beautifully written in the fourteenth century; in
triple columns, with the Masoretic commentary written in very minute
characters, and frequently in fantastic figures, round each page.

    One of the Oppenheimer MSS.

29. _Horae._ An illuminated MS. of the middle of the fifteenth century,
in 4to., probably by a French scribe and artist.

    From the Canonici collection.

30. Another MS. of the _Hours_, in folio, of the fifteenth century,
beautifully illuminated, with many miniatures varying in the treatment
of some of the scenes which they represent from the common type.

    Traditionally said, but on what evidence does not appear, to have
    belonged to Henry VIII.

31. A third fifteenth-century MS. of the _Hours_, in 8vo.

    From the Rawlinson collection.

32. A fourth MS. of the _Hours_, very early in the fifteenth century, or
about the close of the fourteenth.

    Also from the Rawlinson collection. All these copies of the _Horae_
    appear to be of French execution.

33. A pair of long white leather gloves, worked with gold thread, which
were worn by Queen Elizabeth when she visited the University in
1566[378].

34. A Latin exercise book, in 4to., which appears to have been filled up
by Edward VI and his sister Elizabeth, jointly.

    Sentences written by the former are dated from Jan. 1548-9 to Aug.
    1549. The boy-monarch has written his own name in several parts of
    the book. It came to the Bodleian 'ex dono doctissimi viri P. Junii,
    Bibliothecarii Regii, A.D. 1639.' Patrick Young also gave another
    book in Edward's handwriting in folio, containing Greek and Latin
    phrases, written very neatly in 1551-1552[379].

35. Mexican Hieroglyphics; painted on a long skin of leather.

36. The Book of _Proverbs_, written by Mrs. Esther Inglis. See p. 48.

37. Two Runic Primstaves, or wooden Clog-Almanacks: one in the form of a
walking stick; the other, an oblong block, with a handle. See pp. 105,
161.

    An engraving of the second may be found in the _Anglican Church
    Calendar illustrated_, published by Messrs. Parker. And a
    description of these primitive Calendars is given by Plot in his
    _Natural History of Staffordshire_, 1686, pp. 418-432, where there
    is an engraving of a Clog which was still in use in Staffordshire at
    that time.

38. Eight small wooden tablets, apparently a pocket-edition of a
Clog-Almanack, with very quaint figures.

    Given by Archbp. Laud.

39. The Book of _Enoch_, in AEthiopic. See p. 267.

40. A Persian poem, by Jami, on the history of Joseph and Potiphar's
wife. Written A.D. 1569, and decorated with some very good paintings and
arabesque borders[380].

    One of Greaves' MSS.

41. A specimen of Telugu writing on palm-leaves; being an almanack for
the year 1630.

    Given by Archbp. Laud.

42. A French panegyrical poem, presented to Queen Elizabeth, in 1586, by
Georges de la Motthe, a French refugee; with a prefatory address in
prose.

    Enriched with an exquisite portrait of the Queen, in all the
    grandeur of her wide circumference, and with golden hair of very
    _prononcee_ hue; and with a great variety of beautifully-executed
    monograms, symbols, &c. around each page. The binding is richly
    tooled and covered with designs; while in the centre on either side,
    protected by glass, are brilliant bosses, said to be composed of
    humming-birds' feathers.

    'Ex dono ornatissimi, simul ac optimae spei, juvenis D. Johannis
    Cope, armigeri, equitis aurati, baronetti f. natu maximi, olim
    Reginensis Oxon, Almae Matris ergo. 4 Cal. Jan. 1626.'

    On a fly-leaf at the end is attached a fragment from some English
    theological treatise, in wonderfully minute, although clear,
    handwriting.

43. The _Koran_, on a long and narrow roll, very elegantly written in
minute characters.

    Given by Archbp. Laud.

44. A Syriac fragment, on three leaves of paper.

45. A specimen of Chinese printing, on rice-paper.

46. A specimen of the Papyrus-plant, in its natural state.

47. A fine MS. of the _Koran_, from the library of Tippoo Sahib at
Seringapatam.

    Given by the East India Company in 1806; see p. 208.

48. A small Egyptian mummy-figure, of baked clay.

    Given by Archbp. Laud.

49. A Burmese MS., written in large black characters on thirty-nine
gilded palm-leaves.

    'Taken from a priest's chest in an idol-house of the deserted
    village of Myanoung, on the Irawaddy, thirty-five miles below Prome,
    April 17, 1825.' Given by Rev. Joseph Dornford, Oriel College, Nov.
    8, 1830.


IN THE OPPOSITE, OR NORTH, WING.

A large glass case containing a series of MSS. executed by English
scribes, arranged chronologically, so as to exhibit the progress and
development of the arts of caligraphy and illuminating in England. This
case was added by the present Librarian three or four years ago. The
following are its contents:--

1. King Alfred's Anglo-Saxon version of the treatise _De cura pastorali_
of Pope Gregory the Great, being the copy sent by the King to Werfrith,
Bishop of Worcester.

    Given by Lord Hatton; see p. 100.

2. A beautiful Latin _Psalter_ of the tenth century, written in
Anglo-Saxon characters, with an interlinear translation, and decorated
with grotesque initial letters.

    Junius MS. 37. The volume is frequently called _Codex Vossianus_,
    from its having been in the possession of Isaac Voss, who gave it to
    Junius. Facsimiles are given by Professor Westwood, in his
    _Palaeographia Sacra_, and in his new and splendid book of
    _Fac-similes of the Miniatures and Ornaments of Anglo-Saxon and
    Irish MSS_[381].

3. The _Four Gospels_, in Latin, written in Anglo-Saxon characters,
about the beginning of the eleventh century.

    Noticed in Westwood's _Miniatures_, &c. (_ut supra_), p. 123.

    It appears to have belonged to the abbey at Barking, a gift of
    tithes at Laleseie, by Adam, son of Leomar de Cochefeld, being
    entered on a leaf at the end by order of the abbess AElfgiva. Now
    numbered Bodl. 155.

4. The famous _Anglo-Saxon metrical paraphrase_ of parts of Genesis,
Exodus, Daniel, &c. by Caedmon[382]; illustrated, as far as Abraham's
journey into Egypt, with a very curious series of drawings.

    The MS. is considered to have been written about A.D. 1000. The
    latest description of the volume is in Westwood's magnificent book
    of _Fac-similes_. See p. 102.

5. The _Psalter_, _Canticles_, &c., in Latin, with a Calendar; written in
the first half of the eleventh century.

    Noticed in Westwood's _Miniatures and Ornaments_, &c., p. 122. Douce,
    296.

6. A twelfth-century volume containing, besides various historical
works, a _Bestiary_, or Natural History of Beasts, illustrated with very
curious drawings.

    Given by Archbp. Laud.

7. A _Bestiary_ of the beginning of the thirteenth century, enriched
with many very curious paintings upon a ground of brilliant gold.

    Ashmole, 1511.

8. Another _Bestiary_, of slightly later date, illuminated in the same
manner.

    Bodl. 764.

9. The _Apocalypse_, illustrated in a series of very curious drawings,
lightly coloured. Executed about 1250.

    These illuminations have been pronounced by Mr. Coxe, to be, with
    little or no doubt, executed by the same hand as those of MS. Ee.
    III. 59. in the University Library, Cambridge, a volume which
    contains a Life of Edward the Confessor, in French verse, and which
    was printed in 1858, under the editorship of H. R. Luard, M.A., in
    the series of Chronicles published under the authority of the Master
    of the Rolls. In this Life is found a particular description of
    Westminster Abbey, which is not elsewhere met with, and it is
    consequently inferred that the writer was a monk of that church. And
    in the course of the restorations which are now being carried on in
    the Chapter House (which was built about 1250), a series of mural
    paintings, illustrating the history of St. John, has been brought to
    light, one of which is a representation similar to that in the
    Bodley MS. of St. John 'ante portam Latinam,' and in both cases the
    cauldron bears the same inscription of '_Dolium_ ferventis olei.'

10. A _Primer_, written about the middle of the fourteenth century.

    The arms of Edw. III (England 1 and 4, France 2 and 3) are painted
    on the first leaf. One of Rawlinson's MSS.

11. A beautiful _Psalter_, which belonged to Peterborough Cathedral.

    'Psalterium fratris Walteri de Rouceby,' followed by the Canticles,
    Athanasian Creed, Litany, &c. A Calendar is prefixed, with
    Peterborough obits, from which it appears that Rouceby died May 4,
    1341. A series of nineteen miniatures, illustrating the life of our
    Blessed Lord and of the Virgin Mary, precedes the Psalter. The arms
    of Edward III appear at the head of Ps. i. One of Bp. Barlow's MSS.;
    in 1604 it belonged to one John Harborne.

12. A _Psalter_, with Canticles, Hymns, &c., written in the latter half
of the fourteenth century.

    Apparently one of Rawlinson's MSS.

13. '_Ye Dreme of Pilgrimage of ye Soule_, translated out of French [of
G. Guilevile] into Inglissh, with somwhat of addicions of ye
translatour, ye zeere of our Lord, 1400.' Illustrated with curious
coloured drawings.

    A precursor of Bunyan's _Pilgrim's Progress_, with which it has been
    compared. It was printed by Caxton in 1483, and his edition was
    reprinted in 1859.

    This MS. was given to the Library, apparently in Bodley's time, by
    Sir James Lee, Knt.

14. _Commentary on the Passion of our B. Lord_ ('Scripta super totam
Passionem Christi a quatuor Evangelistis formatam'), by Michael de
Massa, of the order of Augustinian Hermits.

    Written (as a final colophon records) by Ralph de Medyltone at
    Ingham (Suffolk?), A.D. 1405, for Sir Miles de Stapiltone. A
    drawing of the Crucifixion at the beginning. Bodl. MS. 758.

15. '_The Mirroure of the Worlde_, that some calleth Vice and Vertu;'
translated from the Latin of Laurence the Frenchman (Laur. Gallus), and
illustrated with some drawings of remarkable grace and spirit, supposed
to be by some Flemish artist.

    A MS. of the early part of the fifteenth century; on paper. Bodl.
    283.

16. _Horae_, formerly in the possession of Queen Mary I. See p. 42.

17. _Treatise of Roger Bacon_, 'de retardacione accidentium senectutis;'
with two drawings. Middle of the fifteenth century. Bodl. MS. 211.

18. An English astrological Calendar, in six divisions, folded for the
pocket; written in the latter half of the fourteenth century.

    Extremely curious; contains prognostications of the weather,
    fatality of the seasons, &c., accompanied with innumerable figures of
    saints, illustrations of prognostics, the symbols found on the Runic
    Clog-Almanacks, the occupations of the several months, the signs of
    the Zodiac, and two quaint figures respectively labelled 'Harry ye
    Haywarde' with his dog 'Talbat,' and 'Peris ye Pyndare.' Formerly
    kept in a tin box. It contains the following note by T. Hearne:
    'Oct. 17, 1719. This strange odd book (upon which I set a very great
    value, having never seen the like) was given me by the Rt. Reverend
    Father in God William [Fleetwood] Lord Bishop of Ely, to whom I am
    oblig'd upon many other accounts.'

19. An _Historical Roll_, upwards of thirteen feet long, showing the
descent of the English Kings, from the expedition of Jason in search of
the Golden Fleece to the accession of Edward I (1272). Formerly
belonging to the Abbey of St. Mary at York.

    Illustrated with representations of various scenes up to the landing
    of Brute in the Isle of Wight, and thenceforward with portraits of
    the monarchs.

20. _Map of the Holy Land_, on a paper roll, nearly seven feet long;
written, apparently, in the first half of the fifteenth century.

    In the Douce collection. Engraved in facsimile during the past year,
    1867, for the Roxburghe Club, to illustrate the Itineraries of
    William Wey, which were edited by Rev. G. Williams, B.D., for the
    same Club, from Bodl. MS. 565, in 1857. The Map in many points
    agrees very closely with the latter, but contains also some
    discrepancies, and is somewhat earlier in date.

21. A _Psalter_, with the usual Canticles, Litany, &c; written about the
middle of the fourteenth century.

    This magnificent volume was given by Robert de Ormesby, a monk of
    Norwich, to the choir of the Cathedral Church, 'ad jacendum coram
    Suppriore qui pro tempore fuerit inperpetuum.' It is illustrated
    with illuminations most beautifully executed, but, at the same
    time, containing the most grotesque and profanely inappropriate
    figures, resembling those sometimes found on the _Misereres_ of
    collegiate churches. It is bound in a large covering of sheepskin,
    which by overlapping the volume has no doubt greatly contributed to
    preserve its freshness and beauty of condition. A facsimile from one
    page is to be found in Shaw's _Illuminated Ornaments_, 1833, with a
    description by Sir F. Madden. It belongs to the Douce collection.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a separate glass case adjoining the preceding (in which was formerly
exhibited a fine specimen of the typography of the Royal Press at
Berlin, in a German Bible given by the King of Prussia) is now displayed
a fine Bible printed at Glasgow in 1862, in two folio volumes, and
illustrated with very beautiful photographs by Frith, which was called
the Queen's Bible from its being dedicated by permission to Her Majesty.

In a glass case in the adjoining window is a German Bible, printed in
1541, with texts on the fly-leaves in the handwriting of Luther and
Melanchthon, whose signatures, although much defaced by some possessor,
are still very legible. See p. 245.


IN A GLASS CASE, WEST END OF THE LIBRARY.

1. _Plinii Historia Naturalis_; in folio. Printed 1476.

    From the Douce collection. See p. 250.

2. _Breviary_ and Psalter according to the use of the Carthusian Order;
written about 1480.

    A specimen of Italian art, from the Canonici collection.

3. _Horae B. M. Virg._ 12mo. An exquisite MS., of the school of Albert
Durer, executed for Bona Sforza. See p. 249.

4. _Psalter_, on purple vellum, written about the close of the ninth
century. From the old library of the kings of France. See p. 249.

    A MS. of the _Horae_, written on purple vellum, about 1500, is among
    the Canonici MSS.

5. _Boccaccio's Il Filocalo_; in folio, of the fifteenth century.

    A beautiful MS., with five exquisite miniatures, and interlaced
    arabesque borders of the richest character. A facsimile, with a
    notice of the book, will be found in Shaw's _Illuminated Ornaments_.
    From the Canonici collection.

6. _Horae_, quarto; fourteenth century. A beautiful book.

    From the Douce collection.

7. _Horae_, small quarto; end of the fifteenth century. The illuminations
possess exquisite softness and delicacy.

    Also from the Douce collection.

8. _The Miracles of the B. Virgin_, in French. A Douce MS., in folio,
executed about 1460, for Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, and enriched
with most beautiful paintings of the tint called '_Camaieu gris_'.

9. _Horae_, in quarto. A beautiful Douce book, the work of a French
scribe in and about the year 1407.

10. _Horae_, in duodecimo. Another gem from the Douce collection,
executed about the year 1500, for the Emperor Maximilian and Mary of
Burgundy his wife.

    The margins are adorned with charming figures of birds, and in one
    instance a border is filled with representations of pottery and
    glass.

11. _Horae_, in quarto, of the commencement of the sixteenth century;
from the Douce collection. An exquisite specimen of Flemish art. It
belonged to Mary de Medici.

12. _Horae_, in small folio. A most sumptuous volume, executed about
1410. The illuminations are of the school of Van Eyck.

    The borders of birds, butterflies, flowers, landscapes, &c., are
    marvels of nature in art; and many of the initials are distinguished
    by the utmost delicacy in design and finish in execution. Also from
    the Douce collection.

13. _Quatuor Evangelia_; commencement of the seventh century. See p. 24.

14. _Letters of Queen Henrietta Maria_ to Charles I before their
marriage; in French.

    The volume forms part of the Clarendon State Papers, and contains
    fifteen of the Queen's letters, besides some from the King, and
    other documents.

15. _Latin Translation by Queen Elizabeth_, while Princess, of an
Italian sermon by Bern. Ochini, _De Christo_; written entirely by
herself, and sent as a New-year's gift to her brother Edward VI[383].

    It forms a small 8vo. volume of thirty-six pages, on vellum, and was
    given to the Library by J. Bowle, of Idmerston, Aug. 15, 1765. The
    following dedication (hitherto unprinted) is prefixed by the
    Princess:--

    'Augustissimo et serenissimo Regi Edvardo Sexto. Si aliquid hoc
    tempore haberem (Serenissime Rex) quod mihi ad dandum esset
    accommodatum, & Maiestati tuae congruens ad accipiendum, equidem de
    hac re vehementer laetarer. Tua Maiestas res magnas & excellentes
    meretur, et mea facultas exigua tantum suppeditare potest, sed
    quamvis facultate possim minima, tamen animo tibi maxima prestare
    cupio, & quum ab aliis opibus superer, a nemine amore & benevolentia
    vincor. Ita iubet natura, authoritas tua commouet, & bonitas me
    hortatur, ut cum princeps meus sis te officio obseruem, & cum frater
    meus sis vnicus & amantissimus, intimo amore afficiam. Ecce autem
    pro huius noui anni felici auspicio, & observantiae meae testimonio,
    offero M. T. breuem istam Bernardi Ochini orationem, ab eo Italice
    primum scriptam, & a me in latinum sermonem conuersum. Argumentum
    quum de Christo sit, bene conuenire tibi potest, qui quotidie
    Christum discis, & post eum in terris proximum locum & dignitatem
    habes. Tractatio ita pia est & docta, ut lectio non possit non esse
    vtilis et fructuosa. Et si nihil aliud commendaret opus, authoritas
    scriptoris ornaret satis, qui propter religionem et Christum patria
    expulsus, cogitur in locis peregrinis & inter ignotos homines vitam
    traducere. Si quicquam in eo mediocre sit, mea translatio est, quae
    profecto talis non est qualis esse debet, sed qualis a me effici
    posset. At istarum rerum omnium M. tua inter legendum iudex sit, cui
    ego hunc meum laborem commendo, & vna meipsam etiam dedico, Deumque
    precor vt M. tua multos nouos & felices annos videat & lucris ac
    pietate perpetuo crescat. Enfeldiae, 30 Decembris.

  'Maiestatis tuae,
  'humill. soror,
  '& serua,
  'Elizabeta.'

16. A Persian treatise, in prose and verse, on ethics and education,
entitled, _Beharistan, or, The Season of Spring_; by Nurruddin
Abdurrahman, surnamed Djami.

    The MS. was written at Lahore, for the Emperor of Hindustan, A.D.
    1575, by Muhammed Hussein, a famous scribe, who was called the _Pen
    of Gold_; and illustrated by sixteen painters. Its modern velvet
    binding is adorned with gold corners and bosses; and a bag in which
    it was kept lies beside it. From the collection of Sir Gore Ouseley.

17. _Evangeliarium_, MS. in folio; of the tenth century.

    A fine MS., which formerly belonged to the abbey of St. Faron, near
    Meaux; bought at the sale of M. Abel-Remusat's library in 1833, by
    Mr. Payne, and sold to Douce, apparently for the sum of L31 10_s._On
    the cover is an ivory diptych; in the centre, a figure of our
    Blessed Lord treading on 'the lion and adder, the young lion and
    dragon;' around, twelve scenes from His life and miracles.

18. Ivory triptych eleven inches high; North Italian work, of the
fifteenth century.

    In the centre the Blessed Virgin and Child between St. Leonard and
    another saint; on the wings, St. John the Evangelist and St.
    Lawrence[384].

19. _Evangelia, secundum Matt. et Marc._ A fine Douce MS. of the
eleventh century, bound in thick boards, overlaid on one side with a
brass plate, whereon are engraved the four Evangelists, with angels; in
the centre, an ivory carving of our Lord, with the Evangelistic symbols.

20. Metal-Work.

    i. Crucifix; enamelled.

    ii. The Martyrdom of St. Sebastian; small, on brass.

    iii. Four enamelled round tablets, bearing portraits of 'Le Conte
        de Flandres, le Conte de Champagne, le Conte de Tholoze, Duc de
        Normandie.'

    iv. Two small enamelled representations of March and May.

    v. Dolphin, with boy on his back (the Dauphin); motto, 'Qui pense ma
        ... vy advient.'

    vi. Heads, enamelled, of the following Roman Emperors; Julius Caesar,
        Augustus, Claudius and Otho.

    vii. English pocket-almanac, in brass, 1554-1579, with tidal tables
        for English ports, a compass, &c. On one side of its case is the
        following  inscription:--

          'Aske me not, for ye Gett me not.--'R. P.'

    viii. A small copper figure of our Blessed Lord, crowned and robed,
        with eyes open, and arms extended.

      The following account is given by Hearne in a volume of his MS.
        collections[385]:--

      'About five years since the workmen in digging the gardens that
        formerly belong'd to St. Frideswyd's, Oxford, found a crucifix;
        the figure in pontifical robes, enamelled and gilt, with stones
        in the arms and breast. It came afterwards into the hands of Mr.
        Edw. Thwaites of Queen's College, who gave it to the Bodleian
        Library, where in the Physick schoole 'tis now reserved, and
        seems to be very ancient.'

      A drawing of the figure made for Thwaites by J. T. [alman] lies
        beside it, which was given to the Library by the late Dr.
        Wellesley. The figure resembles a crucifix found at Lucca, of
        the seventh century.

21. _Psalterium_; close of thirteenth century.

    Bound in solid silver, on which are engraved the Annunciation and
    the Coronation of the Blessed Virgin, seen beneath a coloured
    transparency which gives an appearance of great richness to the
    otherwise uncoloured silver.

    A beautifully decorated volume, given by Sir Rob. Cotton to William
    Butler, M.D. of Cambridge, in 1614; and to the Bodleian, July 15,
    1648, by Dame Anne Sadler, wife of Ralph Sadler, of Stonden, Herts.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The following objects of interest are dispersed in various parts of the
Library:--_


AT THE EAST END.

1. A drawing by Holbein, framed and glazed, being a design for a cup.

    On the back is the following note:--'This is an original drawing by
    Hans Holbein, was actually executed, and in the possession of Queen
    Anna Bulleyn, A.D. 1534. D. Logan.' It bears, however, the initials
    H. and J., and was therefore executed, not for Anne Boleyn, but Jane
    Seymour. 'The cup was carried into Spain by George Villiers, Duke of
    Buckingham, when he accompanied Charles, Prince of Wales, on his
    romantic expedition to Madrid[386].'

2. The original drawing, as is supposed, by Raffaele, for his picture of
Attila stopped on his approach to Rome by the apparition of SS. Peter
and Paul. Framed and glazed.

    This and the preceding form part of the Douce collection.

3. Bust of Sir T. Bodley. See p. 26.

4. Bust of Charles I. See p. 61.

5. Small marble bust of Napoleon.

    Bequeathed by Capt. Montagu in 1863. See p. 299.

6. Engraved facsimile of the Rosetta Stone, published by the Antiquarian
Society in 1803.

7. Egyptian scroll.

    [Five other Egyptian fragments hang at the other end of the
    Library.]

8. Map of England and Scotland, on parchment. Written in the fourteenth
century. See p. 212, _note_.

9. An armillary sphere, in bronze, supported by three lions.

    Given by Capt. Josias Bodley. See p. 21.

10. Two small bronzes; one representing Narcissus contemplating his face
in the stream; the other, Cupids disporting themselves on the backs of
Tritons.

11. A plaster cast of young Bacchanals leading the goat.

12. A wood carving, coarsely executed, representing Hercules spinning,
and exposed by Omphale to the ridicule of two female visitors.

13. Bronze, in fine alto-relievo, of Curtius leaping into the gulf in
the Forum at Rome.

14. Carving, in soap-stone, of the Judgment of Solomon.

15. A geometrical, eleven-sided figure, inclosing an open and hollow
iron ball with sixty sides, and surmounting a small pillar representing
the five orders of architecture. Around the base of the column are eight
other geometrical figures, with vacant spaces for two which have been
lost.

    [Probably all the preceding articles, 10-15, came from Rawlinson.]

16. Model, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, of the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre at Jerusalem.

    Bequeathed by Dr. Mason in 1841. See p. 265.

17. Four specimens of papyrus-rolls from Herculaneum, burnt to a crust.

    Presented to the Library by George IV. See p. 216.

18. Piece of wood from the south side of the curious timber Church at
Greensted in Essex, built A.D. 1013.

    Presented by Mr. James Dix, of Bristol, Feb. 10, 1865.

19. Specimen of ornamental writing by Mr. Hormuzd Rassam, whose name is
so well known in England, first, from his having accompanied Mr. Layard
during his Assyrian researches, and next from his, now happily ended,
captivity in Abyssinia; consisting of various chapters from the Old and
New Testaments, in Chaldee, Arabic, and Turkish, beautifully written in
the form of two angels supporting a cross, within a border.

    Presented by Mr. Rassam on leaving Oxford in January, 1849, after a
    stay of some months, as a mark of thanks for the manner in which he
    had been received. It occupied only forty-eight hours in execution,
    as he himself told the present writer[387].


AT THE WEST END.

20. Sir Thomas Bodley's bell. See p. 33.

21. Maps of Oxford and Cambridge, by Ralph Aggas; the former dated 1578,
the latter 1592; about three feet by four in size.

    These extremely curious and valuable maps were bequeathed by Dr.
    Rawlinson. Having become decayed and dilapidated by exposure, they
    were some few years ago carefully mounted on canvas, on a wooden
    frame, and covered with glass; by which means they are effectually
    secured from further injury of the same kind.

22. Four drawings of heads by Raffaele, or Giulio Romano. See p. 251.


IN THE LIBRARIAN'S STUDY.

23. A Roman inscription on a brazen plate:--

         FLORAE
  TI. PLAVTIVS DROSVS
        MAG. II.
      V. S. L. M.

    Given by Dr. Rawlinson. An engraving is extant, among the many which
    were executed for Rawlinson of various relics in his miscellaneous
    collection. It is described on the engraving as being 'Ex regiis
    Christinae thesauris.'

24. A small plaster cast of the head of Torquato Tasso, from a wax model
made by Mr. N. Marchant from a cast taken after Tasso's death, and
preserved in the Convent of St. Onofrio at Rome, where his death
occurred.


IN THE OPPOSITE SUB-LIBRARIAN'S STUDY.

25. A warrior on horseback, enamelled on copper, and marked 'Ezechias.'

26. A Greek painting on wood of St. George and the Dragon.

27. Another Greek painting on wood, on a gold ground, apparently
representing two angels bowing before the Blessed Virgin, &c.

28. Heads of our Blessed Lord, and of King Charles I, painted on copper.
See p. 148.

29. A Ph[oe]nician inscription, on stone. See p. 162.


_The following Portraits hang in the Library:--_

1. Sir T. Bodley. By Corn. Jansen.

2. All the Librarians from James to Bowles; with a small engraved sketch
of Price, and a photograph of Dr. Bandinel, taken in the year of his
resignation of office.

    There are no portraits of Fysher or Owen.

3. Archbishops Usher and Laud; Bishops Crewe and Atterbury; Deans
Nowell, Aldrich, and Hickes; Erasmus, Wanley, Lye, Gassendi, Sir Thos.
Wyat, two of Chaucer, Gower, Junius (sketch by Vandyke), two of Selden
(with his arms painted on panel), Sir K. Digby, Queen Elizabeth of
Bohemia; Frederick, Elector Palatine; Mr. Sutherland.

4. Drawing of Thos. Alcock. By Cooper.

    Bequeathed by Rawlinson.

    The following note is written on the back:--

    'This picture was drawne for mee at the Earle of Westmoreland's
    house at Apethorpe, in Northamptonshire, by the greate (tho' little)
    Limner, the then famous Mr. Cooper of Covent-Garden, when I was
    eighteen years of age.

  'THOMAS ALCOCK, Preceptor.'

5. Pen-and-ink sketch of Ant. a Wood, dated 1677.

6. Pencil drawing of Pope.

    Bequeathed by Rawlinson.

7. Drawing of F. Douce.

8. Engraved portrait of Camden.

Eighteen Oxford Almanacs, between the years 1812 and 1833, decorate the
middle of the room.


PICTURE GALLERY.

A Catalogue of the Pictures (which are now exclusively Portraits) was
printed some years ago by the Janitor. Since then, the following
additions have been made[388]:--

Froben, the printer. By Holbein.

    Bequeathed by Rawlinson.

Oliver Plunket, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Armagh; executed in 1681.
On panel.

    Bequeathed by Rawlinson.

James Edward, the 'old Chevalier,' and his wife Clementina Sobieski. See
p. 169.

    Bequeathed by Rawlinson.

Sir R. Chambers, Chief Justice of Bengal.

Sir R. H. Inglis, Bart. By Richmond.

Dr. Routh, President of Magdalen College. By Thomson.

Dr. Daniel Wilson, Bishop of Calcutta.

The Earl of Derby. By Grant. See p. 281.

The Prince of Wales. By Gordon. See p. 304.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following Curiosities and Models are exhibited in the Gallery:--

1. Chair made from the wood of Sir F. Drake's ship. See p. 94.

2. Chair of Henry VIII. See _ib._

3. Guy Fawkes' Lantern. See p. 97.

4. A series of casts of various ancient Temples and other buildings. See
p. 236.

5. Model, in teak wood, of a subterranean palace and reservoir, in
Guzerat; beautifully carved, and exhibiting the whole of the interior
construction and arrangement.

    Presented in 1842 by Sir J. W. Awdry, Chief Justice of Bombay.

6. Cases of Italian medals, medals by Dassier of English sovereigns, &c.
See p. 182.

7. Two plaster casts of monuments from Nineveh, now in the British
Museum, with cuneiform inscriptions.

8. Model, in papier-mache, of the Martyrs' Memorial, beautifully
executed.

    Presented in 1844 by the late Rev. Vaughan Thomas, B.D.

9. Plaster model of the Waltham Cross.

    Presented by the same donor.

10. Casts of the Elgin marbles.

11. Alabaster model of the Cathedral at Calcutta.

    Given by the late Bishop Wilson in 1846. This beautiful model was
    executed at Pisa; it was exhibited in the Italian department of the
    Great Exhibition in 1861.

12. A large and fine model in cork, of the Amphitheatre at Verona; by
Dubourg.

13. Model of the Royal Yacht in 1697.

14. Glass case, containing:--

    i. Two Chinese rolls, one silk, the other paper, containing coloured
        drawings of the banks of the river Tsing-Ming, with scenes
        illustrating the manners and amusements of the country.

    ii. Collection of Indian weapons presented by Mr. Elliott. See p.
        291.

    iii. Series of clay figures, coloured, representing all degrees of
        rank, &c. among the Chinese.

      Brought by Col. Gibbes Rigaud, of the 60th Rifles, the donor, from
        Tien-tsin, and given in 1862.

    iv. Handbell from a temple at Tien-tsin. See p. 33.

    v. Small Chinese figure of a deity, in brass; from Pekin.

    vi. Half-burned copy of a Russian translation of the _Pickwick
        Papers_.

      Found in the Redan at Sebastopol, when that battery was stormed on
        Sept. 9, 1855. Given by Rev. F. J. Holt Beever in 1856.

15. Portrait, on a large roll, of the late Emperor of China, seated,
with a bow and arrow in his hands.

    Above is an autograph inscription by the Emperor, in verse, in
    praise of archery. Brought by Col. Rigaud from the 'Summer Palace.'

16. Another glass case, containing:--

    i. A series of carved and coloured ivory tablets, representing
        Chinese life and manners, partly broken; with some grotesque
        figures, probably of deities, carved in wood.

      Believed to have been bequeathed by Rawlinson.

    ii. A series of small Chinese paintings on ivory.

      From the Douce collection.

    iii. Three sets of wooden roundels[389], or trenchers, of which two
        are round (numbering thirty plates), the other square (numbering
        twelve); with mottos, in the former case in verse, in the latter
        consisting of precepts from the Bible. One of the round sets
        belonged, in 1599, to Queen Elizabeth. The verses are sometimes
        humorous, sometimes moral, and strongly dehortatory from
        marriage; not, however, out of any flattering deference to the
        condition or supposed inclination of the 'Virgin Queen,' but
        chiefly in accordance with the opposite view taken by some
        hard-hearted misogynist. Of the two classes of motto, let these
        stand as  specimens:--

    'If that a bachelor thou bee
    Keepe thou so, still be ruled by mee,
    Leaste that repentance all to late
    Reward thee with a broken pate.'

    'Content thyselfe with thyn estate,
    And send noo poor wight from thi gate:
    For why this councell I thee give
    To learne to die and die to lyve.'

    iv. A large set of wax impressions of seals. See p. 183.

17. Model, in wood, of the Temple at Paestum.

    Carved by Mr. Thomas Wyatt, of Oxford, about 1830.

[374] Many autographs of distinguished literary men are found in the old
Registers of all the persons admitted to read in the Library, since in
these the readers themselves generally entered their own names. The
first 'Liber admissorum' contains the names of both graduates and
non-academics, the names in the first case being only in part autograph;
it commences about the year 1610, and ends, in the case of graduates,
arranged under their several colleges, about 1676; in the case of
strangers, at 1692. The second Register, which is 'peregrinorum et
aliorum admissorum' alone, begins at 1682 and ends at 1833. The first
existing register of books used by readers begins Jan. 3, 1647-8, and
ends Dec. 30, 1649. The following are some of the names, of some special
mark, which are found in the Admission-books:--

  Joh. Jonstonus, M.D., 1633.
  Joh. Fred. Gronovius, June 25, 1639.
  George Bull, 'SS. Theol. Studiosus, per dispensat,' July 5, 1656.
  Andrew Marvell, Sept. 30, 1665.
  Sir Winston Churchill, Oct. 4, 1665.
  Henry Dodwell, Oct. 20, 1666.
  Thomas Rymer, June 20, 1683.
  Edmund Calamy, 'Londinensis,' Aug. 18, 1691, and in 1722.
  Sir George Mackenzie, Dec. 14, 1694, and several times subsequently.
  Joh. Ern. Grabe, Nov. 10, 1697.
  Thomas Madox, Sept. 21, 1705.
  Joshua Barnes, July 22, 1706.
  William Whiston, Sept. 28, 1710.
  C. Wesley, 'AEidis Xti alumnus,' April 19, 1729.
  Joh. Dav. Michaelis, Oct. 9, 1741.
  W. Blackstone, 'S.C.L.' Feb. 11, 1742-3.
  Benj. Kennicott, 'Coll. Wadh. Schol.' July 15, 1746.
  George Ballard, Dec. 9, 1747.
  Edw. Rowe Mores, Commoner of Queen's College, Aug. 29, 1748.
  John Uri, 'Korosini, Hungarus,' Feb. 17, 1766.
  Edw. Gibbon, 'Coll. Magd. olim Soc. Com.' Oct. 17, 1766.
  Joh. Schweighaeuser, June 13, 1769.
  J. J. Griesbach, March 22, 1770.
  Hen. Alb. Schultens, Oct. 16, 1772.
  John Macbride, 'ex Coll. Exon.' (the late venerable Principal of Magd.
    Hall, who was only removed by death at the beginning of the present
    year), May 10, 1797.
  Philip Bliss, Feb. 9, 1809.

[375] Of this xylographic _Apocalypse_ the Library possesses two other
editions; one being that called by Mr. Sotheby the Fourth, which was
given by Archbp. Laud, and the other being that called the Fifth by
Sotheby, but 'Editio princeps' by Heinecken, which was bought in 1853
for L120 5_s._ Other Block-books in the Library are, (1) two editions of
the _Biblia Pauperum_, or Scenes from Bible History; one coloured, the
other (which belonged to Douce) uncoloured; (2) the _Historia B. M. V.
ex Cantico Canticorum_, being the edition called the Second by Sotheby;
(3) _Propugnacula, seu Turris Sapientiae_, a broadside, bought in 1853
for six guineas. A facsimile of this is given in vol. ii. of Sotheby's
_Principia_; (4) _Speculum Humanae Salvationis._ In this book, which is
the second Latin edition of the work (formerly described as the _Editio
princeps_), twenty pages are taken off from wood-blocks, and the rest
from moveable type. The copy belonged to Douce. It came previously 'ex
Musaeo Pauli Girardot de Prefond,' but is not mentioned in De Bure's
catalogue of that library, published in 1757. It is said that a copy of
this book has been sold for the large sum of 300 guineas.

[376] A touching letter, in English, dated June 28, which Laud
forwarded, together with this formal document, is printed in vol. ii. of
Wharton's edition of his _Remains_, p. 217. In the same volume are
included copies of all the letters which accompanied the Archbishop's
gifts to the Library. The following reply (_ibid._ p. 177) to a
notification from the Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Frewen, of the visitation of
his collection, and of the giving special charge to the Librarian
respecting their safe custody, seeing that they stood unchained, and in
a place frequented by strangers who came to see them, should have been
noticed in its due place in the _Annals_.

  'SIR,

    'I thank you heartily for your care of my books. And I beseech you
    that the Library-keeper may be very watchful to look to them since
    they stand unchain'd. And I would to God the place in the Library
    for them were once ready, that they might be set up safe, and
    chained as the other books are; and yet then, if there be not care
    taken, you may have some of the best and choisest tractats cut out
    of the covers and purloin'd, as hath been done in some other
    libraries.'

                                    'W. CANT.
  'Lambeth, Nov, 15, 1639.'

[377] Pedigree of the family of Lane, p. 392 of the _Boscobel Tracts_,
edited by J. Hughes, A.M., second edition, 1857.

[378] No. 7762 in the catalogue of the South Kensington Museum, in 1862.

[379] Mr. John Gough Nichols, in his collection of the _Literary Remains
of Edw. VI_, printed by the Roxburghe Club in 1857 (vol. i. pp.
cccxxiii-cccxxv), describes these volumes at length, and assigns the
whole of both of them to the pen of the King, but some part of the first
volume corresponds much more closely with the usual style of Elizabeth's
early writing, and a memorandum by Hearne testifies that it was regarded
in his day as having been written by her.

[380] 'The poem of Joseph and Zuleikha, in the Public Library at Oxford,
is perhaps the most beautiful MS. in the world; the margins of every
page are gilt and adorned with garlands of flowers, and the handwriting
is elegant to the highest degree.' (I. Disraeli's _Romances_, 1799, p.
52.)

[381] This book, which has appeared since the earlier sheets of this
volume were printed, contains descriptions, with facsimiles, of the
Leofric, Dunstan, and Mac-Regol MSS. and of the Rawlinsonian Life of St.
Columba, besides those noticed above.

[382] Caedmon was a monk of St. Hilda's Abbey, and died in 680. Bede
(_Eccl. Hist._ iv. 24) tells the well-known story of his being
miraculously enabled by a vision to compose vernacular verses, when
previously he had been entirely unable to compose or sing a line, so
that when present as a layman at feasts where, on the principle of 'no
song, no supper,' every one was expected to raise a lay in his turn, he
was wont, when he saw the harp coming round, to rise from his place and
go home supperless.

[383] This MS. is noticed by Warton in his _Life of Sir T. Pope_, p. 73,
where he also quotes Hearne's account of Elizabeth's New Testament,
which is described at p. 52 _supra_.

[384] Lent to the South Kensington Museum in 1862, from the catalogue of
which exhibition (under No. 202) the above description is taken.

[385] Rawlinson, C. 876, f. 52.

[386] _Catalogue of the South Kensington Exhibition_, 1862, p. 672.

[387] Another specimen of Mr. Rassam's caligraphic skill is to be seen
in the Common Room of Magdalene College (in which College he was
entertained for some time), where the College arms are represented in
the same manner.

[388] Besides some restorations from the Randolph Gallery of portraits
formerly removed thither.

[389] An engraving of a roundel (then, with others, in the possession of
John Fenton of Fishguard) of which the exact counterpart is found in one
of these sets, is given in the _Gent. Magaz._ for 1799, p. 465. As it is
not known how long the Library has been in possession of its present
collection, it is possible that Mr. Fenton's series may now be included
in it. A description of a set of the time of James I may be found in
vol. xxxiv of the _Archaeologia_, pp. 225-230; and a notice of the
Bodleian trenchers in _Notes and Queries_, 1866, p. 472, and other
communications on the subject in the first volume for 1867.




APPENDIX E.


_Numismatic Collection._

The collection of Coins and Medals was commenced by the gift from
Archbishop Laud of five cabinets of coins, in 1636[390], to which he
subsequently made some additions. These were accompanied by a very full
MS. catalogue, which is now preserved among Laud's MSS., No. 554. In
1657 a large addition was made by Mr. Ralph Freke (see p. 88), and
numerous small gifts came from many donors in following years. A
catalogue, upon which Francis Wise had been engaged for a long period,
was published by him in a folio volume, in 1750, entitled, _Nummorum
antiquorum scriniis Bodleianis reconditorum catalogus, cum commentario,
tabulis aeneis et appendice_. Wise remarks in his Preface, that no
donation, however trifling, was rejected, and that, consequently, there
was (as there is still) a very large quantity of Middle and Third brass
coins of little or no value. From Rawlinson there came, in 1755, besides
coins, a collection of Italian medals (Popes, Medici family, &c.), and
numerous matrices of seals, chiefly foreign. Browne Willis contributed
the most valuable portion of the whole collection, in his series of gold
and silver English coins[391].

Subsequent benefactors have been C. Godwyn, in 1770; Douce, whose
collection included those of Calder, Moore, and Keate, and from whom
came a series of Tradesmen's Tokens; Dr. Ingram, in 1850, whose bequest
included some British specimens; the Queen, who gave, in 1841, a portion
of the treasure found at Cuerdale (see p. 264); Mackie, Roberts,
Elliott, whose valuable series of Indo-Bactrian coins was presented in
1860 (see p. 291), and Dr. Caulfield of Cork, who presented in 1866 a
large collection of the Gun-money struck by James II in Ireland. The
Ashmole coins were transferred from the Museum, together with Ashmole's
library, in 1861. There is also a cabinet of Napoleon medals.

No catalogue of any portion of the contents of this room (excepting a
brief description of the Cuerdale coins) has been issued since the
publication of Wise's volume. For some short time past, however, W. S.
Vaux, Esq., of the British Museum, has occasionally afforded his
valuable services in arrangement and description; and it is hoped that
before long the whole of the collection may be reduced to order and
properly indexed.

By the statutes of the Library, the Librarian, or one of the
Sub-librarians, must always be present when any coins are exhibited; nor
may they be shown to more than two persons at a time, unless two
officers of the Library, or a Curator, are present. No examination of
coins for the purpose of comparison with other specimens is permitted.

[390] Amongst these are several rare Hebrew specimens. Laud's letter of
gift, dated June 16, is printed at p. 94, vol. ii., of his _Remains_,
edited by H. Wharton. A curious collection of Roman weights came among
early benefactions; they are entered in Wise's catalogue.

[391] The special gems are a gold Allectus, and the famous _Reddite_ and
_Petition_ crowns of Thomas Simon, the latter of which was struck in
1663. The Petition crown is probably the one which was sold in Dr.
Mead's sale in February, 1755 (_Cat._ p. 186), and which is noted by
Rawlinson in his copy of the sale catalogue as having been purchased
by -- Hodsall for L12. A gold Allectus was sold at the same sale to the
Duke of Devonshire for L21 5_s._




APPENDIX F.


_Past Librarians._

  1598.       Thomas James, M.A.
  1620.       John Rouse, M.A.
  1653.       Thomas Barlow, M.A., afterwards Bishop of Lincoln.
  1660.       Thomas Lockey, B.D.
  1665.       Thomas Hyde, D.D.
  1701.       John Hudson, D.D.
  1719.       Joseph Bowles, M.A.
  1726.       Robert Fysher, M.B.
  1747.       Humphrey Owen, D.D.
  1768.       John Price, B.D.
  1813.       Bulkeley Bandinel, B.D.

_Past Sub-librarians._

  Before  1619[392].    John Verneuil, M.A.
          1647.       Francis Yonge, M.A.
          1657.       Henry Stubbe, M.A.
          1659.       Thomas Barlow, M.A., afterwards Librarian.
         *       *       *       *       *
  About   1680-90.    Rev. John Crabb, M.A.
          1695-1700.  Rev. Joseph Crabb, M.A.
          1712.       Thomas Hearne, M.A.
          1715.       Rev. John Fletcher, M.A.
          1719.       Rev. Francis Wise, B.D., appointed first Librarian
                        of the Radcliffe in 1748, when he, no doubt,
                        resigned his post in the Bodleian.
          1748?       N. Foster[393]? (qu. Nath. Foster, of Magd. Coll.,
                        M.A. in 1748?)
         [1770.       'Jones and White, Price's representatives[394].']
          1780-81.    John Walters, Scholar of Jesus College.
  Before  1787.       Edward Morgan, Jesus College[395], M.A.
          1788.       John Bown, Lincoln College[396], M.A.
          1797.       Henry H. Baber, St. John's.
          1798.       Henry Ellis, St. John's.
  [Before 1804?       Rev. Sam. Rogers, M.A., Wadham College?]
  Before  1810.       ---- Matthews.
          1810.       Philip Bliss, St. John's College.
          1811.       Rev. Bulkeley Bandinel, M.A.
          1814.       Rev. Henry Cotton, M.A.
          ----        Rev. Alex. Nicoll, M.A.
          1822.       Rev. Philip Bliss, D.C.L.
          ----        Rev. Rich. F. Laurence, M.A.
          1826.       Rev. Charles Henry Cox, M.A.
          1828.       Rev. Stephen Reay, M.A.
          ----        Rev. John Besly, M.A.
          1831.       Rev. Ernest Hawkins, M.A.
          1834.       Rev. William Cureton, M.A.
          1837.       Rev. Herbert Hill, M.A.
          1838.       Rev. H. O. Coxe, M.A.
          1861.       Rev. Rob. Payne Smith, M.A.
          1865.       Max Mueller, M.A.


_Present Officers of the Library._

LIBRARIAN:

Rev. H. O. Coxe, M.A., Corp. Chr. Coll., appointed Sub-librarian, Nov.
16, 1838; Head Librarian, Nov. 6, 1860.

SUB-LIBRARIANS:

Rev. Alfred Hackman, M.A., Ch. Ch., Assistant for the General Catalogue,
April 27, 1837; Sub-librarian, April 20 1862.

Rev. John William Nutt, M.A., All Souls' Coll., June 25, 1867.

ASSISTANTS:

_First Class._

Mr. H. S. Harper, [entered the Library June, 1837.]

Mr. H. J. Sides, [Dec., 1853.]

Mr. H. Haines, [Dec., 1861.]

_Second Class._

Rev. W. H. Bliss, M.A., Magd. Coll., [March, 1866.]

Mr. Henry J. Shuffrey, [Jan., 1863.]

_Third Class._

Percy W. Collcutt, [June, 1866.]

W. F. Green, [March, 1868.]

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW CATALOGUE.

_General Superintendent._

Rev. W. D. Macray, M.A., Magd. Coll., [June, 1840.]

TRANSCRIBERS:

Mr. George Parker, [Sept., 1855.]

Mr. Will. H. Timberlake, [June, 1857.]

Mr. Fred. Prickett, [Jan., 1863.]

Mr. Will. Burden, [Jan., 1863.]

Mr. Will. Plowman, [Nov., 1863.]

ATTENDANTS:

Will. H. Allnutt, [Oct., 1864.]

W. R. Sims, [May, 1867.]

W. S. Plowman, [Sept., 1867.]

BINDER:

Edwin Hickman, [March, 1864.]

       *       *       *       *       *

JANITOR: John Norris, [Oct., 1835.]

DEPUTY-JANITOR: Robert Roby, [Dec., 1860.]

JANITOR AT THE CAMERA RADCLIVIANA: W. Bayzand, [June, 1863.]

[392] The date of his appointment is not known, but that it was before,
or at least not later than, 1619 is shown by an inscription in a copy of
T. Holland's _Oratio Sarisb. babita_, which records that it came to the
Library in that year: 'Ex dono Johannis Vernulii, hypobibliothecarii.'

[393] His name first appears in 1746 as making out the accounts and
receiving money.

[394] The reference to the source whence this quotation was taken has
been lost.

[395] See Nichols' _Lit. Hist._ vol. v. p. 539.

[396] _Ibid._ p. 541.




APPENDIX G.


_Rules of the Library._

The Library is open from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. from Lady-Day to Michaelmas,
and from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. from Michaelmas to Lady-Day. It is closed from
Christmas Eve to the Feast of the Circumcision, both inclusive; on the
Epiphany; on Good Friday, Easter Eve, and through the whole of Easter
week; on Ascension Day; on Whit-Monday and Whit-Tuesday; on the day of
the University Commemoration; for the first week in October (Oct. 1-7),
for purposes of dusting and cleaning; and on Nov. 7th and 8th (or Nov.
6-7th, should the 8th fall on a Sunday) for the Visitation.

On other festival days, being days for which services are appointed in
the Prayer-Book, and on which Sermons are, consequently, preached before
the University, as well as on the days of Latin Litany and Sermon (viz.
the first day of each Term), the Library is opened when the Sermon is
over, _i.e._ ordinarily at 11 o'clock.

All graduate members of the University have the right to use the
Library. Undergraduates are admitted upon bringing letters of
recommendation from their Tutors. Strangers are admitted upon being
introduced by a Master of Arts or higher graduate, or upon producing
sufficient letters of introduction; but every facility is afforded to
strangers who make personal application to the Librarian for permission
to make researches for any definite and special purpose.

The Library is under the control of a Board of Curators, consisting of
the Vice-Chancellor, the two Proctors, the five Regius Professors of
Divinity, Civil Law, Medicine, Hebrew, and Greek, and five Members of
Congregation, elected by that House for ten years.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Camera Radcliviana_, formerly the Radcliffe Library, is open all
the year round from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.; excepting that it is closed
during the same periods at which the old Library is closed. In it are to
be found most of the publications of the last sixteen years, with the
most recent magazines; and books from the general collection may be
carried over for use there, upon proper application.

The Statutes of the Library are printed in the general _Corpus
Statutorum Universitatis_.




INDEX.


  ABBOT, Archbp., 36.

  Abbott, Robert, 36.

  Abel-Remusat, J. P., sale, 332.

  Abingdon, Earls of, 180, 281.

  Abulpharage, Gregory, 114.

  Acland (H. W.), M.D., 293, 294 _n._

  Acton, Oliver, 184.

  Actor, Petrus, 113.

  Adams, Thomas, 36.

  Addison, Joseph, 223, 322.

  Adelaide, Q. Consort of Will. IV, 319.

  AEgidius Romanus, 111.

  AElfgiva, Abbess of Barking, 327.

  AEsop, 27 _n._

  AEthiopic MSS., 63, 113, 215, 267.

  Aggas, Ralph, 335.

  Airy, G. B., 195.

  Albert, Prince, 252, 319.

  Albert of Aix, 296.

  Albertini, Albert, 202.

  Alcock, Thomas, 336.

  Aldines purchased, 117, 204, 229, 232 _n._, 242, 262, 300;
    catalogued, 203.

  Aldred, --, M.A., 107.

  Aldrich, Henry, D.D., Dean of Ch. Ch., 119, 125, 336.

  Aldworth, Rev. John, 39.

  Ales, Alexander de, 111.

  Alexander, Romance of, 17.

  Aleyne, Richard, 314.

  Alfred the Great, transl. of Gregory's _Pastoral Care_, 100;
    Preface to Gregory's _Dialogues_, _ib._;
    coins, 264.

  Allen, --, 158.

  Allen, Fifield, M.A., 107.

  Allen, Thomas, M.A., donor, 19;
    mentioned, 58.

  Allen, Thomas, Finchley, 57.

  Allibond, Dr. John, _Rustica Acad. Oxon. Desc._, 75.

  Al-malek, Alashraf Shalian, Sultan, 114.

  Almanacks, deemed unworthy of admission by Bodley, 66;
    Clog almanacks, 105, 161, 325;
    various almanacks, 183;
    MS. astrological calendar, 329;
    brass calendar, 333.

  Alstedius, J. H., _Systema Mnemon._, 43.

  Altham, Roger, D.D., 39.

  Altham, Roger, jun., M.A., 106.

  Alward, John, 315.

  American Tracts, 253, 254, 271;
    Psalters, 264.

  Ames, Joseph, 200, 232.

  Anabat, Guil., 312.

  Anacreon, 298.

  Anderson, Sir Richard, donor, 49.

  Anglo-Saxon MSS., 19, 63, 99, 100, 102, 103, 104;
    the _Chronicle_, 64;
    list of some, in some priests' libraries, 25.

  Anne, Queen, 127, 137.

  Anstey, Rev. Henry, M.A., 7.

  Anstis, John, 178.

  Anwykyll, John, _Compend. Grammat._, 112 _n._

  Apsley, Sir Peter, 185 _n._

  Aquinas, St. Thomas, 285 _n._

  Arabic MSS., 51, 59, 63, 76, 82 _n._, 91, 95, 113 _bis_, 199, 206,
    207, 208, 215, 225, 229, 231, 233, 267, 269, 289, 290, 294 _n._

  Arbuthnot, Alex., 304.

  _Archaeologia_, cited, 338 _n._

  Archimedes, 201.

  Arethas of Patras, 208, 215.

  Aretine, L., 8.

  Aristotle, 8, 111, 226.

  Armenian MSS., 63, 92, 113.

  Arnold, Samuel, Mus. D., 205.

  _Articles_ of 1562, with signatures of Convocation, 87.

  Arundel, Howard, Earl of, collector of Marbles and MSS., 102.

  Arundel Marbles, 138.

  Ashantee, Princes of, 319.

  Ashburnham, Earl of, 321.

  Asher, A., 275.

  Ashmole, Elias, 177;
    his library, 287;
    a MS. 327;
    coins, 340.

  Ashton, John, or Eschyndone, 58.

  Asula, A. de, 261.

  Athelstan, King, 23.

  _Athenaeum_, 281, 295 _n._, 301.

  Atkins, Henry, M.D., 37.

  Atterbury, Francis, Bp. of Rochester, 336.

  Attila, 334.

  Aubigne, Sieur d', _Hist. Univ._, 72.

  Aubrey, John, MSS., 253, 288;
    _Lives_ cited, 73, 77 _n._

  Auerbach, Dr. I., 275.

  Aufrecht, Theod., M.A., 265, 270, 272, 294 _n._, 300.

  Augustine, St., of Hippo, 20 _n._, 253.

  Augustine, St., of Canterbury, his MS. of the Gospels, 24.

  Aurung-zebe, 158.

  Awdry, Sir J. W., donor, 337.

  Ayliffe, Dr. John, _Univ. of Oxford_ cited, 31, 38, 86 _n._


  BABER, Rev. H. H., M.A., Sub-librarian, 204, 217.

  Backer, A. De, _Bibl., des Ecr. de la Comp de Jes._ cited, 224 _n._

  Bacon, Sir Francis, donor, 49;
    _Works_, 50;
    _Essays_, 51.

  Bacon, Roger, 58, 329.

  Bacon, Thomas Sclater, 184.

  Bagford, John, 112, 177, 178.

  Bailey, W., B.A., 239, 241.

  Bailly, Lud., 263.

  Baker, Thomas, B.D., 178, 212 _n._

  Bale, John, Bp. of Ossory, 90, 239, 248.

  Ballard, George, his bequest, 186-8;
    cited, 49, 52 _n._;
    references to his MSS., 99, 156;
    mentioned, 320.

  Balliol, Devorguilla de, 314.

  Bandinel, Bulkeley, D.D., mentioned, 82 _n._, 149, 215, 220, 237, 238,
      249, 273, 279, 336;
    Sub-librarian, 217;
    Librarian, 218;
    resignation, 292;
    death, 293;
    sale of his library, 297.

  Banks, Sir Joseph, 194.

  Barges, J. J., 311.

  Barker, Christopher, 52, 171 _n._

  Barker, E. H., 290.

  Barker, Robert, donor, 25;
    mentioned, 36, 171 _n._

  Barker, Robert, in 1631, 290 _n._

  Barlow, Thomas, D.D., elected Librarian, 76;
    draws up a paper against lending books, 79;
    quotations from it, 50, 72, 77, 81-84;
    Library accounts, 67, 69, 85;
    mentioned, 58, 100 _n._;
    resigns, 90;
    interview with a R. C. priest, 91;
    his books, 99, 111, 115, 119, 126, 129, 328.

  Barnes, J., mentioned, 41;
    donor, 50.

  Barnes, Joshua, 178, 320.

  Barnes, Juliana, 160.

  Barocci, Giacomo, his MSS., 53-55, 130 _n._;
    references to MSS., 83.

  Barrett, P., B.A., 235.

  Barrington, Shute, Bp. of Durham, donor, 231.

  Barthelemy, J. J., 162.

  Basire, James, 212 _n._, 213.

  Baskett, John, donor, 147.

  Basle, Council of, 51.

  Bassandyne, Thomas, 304.

  Bateman, --, 153.

  Bath, Countess of, 185 _n._

  Battely, Oliver, M.A., 107.

  Bathurst, Ralph, M.D., donor, 88.

  Baudry, F., 184 _n._

  Baxter, W. H., 309.

  Bayeux, 180.

  Beaumont, F., and Fletcher, J., 231.

  Bebseth, John, 315.

  Becket, Archbp. T. a, 29, 42, 104, 188.

  Becon, Thomas, 248.

  Beddoes, Thomas, M.D., makes complaint against Price, 197.

  Bede, cited, 64, 102, 327 _n._;
    mentioned, 104.

  Bedell, William, Bp. of Kilmore, MS. papers, 176.

  Bedford, Bp. Hilkiah, 181.

  Bedford, William, M.A., 106, 181.

  Beet, T., bookseller, 42 _n._

  Beever, Rev. F. J., donor, 338.

  Bell, Rev. John, 39.

  Bembi, Cardinal, 58.

  Benaliis, B. de, 310.

  Bengal, Asiatic Society of, donor, 269.

  Benius, Paulus, 50.

  Bennet, Sir John, mentioned, 36;
    one of Bodley's executors, and a defalcator, 37.

  Bennet, Matthew, 37.

  Bent, Andrew, 233.

  Berkshire MSS., 212 _n._

  Bernard, Edward, D.D., his books, 116, 117;
    mentioned, 133;
    _Catal. MSS._, 89, 94, 95, 101, 103, 104, 108, 110, 111, 113 _bis_,
      116, 117, 130 _n._, 287.

  Bernstein, Dr., 296.

  Berryer, M., 319.

  Besly, John, D.C.L., Sub-librarian, 242, 246.

  _Bestiaries_, 327-8.

  Beverland, Hadrian, 207.

  Bible, _Paris Polyglott_, 76;
    _Hebr._ MS. 324, _pr._ 1488, 201;
    _Latin_, MSS., 22, 224;
    _c._ 1455 (Mazarine), 202;
    1462, on vellum, 161, on paper, 201;
    _c._ 1470, 210;
    1471, _ib._;
    (Strasb.) _n. d._, _ib._;
    _Wickliffe's Version_, 96;
    _Coverdale's_ 1535, 239, 321;
    -- 1537, _ib._;
    _Cromwell's_ 1539, 300;
    _Cranmer's_ 1540, 1541, 1553, 239;
    _Matthew's_ 1551, _ib._;
    _Bishops'_ 1568, 233;
    _First Scottish edit._ 1579, 304;
    _Auth. Vers._ 1631, 290;
    1639, 53;
    _Vinegar_ 1717, 147;
    _Glasgow_ 1862, 330;
    _Bowyer_, 244-5;
    _Douay_, 49;
    _Bohemian_, Ed. Pr., 283;
    _Dutch_ 1637, 89;
    _German_, Ed. Pr., 202;
    1466, 233;
    Luther's 1541, 245, 330;
    Royal Press, Berlin, 330;
    Polish 1563, 229.
    Old Test., _Syriac_, 107;
      Pentateuch, _Hebr._ 1482, 226;
      _Samaritan_, 296;
      _Syriac_, 107;
      _German_, 283;
      Genesis, _Greek_, 283;
      Psalters, _Lat._, 179, 249, 327;
      1459, 229;
      _Archbp. Parker's_, 250;
      _American_, 264;
      _AEthiopic_, 1513, 89.
    Apocrypha 1549, 233.
    New Test., _Codex Ebner._ 229-30;
      _Tyndale's_ 1534, 232;
      -- 1536, 239;
      _Coverdale's_ 1538, 302;
      _Hollybush_ 1538, 239;
      _Erasmus_ 1540, _ib._;
      _C. Barker_, 52;
      1625, 53;
      1628, 53;
      1630, 53.
    Evangeliaries, _Greek_, 94, 224.
    Gospels, _Lat._, 104, 327;
    _Lat._, (given by S. Gregory to S. Augustine), 24;
    _Early English_, 100;
    _Coptic_, 107;
    _Russian_, 19;
    _Syriac_, 56;
    St. Luke, _Greek_, 283;
    St. Luke and St. John, _Greek_, 283;
    _Lat._, 179;
    Acts, _Codex Laudianus_, 64;
    _Biblia Pauperum_, 321 _n._;
    _Apocalypse_ illustrated, MS., 321, 328;
    MS. illustrations of the Bible, 324.

  Bill, John, 17, 53.

  Bilstone, John, M.A.,
    Janitor, 151, 152;
    deprivation and death, 192.

  Bindings, 27 _n._, 49, 51-3, 57, 89, 230, 332. 333.

  Birch, Thomas, D.D., 172.

  Bishop, --, 205.

  Bishop, Sir Henry, 278.

  Black, W. H., 287, 289.

  Blackbourne, Bp. John, 169.

  Blacman, John, 318.

  Blackstone, Sir W., 320 _n._

  Blackwood, Adam, 266 _n._

  Blades, William, 155, 250, 262.

  Blakeway, Edward, M.A., 107.

  Blakeway, Rev. J. B., Shropshire MSS., 263.

  Blakeway, Richard, M.A., 106.

  Blayney, Benjamin, D.D., 198.

  Bliss, Rev. Nathaniel, 194.

  Bliss, Philip, D.C.L., his sale, 97, 289;
    cited, 117, 152, 171 _n._;
    mentioned, 178, 180, 192 _n._, 196, 215, 216, 219 _n._, 220, 235,
      236, 242, 245, 257 _n._, 320 _n._

  Bliss, W. H., M.A., 117.

  Block-books, 321.

  Blow, Dr. John, 205.

  Bloxam, J. R., D.D., _Regist. of Magd. Coll._, cited, 188, 210.

  Blunt, J. H., M.A., 132 _n._

  Bobart, J., 115.

  Boccaccio, Giovanni, 8, 296, 330.

  Bodleian Library, see 'Stationers' Company;'
    central room built to receive Duke Humphrey's books, 7;
    destruction of his library, 11-12;
    re-foundation by Bodley, 14;
    roof, 14-15;
    register of benefactors, 16;
    opened, 24;
    styled the Bodleian by letters patent, 25;
    eastern wing built, 29;
    great window, _ib._;
    endowments, 32;
    western wing built, 60;
    statute 1813, 218;
    new statutes 1856, 284;
    first catalogue 1605, 207;
    second 1620, 46, 91;
    appendix 1635, 60;
    prices of these catalogues, 60;
    third 1674, 97, 156-7;
    Hearne's Appendix, 123;
    fourth 1738, 156;
    fifth 1843, 268;
    new catalogue now in progress, 291;
    Uri's catalogue of Oriental MSS., 199;
    catalogues
      of pictures, 189;
      of early printed books 1795, 203;
    number
      of books 1620, 46-7;
      of MSS. 1690, 110;
      of printed books and MSS.
        1714, 137;
        1849, 274;
        1867, 305;
    remonstrance from foreign readers against an order of the Curators, 68;
    loan to Charles I, 37, 69;
    supposed attempt to burn the library, 70;
    attendance of readers
      in 1648-9, 75;
      in 1730-40, 152;
    duplicates exchanged with Queen's College, 115;
    sales of duplicates, 160, 201, 297, 298;
    western end re-floored, 191;
    annual payment from graduates, 195;
    books not allowed to be borrowed, 50, 82 _n._;
    borrowing allowed
      by Lord Pembroke and Sir T. Roe, 51;
      by Sir K. Digby, 59;
    loan of books refused
      to Bp. Williams, 50;
      to Charles I, 72;
      to Cromwell, 76;
      to the translators of the Bible, 82 _n._;
      to Archbp. Laud, _ib._;
      granted by special grace, from some collections, to Selden, 79;
    MSS. lent
      to Marshall, 100;
      to the French government by Convocation, 295;
    removal of books forbidden 1686, 109;
    books returned--
      to Univ. Libr., Cambr., 154;
      to Emman. Coll., Cambr., 159;
      to Magd. and Univ. Coll., Oxf., 215;
      to Durham, 216;
      to two parishes, 234;
    books stolen, 74, 80 _n._, 81, 103 _n._;
    denunciation of a thief by the Curators, 80 _n._;
    books restored, 81, 82, 103 _n._;
    chains for books, 86;
    pamphlets, 66, 194, 202, 290;
    dispute between the Hebdomadal Board and the Curators, 198;
    poem on the Library, 196;
    returns to House of Commons, 227, 273, 274;
    Greek text affixed to the door, 209;
    coldness in winter formerly, 98;
    warming apparatus, 234-5;
    the Radcliffe building assigned as a reading-room, 293, 295;
    visited
      by James I, 26, 41,
      by Charles I, 55, 70,
      by Charles II, 92,
      by James II, 109,
      by George III, 197,
      by her present Majesty, 319;
    American visitor's account cited, 134 _n._;
    order in 1722 against admission of readers at unstatutable times, 74;
    Anatomy Sch., 132, 134, 136, 140;
      assigned to the Library, 200;
    heads formerly on the wall of Picture Gallery, 138;
    the clock, 182 _n._;
    librarians' celibacy, 21;
    stipends of officers in 1655-7, 87;
    stipends of Sub-librarians, 260;
      in 1856, 284;
    list of officers, 341-343;
    rules, 344.

  Bodley, Gerard, 160.

  BODLEY, Sir Thomas; early career, 12-13;
    begins to restore the Library, 14;
    his motto, 15;
    bust, 26;
    desires the Catalogue to be dedicated to the Prince of Wales, 27;
    builds eastern wing, 29;
    said to have given plate to the Stationers' Company on their agreement
      with him, 32;
    endows the Library, 32;
    forbad the borrowing of books, 82 _n._;
    his bell, 33;
    his chest, _ib._;
    death, 37;
    charged with neglect of his relatives, 38;
    petition from his grand-nephew and niece, 39;
    portrait, 336;
    portrait on glass at Oriel Coll., 45 _n._;
    annual Bodley speech, 105;
    _Reliquiae Bodleianae_ cited, 14, 16, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 31, 33, 40,
        42, 88;
      mentioned, 138;
    books with his autograph, 32, 296;
    _Justa Funebria Bodlei_ cited, 26, 37;
    _Bodleiomnema_, 37.

  Bodley, Capt. Sir Josias, 13 _n._;
    donor, 21.

  Bodley, Laurence, 13 _n._

  Bodley, Miles, 13 _n._

  Boethius, 23.

  Boileau, Nic., 298.

  Bois, Sim. du, 312.

  Bokelonde, Thomas, 8 _n._

  Boleyn, Queen Anne, 333;
    book which belonged to her, 27.

  Bolingbroke, Lord, 175.

  Boninis, B. de, 312.

  Bonner, Edm., Bishop of London, 239.

  Bonyngton, W., 313.

  Boone, T., 304.

  Booth, John, Bp. of Exeter, 317 _n._

  Borlase, Dr. W., 289.

  Boswell, James, _Life of Johnson_, 188 _n._

  Boswell, James, 231.

  Boswell, Sir W., 322.

  Botel, Henry, 303.

  Boucher, Rev. Jonathan, 254.

  Bourgchier, Sir H., 54.

  Bowcher, G., donor, 149.

  Bowen, James, donor, 163, 321.

  Bowles, Joseph, M.A.; Dr. Hudson's servitor, 139, 140;
    elected Librarian, 144;
    Hearne's character of him, 145, 146;
    began to print a new Catalogue, 158;
    demanded payment for making lists, 171 _n._;
    death, 151.

  Bown, John, M.A., 342.

  Bowyer, Sir George, donor, 260.

  Bowyer, Rob.; his illustrated Bible, 244.

  Boyce, William, Mus. D., 205.

  Boydell, J., 258.

  Boyle, Robert; _History of the Air_, 124.

  Boys, John, D.D., 36.

  Bradley, Dr. James; MSS. of his _Astron. Observations_, 193, 195.

  Bradshaw, Henry, M.A., Cambr., 112 _n._, 155.

  Brahe, Tycho; _Astron. Mechan._, with original MSS. additions, 58.

  Braidwood, --, 234, 284.

  Breamore, Hants, 131.

  Bredon, Simon, 58.

  Brent, Charles, M.A., 107.

  Bresslau, M. H., 114.

  Brett, Lieut., 289.

  Breviaries, 213, 280, 303, 310, 311.

  Brewer, J. S., M.A., 166.

  Brewster, William, M.D., 142.

  Bridgeman, William; his sale, 173, 184.

  Bridges, John; Northamptonshire collections, 204.

  Bridges, Nath., D.D., 204.

  Brie, Joh. de, 312.

  Bright, B. H., donor, 232 _n._;
    sale, 270.

  Brightwell, Rich., _i.e._ J. Frith, _q.v._

  Bristol, Charter, 180.

  Bristol, George Digby, Earl of, 240.

  British Museum; various MSS., 10, 19 _n._, 101, 102, 153, 180;
    printed books, 246 _n._, 272.

  Britton, John, 253 _n._, 288.

  Broad, J., 285.

  Brooke, Margaret, donor, 57.

  Brooks, --, glass-painter, 193.

  Brougham, Lord, 319.

  Brounst, Richard, 314.

  Brown, Thomas R., M.A., 260 _n._

  Brown, Thomas, 196 _n._

  Browne, Arthur, M.A., 268.

  Browne, Lancelot, M.D., donor, 22.

  Browne, Sir Thomas, 177.

  Bruce, James; his MSS., 266-8.

  Bruce, John, 61.

  Bruno, S., 179.

  Bry, J. T. de, 279.

  Buckeridge, John, Bp. of Rochester, 36.

  Buckhurst, Lord. See _Dorset_.

  Buckingham, George, first Duke, 51, 54, 334.

  Buckingham, Sheffield, Duke of; portrait, 148.

  Buckinghamshire MSS., 190.

  Bugenhagen, J., 246 _n._

  Bull, George, Bp. of St. David's, 320 _n._

  Bull, N., Janitor, 189.

  Bulls relating to England, 110.

  Bunsen, Chevalier, 319.

  Bunyan, John, 304.

  Burbache, John, 316.

  Burdett-Coutts, Miss, 42 _n._

  Bure, G. F. de, 200, 321 _n._

  Bures, Suffolk, parish register, 234.

  Burgess, Thos., Bp. of St. David's, 196.

  Burgo, D. de, 8.

  Burgred, King of Mercia, 185.

  Burmese MSS., 240, 326.

  Burn, J. H., 297.

  Burn, J. S., cited, 290 _n._

  Burnet, Gilbert, Bp. of Salisbury, 175, 238, 251, 254, 276;
    _Life of Hale_ cited, 77, 85.

  Burnett, Alex., Archbp. of St. Andrew's, 155 _n._

  Burnford, Humphrey, Librarian, 11.

  Burton, Daniel, M.A., 107.

  Burton, Robert; his gift of printed books, 65-7, 111.

  Burton, Archd. Samuel, 57.

  Burton, Thomas, M.A., 106.

  Burton, William, donor, 56.

  Bury, Philip of, Bp. of Durham; his library at Durham College, 4.

  Bury St. Edmund's, abbey register, 154 _n._

  Butler, Charles, 247.

  Butler, Samuel, Bp. of Lichfield, 262.

  Butler, William, M.D., 333.

  Button, James, donor, 44.

  Byron, Lord, 227.


  CADELL, T., 166.

  Caedmon, 102, 327.

  Calamy, Edmund, 320 _n._

  Calcott, John, B.D., 221.

  Calcutta, 338.

  Caldecott, Thomas, donor, 247.

  Calder, --, coins, 340.

  Camac, Turner, donor, 199.

  Cambridge, Statutes of various Colleges, 179;
    Corp. Chr. Coll., MS. there, 24;
    fragment there, 112 _n._;
    Emmanuel Coll., book restored to the College, 159;
    St. John's Coll., fragment there, 112 _n._;
    Univ. Library, 112 _n._;
    MSS. restored to Moore's Library, 154 _n._;
    return to House of Commons of books rejected, 227;
    map, 335.

  Camden, William, donor, 19;
    MS. collections, 196 _n._;
    engraved portrait, 336;
    _Britannia_ and _Annales Eliz._, 153.

  Canonici, M. L., his MSS., 223-6, 230 _n._, 310;
    fragments of vellum Bible, 161.

  Canons, early MSS., 100, 103.

  Canterbury, MSS. from St. Augustine's, 22, 24;
    Statutes of the Cathl., 179.

  Capgrave, John, 10, 178.

  Carew, Sir G., MSS., 64 _n._

  Carleton, Sir Dudley, and Alice, 38, 48 _n._

  Carmey, Angel, 182 _n._

  Carte, Thomas, his MSS., 165-7;
    _Letters_ cited, 75.

  Cary, Henry, M.A., 268;
    _Mem. of the Civ. War_, 154.

  Casaubon, Isaac, writes verses on Bodley's death, 37;
    his _Adversaria_, 95.

  Casaubon, Meric, bequeathed his father's _Adversaria_, 95.

  Cassel, D., 275 _n._

  Cassini, --, 205.

  Castell, Edmund, D.D., 150.

  Castlemain, Lord, 173.

  Catalogues, Sale, 248.

  Catherine, S., 178.

  Cato, 43.

  Caulfield, Richard, LL.D., donor, 311, 340.

  Cave, Sir Thomas, donor, 188.

  Cawood, John, 171 _n._

  Caxton, William, _Descr. of Brit._, 88;
    _Governayle of Health_, 155;
    _Ars Moriendi_, 155
    _Game of Chesse_, 163;
    _Recuyell of Troye_, 163;
    _Horae_, 250;
    _Booke of Curtesye_, 250;
    _Dictes_, 262;
    _Chronicle_, 280, 321;
    _Pilgrimage_, 328;
    placard, 250.

  Cecil, R., Lord Burleigh, 171 _n._

  Celotti, Abate, 230 _n._

  Chace, Thomas, Chanc. of Oxford, 7 _n._

  Chains for books, 86;
    books unchained, 191.

  Chalmers, Alexander, donor, 212 _n._

  Chalmers, George, sale, 248 _n._, 254.

  Chamberlain, John, 38, 48 _n._

  Chamberlayne, Edward, LL.D., papers, 176;
    _State of Great Brit._, 237.

  Chambers, Sir R., 337.

  Chambre, W. de, _Hist. Dunelm._ cited, 4 _n._

  Chandler, Richard, D.D., 162.

  Chandos, James Brydges, Duke of, his sale, 147, 165 _n._, 184.

  Chapman, --, bookseller, 201.

  Chapman, George, 231.

  Chappiel, Anth., 312.

  Charlemagne, 250.

  Charles I, visits the Library, 55, 70;
    his application to borrow a book refused, 71-2;
    loan of money to him, 37, 69;
    book said to be bound in a piece of his waistcoat, 53;
    book that belonged to him, 178;
    _Catalogue_ ded. to him in 1620, 46;
    letters, 154, 289;
    Treaty in Isle of Wight, 187;
    bust, 61;
    portraits, 148, 255;
    mentioned, 54, 111, 171 _n._, 331, 334.

  Charles II, visits the Library, 92;
    platter from the Royal Oak, 324;
    oak planted by him in St. James' Park, 135;
    letters, 173;
    portraits, 255;
    mentioned, 237, 258.

  Charlett, Arthur, D.D., 99, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121, 127, 128, 136,
      145, 171 _n._, 187;
    book-plate, 186.

  Charlotte, Q. Consort of George III, 197.

  Chartier, Alan, 18 _n._, 215.

  Chaucer, Geoffrey, 96, 178, 336.

  Chaworth, Dr., 69.

  Cheke, Sir John, 56.

  Cherry, Francis, his MSS., 52, 151.

  Chester Cathedral, 179.

  Chettle, H., 298.

  Cheshire MSS., 265.

  Chichester, 180.

  _Children of the Chapel_, 156 _n._

  Chinese books, 28, 63, 91, 208, 284, 338;
    Chinese visitors, 109, 320;
    Chinese figures, &c., 338.

  Chipping-Barnet, 180.

  Christian, Charles, 183.

  Christie, --, auctioneer, 267.

  Chrysanthus, Patr. of Jerusalem, donor, 143.

  Churchill, A., _Voyages_, 124.

  Churchill, Sir Winston, 320 _n._

  Churchyard, Thomas, two of his tracts stolen, 81.

  Citium, in Cyprus, 162.

  Clapham, John, donor, 28.

  Clarendon, Edward, first Earl of, donor, 94;
    his MSS., 163, 289, 294 _n._;
    resignation of Chanc. of Univ., 323;
    Gray's copy of his _History_, 276.
    _v._ Sutherland.

  Clarendon, Edward, third Earl, 164.

  Clarendon, H., Earl of, MSS., 184, 281.

  Clarke, --, 115.

  Clarke, Edw. D., LL.D., his MSS., 215.

  Clarke, Sam., M.A., his MSS., 95, 268.

  Clarke, William, _Repert. Bibl._ cited, 255 _n._, 305.

  Clarke, W. N., D.C.L., _Collection of Letters_, 154;
    Berkshire MSS., 212 _n._

  Clavell, Walter, 184.

  Claymond, John, 11.

  Clayton, Dr. John, 81.

  Cleaver, E., Bp. of St. Asaph, 192.

  Clement VIII, Pope, 283, 310.

  Clements, --, bookseller, 144.

  Cloyne, 311.

  Cobbe, Richard, M.A., 149.

  Cobham, Thomas, Bp. of Worcester, first founder of the Univ. Library, 3.

  Cobham, Lord, donor, 22.

  Cockburn, John, D.D., and his son, 127.

  Coins and Medals, 61, 75, 88, 93, 124, 125, 182, 190, 191, 203, 264,
      291, 294 _n._;
    Catalogue ordered to be made, 76;
    enlarged by Hearne, 123;
    coin-room, 339, 340.

  Cole, T., 212 _n._

  Colf, R., D.D., his sons, donors, 44.

  Collier, Bp. Jeremy, M.A., 168 _n._

  Collins, Richard, 36.

  Columba, S., 64, 176.

  Compton, Henry, Bp. of London; MS. papers, 154 _n._, 175;
    mentioned, 127.

  Conde, J. Ant., 238.

  Connock, Richard, donor, 42.

  Constance, Council of, _Acta_, 9, 58.

  Cook, Captain, _Voyages_, 198.

  Cooper, or Cowper, George, M.A., 121.

  Cooper, Samuel, 336.

  Cope, Sir Walter, donor, 22.

  Coptic, MSS. 107, 149, 150, 267.

  Corbinelli, J., 296.

  Cornbury, Henry Hyde, Lord, donor of the Clarendon MSS., 163.

  _Cornhill Magazine_, 280, 302 _n._

  Cornish MSS., 44.

  Cosin, Richard, LL.D., 170 _n._

  Cotton, Archd. Henry, Sub-librarian, 220;
    mentioned, 223, 235;
    _List of Bibles_ cited, 97;
    _Typogr. Gaz._ cited, 112 _n._, 162 _n._, 244, 303, 310 _n._;
    donor, 311.

  Cotton, Sir R., donor, 24;
    MS. from his library, 96 _n._;
    mentioned 9, 86.

  Courayer, F. le, papers and portrait, 205.

  Coventrey, Thomas, 37.

  Coventry, placards, &c., 298.

  Coverdale, Miles, Bp. of Exeter, 239, 277, 302.

  Coward, William, M.D., donor, 119.

  Cowderoy, W., Janitor, 189.

  Cowley, Abraham, his _Poems_, given by him, 45 _n._;
    verses on Drake's chair, 95.

  Cowper, William, 45.

  Cox, C. H., M.A., Sub-librarian, 240, 242.

  Coxe, H. O., M.A., Sub-librarian, 261;
    Librarian, 293;
    mentioned, 19 _n._, 29, 43, 64, 112, 169 _n._, 172, 182, 194, 196
      _n._, 279, 280, 289 _n._, 291, 298, 328;
    _Catalogues_, 55, 65, 87, 89, 95, 108, 149, 186, 223 _n._, 225, 230,
      238, 251;
    donor, 212 _n._

  Crabb, John, M.A., Sub-librarian, 131-2.

  Crabb, Jos., M.A., Sub-librarian, 129-131.

  Crabb, William, 131.

  Crabeth, --, 228.

  Cranmer, Thomas, Archbp. of Cant., Autograph, 17 _n._

  Cremer, Henry, M.A., 107.

  Crevenna, P. A., sale, 201.

  Crew, --, M.A., 92.

  Crewe, Nathaniel, Bp. of Durham, donor, 92, 162;
    portrait, 336.

  Croft, William, Mus. D., 205, 206.

  Cromwell, Henry, 322.

  Cromwell, Oliver, gift of Greek MSS., 55, 89;
    applies for the loan of a MS., but is refused, 76;
    letters, 154;
    _Memoirs_, 227;
    portraits, 255.

  Cromwell, Richard, 55 _n._

  Croydon, 180.

  Crynes, Nathaniel, M.A., his bequest, 159, 160;
    had some duplicates from the Bodleian, 46.

  Crystall, John, 313.

  Cuerdale coins, 264.

  Cuper, Gisb., 207.

  Cureton, William, D.D., Sub-librarian, 251, 259.

  Curll, Edmund, 322.

  Curtis, --, 200.

  Cyprian, S., 290.


  DALRYMPLE, 258.

  Daly, Robert, Bp. of Cashel, sale, 321.

  Damascius, 108.

  Daniel, G., 42 _n._

  Danish visitors to the Library, 137.

  Dante, 226 _n._

  Davids, A. L., 115.

  Davies, John, Deptford, donor, 94.

  Davies, John, Hereford, 171 _n._

  Davis, Richard, donor, 105.

  Davis, William, M.A., 107.

  Davy, Capt. L. H., donor, 226.

  Davy, William, A.B., 259.

  Davydge, Richard, donor, 76.

  Dawkins, Henry, gift of MSS., 188-9.

  Dawson, Thomas, 36.

  Daye, John, 233.

  Decker, Thomas, 231, 298.

  Dee, Dr. John, papers, 177;
    mentioned, 169 _n._, 318.

  Defoe, Daniel, 302.

  Delahogue, L. AE., 263.

  Delaram, Francis, 171 _n._

  Denyer, John, 238.

  Denyer, Mrs. Eliz. D., bequest, 238-9.

  Deptford, 94.

  Derby, Geoffrey, Earl of, donor, 281.

  Derby, Prior Stephen, 179.

  De Rossi, J. B., 225.

  Desborough, Major-Gen., donor, 90.

  Devonshire, Duke of, 340.

  Devonshire MSS., 268.

  D'Ewes, Sir Symonds, 10.

  Dibdin, Dr. T. F., cited, 18, 19, 114, 130 _n._, 208, 209, 215, 222,
      224, 248;
    mentioned, 258.

  Dickens, Guy, donor, 161.

  Digby, Sir Kenelm, his MSS., 58, 318;
    Allen's MSS. included, 20;
    willing that they should be lent, 59, 79, 240;
    his portraits, 196, 336.

  Dillmann, Dr. A., 65, 268.

  Dillon, Viscount, 112 _n._

  Dionysius Halicarnassus, 189.

  Dionysius Syrus, 108.

  Disney, Dr. John, 227.

  D'Israeli, Is., cited, 326 _n._

  Ditchley, Oxon., 112 _n._

  Dissertations, Academic, 240-1.

  Dix, James, 335.

  Dix, John, 36.

  Djami, 325, 332.

  Dodd, --, 220 _n._

  Dodd, Thomas, 251.

  Dodsworth, Roger, his MSS., 96, 97;
    mentioned, 99.

  Dodwell, Henry, M.A., 152, 178, 320 _n._

  Dolben, Gilbert, and J. E., donors, 237.

  Dolben, Sir J. E., Sheldon and Dolben papers, 237-8.

  Donatus, 262.

  Donkin, W. F., M.A., 277.

  Donne, John, D.D., 86.

  Dormer, Sir Michael, donor, 25.

  Dornford, Rev. Jos., donor, 326.

  Dorset, Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, afterwards Earl of, donor of books,
      17;
    of Bodley's bust, 26.

  Dorset, C. Sackville, Earl of, 173.

  D'Orville, J. P., his MSS., 207-8.

  Dositheus, 143.

  Douce, Francis, his library, 249-251;
    mentioned, 257 _n._, 267, 336;
    references to books, 53, 310, 311, 321 _n._, 327, 329-332;
    coins, 340.

  Doughty, Bp. Henry, 169.

  Douglas, James, M.D., 248.

  Douglas, John, Bp. of Salisbury, donor, 164;
    mentioned, 267.

  Drake, Sir F., his chair, 94.

  Drake, Francis, donor, 96 _n._

  Drummond, W., of Hawthornden, 266.

  Drusius, J., cited, 13 _n._

  Dryden, John, 178.

  Dublin, 176, 179.

  Dubourg, --, 338.

  Du Chesne, Andr., _Hist. Fr. Scriptt._, 57.

  Dugdale, Sir W., donor, 104;
    MSS. 177, 287, 288.

  Dukes, Leopold, 114.

  Dukes, T. F., 264.

  Duncan, J. S. and P. B., donors, 236.

  Dune, Thomas, 314.

  Dunstan, St., MSS., 20.

  Dunton, John, 177.

  Durandus, Gul., 229.

  Durham, Register of Bp. Kellow, 216.

  Dury, John, MS. papers, 176.

  Dutch tracts, 228, 258.

  Dyak language, first books printed in the, 303.

  Dysart, Earl of, 155.


  EASTCOT, Daniel, 81.

  East India, portraits of Rajahs, 158.

  East India Company, donors, 208, 223, 260.

  Eberbach, 318.

  Ebner, J. W., 229.

  Eccard, J. G., restored some papers stolen from Bodleian, 103 _n._

  Edelmann, H., 114, 275.

  Eden, Robert, M.A., 235.

  Edgeman, William, 165 _n._

  Edgeworth, Miss, 227.

  Edmonds, Sir Clement, donor, 49.

  Edmund of Pounteney, S., Archbp. of Canterbury, 101.

  Edward the Confessor, 328.

  Edward I, 185, 329.

  Edward III, 328.

  Edward IV, 87.

  Edward VI, mentioned, 56, 282, 331;
    exercise-book, 325.

  Edward, Thomas, M.A., account of him, 149, 150.

  Edwardes, Thomas, 36.

  Ekerman, Peter, 241 _n._

  Elizabeth of York, wife of Henry VII, 120.

  Elizabeth, Queen, exercise-book, 325;
    gloves, _ib._;
    MSS. presented to her, 49, 326;
    books bound by her, 52, 152;
    books translated and written by her, 52, 331;
    proclamations in her reign, 170 _n._;
    roundels, 339;
    mentioned, 307, 308.

  Elizabeth, Q. of Bohemia, 336.

  Elkins, W. H., 300.

  Elliott, J. B., his gift of MSS., &c., 290-1, 340.

  Ellis, Sir Henry, D.C.L., Sub-librarian, 204-5;
    _Letters of Literary Men_, cited, 9, 24, 54, 121;
    _Polydore Virgil_, 11;
    _Remarks on Caedmon_, 103.

  Elmham, Thomas, cited, 24 _n._, 25.

  Elphinstone, Bp., _Chron. of Scotl._, 96.

  Elstob, William and Mary, 187.

  English, Thomas, 316.

  _Enoch, Book of_, 267.

  Erasmus, Des., 144 _n._, 239, 336.

  Erfurt, MSS. from, 285.

  Erpenius, Thomas, 54.

  Essex, Robert, second Earl of, donor, 17;
    mentioned, 24, 48.

  Eton College, 175.

  Etty, Simeon J., M.A., 239, 259.

  Euclid, the D'Orville MS., 207.

  Eulenberg, Baron ab, 68.

  Eusebius, 238 _n._

  Eustace, G., 311.

  Euthymius Zigabenus, 108.

  Eutychius, or Eutex, 20.

  Evans, Rev. F., 284.

  Evans, Messrs., 276 _n._

  Evelyn, John, donor, 88;
    letters, 287.

  Ewart, William, M.P., 273.

  Exeter, MSS. given by Dean and Chapter, 23;
    Statutes of the Cathedral, 179.

  Exeter, Cecil, Earl of, donor, 44.

  Eyre, Dr., 190.

  Eyston, Charles, 213 _n._


  FABER, John, 258.

  Fadir, Peter, 317.

  Faermen, 104.

  Fairfax, Sir Thomas, his bequest of MSS., 95-7;
    versions of Psalms, &c., 97, 289;
    reference to MSS., 18 _n._, 314;
    preserved the Library when Oxford surrendered, 72.

  Falkland, Lucius, Lord, 70, 71.

  Fanshaw, John, M.A., 107.

  Farmer, Anthony, 109.

  Fawkes, Guy, lantern, 67.

  Fees of Visitors, 133, 114, 266.

  Fell, John, Bp. of Oxford, his MSS., 108-9, 120;
    mentioned, 125, 150.

  Fell, Samuel, Dean of Ch. Ch., 72.

  Fenton, John, 338.

  Fenton, Samuel, M.A., 222, 229.

  Fenton, Thomas, M.A., 107.

  Ferrand, William, 36.

  Ferrar, Richard, 53 _n._

  _Festivale_, 112.

  Fetherstone, Henry, donor, 31, 54 _n._

  Field, Richard, 36.

  Finnish MSS., 22.

  Firth, Richard, M.A., 259, 263.

  Fisher, John, Bp. of Rochester, 239.

  Fitz-James, R., Bp. of Chichester, 316.

  Fitz-William, John, D.D., 177.

  Flecher, --, Librarian, 11.

  Fleetwood, William, Bp. of Ely, 141, 170 _n._, 329.

  Fletcher, John, M.A., Sub-librarian, 141;
    resigns, 146.

  Fletcher, Ald. William, donor, 29, 30, 211;
    buried at Yarnton, 30 _n._;
    bust, _ib._

  Florence, MSS. sent thence with merchandise, 226 _n._

  Foley, Lord, 147.

  Foliot, Gilbert, Bp. of London, 188.

  Folkes, Martin, 174.

  Foreigners in the Library, 68, 137.

  Forster, Henry, M.A., 241, 252.

  Foster, --, 282.

  Foster, N., 341.

  Fotherby, Charles and Martin, 36.

  Foucault, Nicholas Jos., 161, 179, 184.

  Foulkes, E. S., B.D., 277.

  Foulkes, Mrs. Edmund, donor, 319.

  Foulkes, Thomas, M.A., 107.

  Fountaine, Sir Andrew, 134.

  Fouquet, --, 236.

  Fowler, Edward, Bp. of Gloucester, 131.

  Foxe, John, 19, 318.

  France, drawings of monuments, 213-214;
    atlas of, 205;
    French tracts, 270;
    French MSS., 63, 177, 215.

  Francis, C., M.A., donor, 113.

  Frankland, Thomas, letter, 108.

  Franklin, Sir John, 319.

  Frappaz, Jules, 214.

  Frazer, --, MSS., 294 _n._

  Frederick, King of Bohemia, 258.

  Frederick, Elector Palatine, 336.

  Frederick, Prince of Wales, epitaph, 160.

  Freke, Ralph and William, donors, 88.

  Frere, E., _Livres de Liturgie_, &c., 213 _n._

  Frewin, Richard, M.A., 107.

  Frewin, Richard, M.D., 294 _n._

  Frith, John, _pseudon._ Brightwell, 239.

  Froben, Joh., 337.

  Fry, Francis, 321.

  Fulke, Will., editions of his _Annotations_ in the Library, 41.

  Fuller, Richard, 314.

  Fuller, Thomas, _Ch. Hist._ cited, 85.

  Furney, Archdeacon Richard, his bequest, 184.

  Fuerst, Jul., _Bibl. Jud._ cited, 243 _n._

  Fust and Schoiffer, books printed by, 161, 201, 229.

  Fyloll, Jasper, 19.

  Fysher, Robert, M.B., elected Librarian, 151;
    publishes a catalogue of the printed books, 156, 158;
    his death, 160;
    charged with neglect, 161;
    coins, _ib._


  GAGUINUS, Rob., 26.

  Galanus, C., 316 _n._

  Gagnieres, --, 213.

  Gaisford, Thomas, D.D., Dean of Ch. Ch., 208, 215, 223.

  Gale, Samuel, 184.

  Gandy, Bp. Henry, M.A., 169, 177.

  Gardiner, Richard, 48.

  Gardner, Dunn, sale, 322.

  Garlick, F. O., B.A., 212 _n._

  Garrett, W. W., B.A., 273.

  Garter, Order of the, 179.

  Gascoigne, Thomas, D.D., 20 _n._, 316.

  Gassendi, P., 336.

  Gent, William, donor, 17, 177 _n._

  Gentilis, Alb. and Scipio, 207.

  George, Prince of Denmark, 185 _n._

  George I, 131, 175.

  George III, visits the Library, 197;
    donor, 198.

  George IV, donor, 216, 223.

  Gentleman's Magazine, cited, 155 _n._, 199 _n._, 205 _n._, 214 _n._,
      217, 222 _n._, 231, 293, 302, 338;
    bought, 218 _n._

  German MSS., 63.

  Gerhard, J. A., 241 _n._

  Gesenius, Guil., _Ph[oe]n. Monumenta_ cited, 163;
    autograph, 319;
    sale, 270.

  Gianfilippi, P. de', 230 _n._

  Gibbon, Anthony, 175.

  Gibbon, Edward, 320 _n._

  Gibbs, James, 294 _n._

  Gibson, Edmund, Bp. of London, 187 _n._

  Gidding, Little, 53.

  Gigli, Gir., _Vocab. Caterin._ cited, 226 _n._

  Gildas, 20.

  Giles, J. A., D.C.L., 188, 260 _n._

  Girardenguz, Nic., 310.

  Girardot, Paul, 321 _n._

  Girdlers' Company, donors, 49.

  Giulio Romano, 251.

  Glastonbury, Chartulary, 110;
    survey of lands, 162.

  Gloucester Cathedral, 185.

  Gloucester, Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of, 19 _n._--_v._ Humphrey.

  Gloucestershire, 187.

  Glover, Robert, 174.

  Glynn, H., 271.

  Gocthan, Thomas, Archbp. of, his labours, 126;
    visits the Library, 127;
    donor, 127-8.

  Godar, Guil., 312.

  Godschall, W. M., 164.

  Godwyn, Charles, M.A., his bequest, 193;
    coins, 340.

  Goetz, G. H., 241 _n._

  Goldberg, Dr. B., 311.

  Goldenthal, Dr. J., 243.

  Golius, Jac., 133.

  Gompertz, Dr. T., 216.

  Gonzaga, Leonora, 249.

  Good, John, M.A., 90.

  Goodwin, T., 81.

  Goodyear, Aaron, donor, 105.

  Gordon, Sir J. W., 304.

  Gouda, 228.

  Gough, Richard, his library, 211-215;
    _Brit. Topogr._ cited, 87, 153, 175 _n._, 212 _n._, 253 _n._;
    mentioned, 257 _n._;
    references to books, 57, 120 _n._, 171 _n._, 311.

  Gower, Rev. F., 265.

  Gower, John, 19 _n._, 96, 237, 336.

  Grabe, J. E., D.D., his MSS., 149;
    autograph, 320 _n._

  Graevius, J. G., 179.

  Grafton, Richard, 300.

  Grant, Sir F. A., 281.

  Granville, Denis, D.D., Dean of Durham, 177.

  Grascome, Bp. Samuel, 177.

  Graves, Richard, 184.

  Gray, Charles, M.P., donor, 162.

  Gray, Thomas, 276.

  Greaves, T., D.D., his MSS., 103, 325.

  Greek MSS., 50, 53, 55, 63, 64, 78, 94, 108, 151, 153, 207, 215, 223,
    224, 229, 230, 238, 246, 282.

  Green, Charles, 194.

  Greene, Maurice, Mus. D., 205, 206.

  Greene, Robert, 231.

  Greenhill, W. A., M.D., 277, 278.

  Greensted, Essex, 335.

  Gregoriis, Jac. de, donor, 92.

  Gregory, St., MSS. of his _Pastorale_, 23, 100;
    _Dialogues_, 100;
    _Sacram._, 262.

  Gregory Nazianzen, 115.

  Gregory, David, M.A., 107.

  Gregory, David, M.D., 119.

  Gregory, Henry, M.A., 107.

  Grene, John, D.D., 112, 313.

  Grenville, Lord, 223.

  Gresham Statutes, 180.

  Greville, Col. Charles, 253.

  Grey, Sir C., donor, 240.

  Griffiths, John, M.A., 34 _n._, 211 _n._

  Griffiths, Ralph, LL.D., 260.

  Grimani, Doge of Venice, 58.

  Grise, Jehan de, 18.

  Gronovius, J. F., 320 _n._

  Grosteste, Roger, Bp. of Lincoln, 20 _n._, 58, 101.

  Grove, Edmund, 251, 266.

  Gucht, --, Van der, 168.

  Guildford, Earl of, 286.

  Guilevile, G., 328.

  Guillim, John, 174, 187.

  Gutch, John, B.D., editor of _Anth. Wood_, _q.v._;
    mentioned, 219 _n._

  Gutenberg, J., 202, 321.

  Guthrie, --, 164.

  Gyles, Fletcher, 172.


  HACKMAN, Alfred, M.A., mentioned, 154, 268, 277;
    Sub-librarian, 298.

  Haddan, A. W., B.D., 20 _n._

  Haden, Messrs., 235.

  Hagembach, Petr., 311.

  Haghe, Inghilb., 311.

  Hake, Robert, M.A., 170 _n._

  Hakewill, William, 37.

  Hale, Sir Matthew, 77, 86 _n._

  Hale, Archdeacon W. H., 29 _n._

  Halifax, Montagu, Earl of, 184.

  Hall, --, 158.

  Hall, Rev. --, donor, 223.

  Hall, Anthony, D.D., 28, 56, 145.

  Hall, Fitz-Edward, donor, 291.

  Hall, Henry, 73.

  Hall, Bp. Joseph, 49.

  Hall, Susannah and William, 301.

  Hall, W., 110.

  Hallam, Henry, 319.

  Halliwell, J. O., 101, 232, 298, 301.

  Halloix, P., _Eccl. Or. Scriptt._, 57.

  Ham House, 155.

  Hamilton, --, 290.

  Hamilton, William and Hubert, sons of Sir William H., donors, 285.

  Hampden, John, Letters, 154;
    jewel, 203.

  Hamper, W., donor, 240.

  Handel, G. F., 205.

  Harborne, John, 328.

  Harcourt, Earl and Archbp., 212 _n._

  Harding, John, _Chronicle_, 87.

  Hardouyn, Germ., 312.

  Hardy, Thomas Duffus, 64 _n._, 166.

  Hare, Aug. and J. C., donors, 247.

  Hare, Robert, 82.

  Harewood, Yorkshire, 104.

  Harper, H. S., 263.

  Harris, J., 239 _n._, 277, 322.

  Hart, Andr., 266.

  Haryson, John, 36.

  Haslam, Christopher, M.A., 107.

  Haslewood, J., 160.

  Hastings, Warren, 208.

  Hatton, Capt. Charles, donor, 99.

  Hatton, Christopher, first Lord, 99.

  Hatton, Christopher, second Lord, his MSS., 20 _n._, 99-100.

  Hatton, Jane, grand-niece to Bodley, petition to the University, 39.

  Havergal, H. E., M.A., 189, 206.

  Hawkins, Ernest, B.D., Sub-librarian, 246, 252.

  Hawkins, John, 147.

  Hayes, Drs. Phil. and Will., 205, 206.

  Head, Sir Edmund, _Few Words on Bodl. Libr._, 247, 277.

  Heath, James, 258.

  Hearne, Thomas, M.A., appointed Janitor, 123;
    makes an appendix to the _Cat._, _ib._;
    catalogues Ray's coins, 125;
    appointed Sub-librarian, 132;
    his respect for Duke Humphrey, 6;
    paper against borrowing books, 80 _n._;
    complaints against him, 132, 136, 139;
    account of his exhibiting a portrait of the Chevalier, 134-6;
    quits the Library upon refusing the oaths, 140;
    commended by Uffenbach, 145;
    his death, 152;
    diary, 180;
    cited, 4 _n._, 14 _n._, 15 _n._, 22, 28, 33, 43, 45 _n._, 48 _n._,
      52 _n._, 55 _n._, 70, 91 _n._, 98, 99, 106, 109, 116, 122, 125,
      126, 127, 128, 130, 132, 137, 138 _bis_, 139, 140, 142, 143, 144,
      145, 146, 149, 151, 156, 157, 171 _n._, 333;
    mentioned, 9, 56, 64, 112, 120, 126;
    references to his MSS., 156, 178, 329;
    _Reasons for taking the Oath of Allegiance_, 152;
    _Dodwell de Parma Woodw._, 134, 136;
    proposed apology for the preface, 137;
    _Camden's Eliz._, 133, 137 _n._, 213 _n._;
    _Letter on Antiquities, &c._, 189;
    _Rossi Hist. Angl._, 120, 138, 141;
    _Guli Neubrig. Hist. Angl._, 126;
    _Langtoft's Chron._, 162.

  Heber, Richard, sale, 141 _n._, 248, 253.

  Hebrew printed books and MSS., 54 _n._, 63, 78, 108, 113, 225, 243,
    270, 272, 275, 280, 300.

  Heddon, Thomas, 315, 318.

  Heinecken, C. H. de, 321 _n._

  Heinsius, Daniel, 207.

  Hendons, or Hindhay, Berks, 32.

  Henrietta Maria, Queen Consort of Charles I, 331.

  Henry II, penance at Canterbury, 29;
    homage of King of Scotland, 30;
    grant to Gloucester, 185.

  Henry IV, granted a payment to the Librarian, 5.

  Henry VI, 29.

  Henry VIII, mentioned, 11, 271, 316;
    books which belonged to him, 27;
    accounts of surveyor of works, 177;
    chair, said to be his, 95.

  Henry, Prince of Wales, 27, 42.

  Heralds' College, 102.

  Herbert, George, cited, 43.

  Herbert, Sir Thomas, donor, 93.

  Herbert, William, 112.

  Herbert of Cherbury, Lord, 187.

  Herculaneum, Rolls from, 216.

  Hereford Cathedral, chartulary, 120;
    statutes, 179;
    _Missale_ 1502, 213 _n._

  Hermann, Godfrey, 282.

  Hermas, 13 _n._

  Heuringius, Simon, 183 _n._

  Heydon, Sir Christopher, donor, 25.

  Heylin, Peter, D.D., _Examen Hist._ cited, 85;
    _Cypr. Angl._ cited, 290 _n._

  Heywood, Robert, M.A., donor of Guy Fawkes' lantern, 67;
   his father searched the Parliament cellars, _ib._

  Heywood, Thomas, 231.

  Hibbert, George, sale, 246 _n._

  Hickes, Bp. George, cited, 20 _bis_, 102, 149;
    mentioned, 100, 187 _n._;
    donor, 104;
    papers, 177;
    portrait, 336.

  Hickman, Charles, M.A., 106.

  Hickman, Henry, 36.

  Hickman, Henry, _Justif. of Fathers_ cited, 85.

  High Commission Court, confirms the ordinance of the Stationers'
    Company, 36.

  Hill, Rev. --, 165.

  Hill, Herbert, M.A., Sub-librarian, 259, 261.

  Hill, Sir John, M.D., _Vegetable System_, 198 _n._

  Hill, Rev. Joseph, 173 _n._

  Hill, Richard, 81.

  Hindhay farm, see Hendons.

  Hoadley, Bp. Benjamin, portrait exhibited by Hearne, 135.

  Hobart Town, first printed book, 233.

  Hobbes, Thomas, 77 _n._

  Hoccleve, Thomas, 178.

  Hodgson, B. H., donor, 265.

  Hodsall, --, 340 _n._

  Hody, Humphrey, D.D., bequest, 126.

  Hogarth, William, donor, 168.

  Holbein, Hans, 333, 337.

  Holland, T., 341 _n._

  Hollis, John Brande, 227.

  Holman, W., MSS. for Essex, &c., 174, 175.

  Holmes, John, 39.

  Holmes, Rob., D.D., Collations of Sept., 207.

  Home, Sir J. E., donor, 276.

  Homer, _Edit. Princ._, 192;
    Scholia on Odyssey, 246.

  Honolulu, Queen Emma of, 320.

  Hooke, Col. John, letters, 222.

  Hooper, George, Bp. of Bath and Wells, 173 _n._

  Hooper, Humphrey, 36.

  Hooper, John, Bp. of Gloucester, 239.

  Hope, F. W., D.C.L., donor, 297.

  Hope, J. T., 297.

  Hopkins, --, 67.

  Horace, 186, 248, 298.

  _Horae_, 42, 178, 213, 250, 289, 311.

  Horne, Rev. T. H., 64.

  Hornsby, Thomas, D.D., 194.

  Horsey, Sir Jerome, donor, 25.

  Hosea, peculiar reading in, 20.

  Howe, Josias, B.D., _Sermon_, 171 _n._

  Howe, Michael, 233.

  Howell, Lawrence, M.A., 177.

  Howland, Ralph, donor, 129.

  Huber, --, cited, 83 _n._

  Huddesford, William, M.A., 181, 288, 289.

  Hudson, John, D.D., elected Librarian, 123;
    donor, _ib._;
    said to have thrown out Milton's books from the Library, 46;
    letter cited, 121;
    mentioned, 69, 124, 127, 132, 133, 140, 157;
    twice married, 22;
    his widow married to Dr. Hall, 28;
    account of the Library, 38;
    subscribes for relief of Bodley's relations, 39;
    threatens to remove Hearne, 139;
    his death, 144;
    neglect and incapacity, 140, 144, 145.

  Hughes, J., M.A., _Boscobel Tracts_, cited, 324 _n._

  Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, gifts to the Library, 6-10;
    motto, 6 _n._;
    aided in building the Divinity School, 6;
    destruction of his library, 11, 12.

  Hungarian books, 275.

  Hunsdon, Henry, first lord, donor, 17.

  Hunt, Leigh, 227.

  Hunt, Thomas, printer and bookseller in Oxford in 1483, 112.

  Hunt, Thomas, D.D., mentioned, 109, 294 _n._;
    MSS., 193.

  Hunter, Joseph, Cat. of Dodsworth MSS., 96.

  Huntingdon, Earl of, 166.

  Huntington, Robert, Bp. of Raphoe, mentioned, 108, 133;
    his MSS., 113, 115.

  Hussey, Edw. L., 255 _n._;
    257 _n._

  Hussey, Robert, B.D., 257 _n._

  Hutton, --, 143.

  Hyatt, J. C, B.A., 273.

  Hyde, Thomas, D.D., Sub-librarian, 90;
    elected Head-librarian, 93;
    dedication of catalogue, 97;
    note on the agreement with the Stationers' Co., 31;
    goes to London to claim books from the Co., 110;
    letters cited, 69, 120;
    MSS. bought from him, 113;
    mentioned, 100 _n._, 109, 130 _n._, 294 _n._;
    charged with ignorance by Wanley, 118;
    wishes to have Wanley for his successor, _ib._;
    resigns the Librarianship, 121;
    his death, 123.


  IBOTT, Benj., 232.

  Icelandic MSS., 242.

  Ince, Peter, donor, 50.

  _Index Libb. Prohib._, Madr. 1612-14, 90.

  Inglis, Esther, MSS. by her, 48, 49.

  Inglis, --, sale, 321.

  Inglis, Sir R. H., donor, 183;
    portrait, 337.

  Ingram, James, D.D., bequest of coins, 340.

  Innocent VIII., Pope, 148.

  Irish MSS., 63, 64, 175;
    pamphlets, 232, 247.

  Isaiah, 82 _n._, 113.

  Isham, Zach., M.A., 106.

  Italian printed books and MSS., 63, 177, 225, 260, 271.

  Ivan Basilides, Czar of Russia, 25.

  Ivie, Edw., M.A., 107.


  JACKSON, Cyril, D.D., Dean of Ch. Ch., 198.

  Jackson, Rev. J. E., 288.

  Jacobs, C. F. G., 273.

  James I, grants letters patent for the Library, 25;
    visits it, 26, 41;
    grants books from the royal libraries, 26;
    a book formerly in his possession, 44;
    presents his own _Works_, 47.

  James II, visits the Library while Duke of York, 92;
    Duchess of Buckingham his daughter, 148;
    mentioned, 166, 173, 222, 237, 252, 255, 323, 340.

  James Edward, 'the Chevalier,' son of James II, portrait exhibited by
      Hearne, 135;
    portraits of him and his wife, 169 _n._

  James, Andrew, donor, 50.

  James, Edward, B.D., donor, 40.

  James, Richard, his MSS., 103, 104.

  James, Thomas, donor, 21;
    Appointment as Librarian, salary, &c., _ib._;
    publishes the catalogue in 1605, 27;
    a continuation of the classified index in MS., 28;
    another Catalogue in MS. in 1613, 39;
    proposes the agreement with the Stationers' Company, 31;
    publishes the second edition of the _Catalogue_, 46;
    resigns his office, 44;
    death, _ib._;
    cited, 13 _n._, 16, 60;
    mentioned, 103;
    _Catal. Interpp._, 60, 243 _n._;
    portrait, 336.

  Janitors, 88, 123, 189, 192.

  Jansen, Cornelius, 336.

  Janson, Nicolas, 250, 310.

  Janua, J. de, 209.

  Javanese MSS., 50, 226, 324.

  Jehannot, E., 312.

  Jekyll, Sir Joseph, 172, 177, 184.

  Jekyll, Thomas, 174.

  Jernegan, Nicholas, 165, 166.

  Jerome, St., 111, 253.

  Jersey, Lord, 277.

  Jerusalem, 105, 265.

  Jessett, --, B.A., 158.

  Jews offer to buy St. Paul's Cathedral and the Bodleian Library, 75.

  John, a Greek scribe, 215.

  John of Aix, 113.

  Johnson, --, 77 _n._

  Johnson, Dr. Samuel, donor, 188;
    mentioned, 87, 232;
    _Lives of Poets_ referred to, 106.

  Jones, --, 341.

  Jones, H., M.A. [_dec._ 1700], his MSS., 109, 120;
    reference to a MS., 96 _n._

  Jones, H., M.A. 1729, 107.

  Jones, John, 210.

  Jones, Sir William, 247.

  Jonson, Ben, 86, 178, 231.

  Jonstonus, Joh., M.D., 320 _n._

  Jordan, John, 44.

  Jordan, William, donor, 104.

  Josephus, 94, 158.

  Jourdain, John, donor, 50.

  Jowett, Benjamin, M.A., 277.

  Joye, George, 239.

  Judge, L. E., M.A., 239.

  Jugge, Richard, 171 _n._

  Junius, Francis, mentioned, 19;
    his MSS. 102, 327;
    _Glossarium Septentr._, 108;
    three Hatton MSS. amongst his own, 100;
    cited, 104;
    portrait, 336.

  Justell, Christopher, 100.

  Justell, Henry, donor, 100.

  Justinian, 173 _n._, 310.

  Juvenal, 252, 262, 298.

  Juxon, Bishop William, donor, 88;
    donor of book to Barlow, 111.


  KEATE, --, 340.

  Keating, Geoffrey, _Hist. of Ireland_, 96.

  Keble, --, bookseller, donor, 125.

  Kedden, Rev. Ralph, 39.

  Keigwyn, John, 44.

  Keil, Prof. John, M.D., 134, 135, 136.

  Kellow, Richard, Bp. of Durham, 216.

  Kelly, Edward, his _Holy Table_, 162 _n._

  Kemble, J. M., _Codex Dipl._, 185.

  Kempe, Thomas, Bishop of London, 10.

  Kempis, Thomas a, 126.

  Ken, John (erroneously printed _Kerr_), donor, 93.

  Ken, Thomas, Bishop of Bath and Wells, 173 _n._;
    letters, 175 _n._

  Kennett, White, Bishop of Peterborough, 187 _n._, 212 _n._

  Kennicott, Benjamin, D.D., _Hebr. Collations_, &c., 191, 294 _n._;
    Arabic tracts, 231;
    autograph, 320 _n._

  Kennon, Mrs., 182 _n._

  Kerver, Thielman, 312.

  Kewsch, John, 65.

  Kilby, --, 67.

  King, --, bookseller, 201.

  King, Charles, M.A., donor, 56 _n._

  King, John, Bishop of London, 36.

  King, John, D.D., donor, 159.

  King, J., bookseller, Moorfields, 182 _n._

  King, P., Lord, _Life of Locke_, cited 124.

  Kingsborough, Viscount, _Mexican Antiq._ 246.

  Kingsley, William, 289.

  Kingston, Felix, a London printer, 32.

  Kirkebote, Adam, Librarian, 11.

  Kloss, Dr., sale, 253, 262.

  Kneller, Sir Godfrey, donor, 147.

  Knight, Archdeacon, 153.

  Knight, Thomas, donor, 203.

  Knox, John, 242, 248.

  Koran, 76, 208, 326.

  Kyngusbury, Thomas de, 316.

  Kyrkeby, John, 7 _n._


  LACTANTIUS, 226.

  Lacy, Edmund, Bishop of Exeter, 315.

  La Fontaine, J. de, 298.

  Laing, David, LL.D., mentioned, 49 _n._;
    donor, 183 _n._

  Lake, Gilbert, M.A., 107.

  Lamb, James, D.D., his MSS., 93.

  Landino, Christopher, 250, 310.

  Landspring, English monastery at, 245.

  Lane, Col. John, and Mrs. Letitia, 324.

  Langbaine, Gerard, D.D., his _Adversaria_, 89;
    mentioned, 59, 67, 78;
    letter cited, 78.

  Langles, L. M., 239.

  Langley, abbey register, 154 _n._

  Langley, Henry de, 316.

  Langford, Emmanuel, M.A., 158.

  Lansyng, Richard de, 316.

  Lascelles, R., _Oxford_, cited, 95, 234 _n._

  Lasher, Josh., M.D., 179.

  Lathbury, T., M.A., 282.

  Lattebury, John, _Expositio in Thren. Jerem._, 112.

  Laud, Archbp., his gifts, 61-65;
    placed at the west end, 62;
    coins, 339;
    letters, 62, 322;
    references to his MSS., 43, 246, 268, 295, 325-327;
    mentioned, 31, 59, 82 _n._, 240, 290 _n._;
    writes verses on Bodley's death, 37;
    portrait, 336;
    book given to St. John's College, 53 _n._

  Laurence, Roger, M.A., 168 _n._

  Laurence, R. F., M.A., 235.

  Laurence, Richard, Archbp. of Cashel, 220, 221, 267.

  Laurentius Gallus, 329.

  Layfields, John, 36.

  Leake, William, 36.

  Lecchelade, John de, 318.

  Lee, Sir James, donor, 328.

  Lee, Matthew, M.A., 107.

  Lee, Sir Richard, donor of books, 22;
    of a Muscovite cloak, 40, 307.

  Lee, William, 302.

  Leeu, Gerard, 155.

  Legat, Hugh, 313.

  Le Hunt, William, M.A., 107.

  Leicester, Robert Dudley, first Earl of, donor, while Lord Lisle, 17;
    his watch, 129;
    book that belonged to him, 320.

  Leicester, Cope, Earl of, 277, 321.

  Leicestershire, 110.

  Leighton, Archbishop, 179.

  Leland, John, his MSS., 56, 318.

  Le Long, le Pere, 184 _n._

  Lendon, Abel, M.A., 202.

  Le Neve, Peter, 174, 184.

  Lennox, Mary, Countess of, 44.

  Lennox, W. J., 210.

  Lenthall, --, Janitor, 189.

  Leofric, Bp. of Exeter, MSS. given to Exeter, 23.

  Lerida, _Brev. Illerdense_, 303.

  Le S[oe]ur, Hubert, 61, 148.

  Letheringham, Suffolk, 214.

  Lewis, F., 211 _n._

  Lewis, Sir G. C., 274.

  Lewis, John, M.A., MSS., 176, 248, 252.

  Lewton, Edward, M.A., 201.

  Ley, Edwin, donor, 44.

  Leyden, 129, 133, 178, 199, 207, 228.

  Lhuyd, Edw., cited, 20, 125;
    MSS., 289.

  Libri, Girol. da, 249.

  Libri, Gugl., 273, 290.

  Lichfield Cathedral, 179.

  Lichfield, Leonard, 65.

  Lilly, William, 169 _n._

  Lilly, W., bookseller, 260 _n._

  Linacer, Thomas, 316 _n._

  Lindsell, Augustine, Bp. of Peterb., 51, 290 _n._, 318.

  Lister, Martin, M.D., his library, 288.

  Livermore, George, 311.

  Liverpool, Earl of, 221.

  Livy, 112, 226.

  Llandaff, 190.

  Lloyd, William, Bp. of Worc., 116.

  Locke, John, donor, 124.

  Lockey, Thomas, B.D., elected Librarian, 90;
    resigns, 93;
    death, _ib._

  Lockhart, James, _Papers_, cited, 222 _n._

  Lodge, Thomas, 231.

  Loftus, Dudley, 108.

  Logan, D., 334.

  London, Charter, 180;
    houses in Distaff Lane, 32;
    burned in the Fire, 38;
    their rent in arrear, 58;
    fire at the Temple, 86;
    map of Lond. and Westm., 255;
    cat. of MSS. at Lincoln's Inn, 96;
    St. Peter's, Cornhill, 177;
    Christ's Hospital, 186.

  _London Gazette_, 302.

  Longhi, G., 299.

  Lorenzi, --, 226.

  Louis XIV of France, 214.

  Louis XVI of France, 267.

  Loutherbourg, P. J. de, 244.

  Louveau, J., 52.

  Low Countries, 186.

  Lownes, Humphrey, 36.

  Lucan, 223, 262.

  Luard, H. R., M.A., 328.

  Lucas, --, bookseller, 290 _n._

  Luff, Richard, monk of Coventry, 314.

  Lumley, John, sixth Lord, donor, 17.

  Luther, Martin, 245, 246, 283, 285, 302.

  Lutheran Tracts, German, 228, 283.

  Lydgate, John, 177, 178, 318.

  Lydiat, Thomas, M.A., 119.

  Lye, Edward, M.A., 336.

  Lyndewoode, William, _Provinciale_, 112.

  Lysiaux, Thos., Dean of St. Paul's, 315.

  Lyte, Rev. H. F., 273.


  MACBRIDE, J. D., D.C.L., donor, 228;
    mentioned, 278, 320 _n._

  Macdonald, Flora, 160 _n._

  Macfarlane, E. M., M.A., 203 _n._

  M'Ghee, Rev. R. J., donor, 262.

  Machlinia, William de, 210.

  Mackenzie, Sir George, 320 _n._

  Mackie, --, 340.

  Macky, John, _Journey through Eng._, cited, 86 _n._

  Macpherson, D., 165, 166.

  Macray, W. D., 85 _n._, 176, 206, 233 _n._, 250 _n._, 270, 287.

  Mac-Regol, Abbot of Birr, 104.

  Madden, Sir Fred., 177 _n._, 281, 330.

  Madox, Thomas, 320 _n._

  Maffei, Scipio, _Verona illust._, cited, 230.

  Magnusen, Finn, his MSS., 242.

  _Magna Charta_, 185.

  Maittaire, Michael, 177, 178, 179, 184.

  Major, G., 246 _n._

  Malabar, Bp. of, 319.

  Malabaric MS., 324.

  Malmesbury, Chartulary, 110, 142.

  Malone, Edmund, his library, 231-2.

  Malyng, H., 318.

  Man, Thomas, 32, 36.

  Manaton, Pierce, M.D., 107.

  Manaton, Robert, M.A., 107.

  Manchester Cathedral, 179.

  Manuzzi, Giuseppe, 225.

  Maraldi, --, 205.

  Marchant, N., 336.

  Margaret of Anjou, 29.

  Margaret, Queen of Scotland, 44.

  Marlborough, John, first Duke of, 135.

  Marriott, Charles, B.D., 278.

  Marsh, Archbp. Narcissus, his bequest of MSS., 132-3.

  Marschalle, William, 317.

  Marshall, F. J., M.A., 259.

  Marshall or Mareschal, Thomas, D.D., his printed books and MSS., 107;
    recovers a lost MS., 92;
    said to have borrowed MSS., 100;
    mentioned, 150.

  Martivall, R. de, Bp. of Sarum, 176, 317.

  Marvell, Andrew, 320 _n._

  Mary I, her MS. _Horae_ and inscription, 42;
    another inscription, 43.

  Mary II, 175 _n._, 255.

  Mary, Queen of Scotland, 171 _n._, 266 _n._

  Maskelyne, N. S., M.A., 278.

  Mason, Robert, D.D., bequest, 264.

  Massa, Michael de, 329.

  Massey, Dr. Richard M., donor, 129.

  Massinger, Philip, 231.

  Master, Dr. Robert, donor, 9.

  Mather, Cotton, 304.

  Matthew of Westminster, 289.

  Matthews, Rev. A. H., donor, 210;
    Sub-librarian (?), 342.

  Maunder, --, D.D., 157.

  Maximilian, Emp. of Germany, 331.

  Maximus, Valerius, 8.

  Maynard, Joseph, B.D., donor, 90.

  Mead, Dr. Richard, 142, 184, 340.

  Medici, House of, 182.

  Medici, Mary de, 249, 351.

  Medyltone, Ralph de, 329.

  Meerman, Ger. and John, 238.

  Meetkirk, Prof. Edward, 81.

  Melanchthon, Philip, 245, 246, 253.

  Mendean MSS., 114, 300.

  Mendham, Rev. Joseph, his bequest, 286;
    _Lit. Policy_, cited, 91 _n._

  Mentelin, --, 210.

  Mentz, 318.

  Mericke, John, donor, 25.

  Mexican Antiquities, 246, 325.

  Michael, J., Hebrew books, 272.

  Michaelis, J. D., 320 _n._

  Middlesex MSS., 175.

  Middleton, Viscountess, 164.

  Milan, Ambrosian Library, 47 _n._

  Mill, John, D.D., donor, 125;
    mentioned, 99.

  Mill, W. H., D.D., his MSS., 272.

  Milles, Jeremiah, D.D., his MSS., 268.

  Milton, John, books given by him, 45;
    these, at one time, said to have been thrown out, 46, 160.

  _Missals_, 23, 65, 179, 213, 225, 283.

  Mocket, or Moket, Richard, 36.

  Models, 49, 105, 236, 334, 337, 338.

  Mollineux, --, 134.

  Monasteries, dissolved, 271 _n._

  _Moniteur_, 205.

  Monkhouse, Thomas, M.A., 164.

  Monmouth, Duke of, letters and dying acknowledgment, 173, 323;
    mentioned, 222, _n._, 282.

  Monson, Sir W., cited, 24.

  Montacute, Lord, donor, 17.

  Montagu, Capt. M., bequest, 298.

  Montagu, Richard, Bp. of Norwich, 47.

  Montague, Edward Wortley, 206.

  Montague, George, 36.

  Monteith, Robert, _Hist. of the Troubles_, cited, 75.

  Montfaucon, Bernard, 224.

  _Monthly Review_, 260.

  Moore, --, 340.

  Morant, Philip, M.A., 174.

  Morbeck, W. de, 59.

  More, Hannah, 227.

  More, Sir Thomas, 144 _n._, 187.

  Moreri, L., 94.

  Mores, E. Rowe, 156, 212 _n._, 320 _n._

  Morgan, Edward, M.A., 342.

  Morley, Thomas, 206.

  Morris, John, D.D., founder of the annual Bodley oration, 105.

  Mortara, Count Aless., his library, 225, 279.

  Morwent, Robert, 12.

  Moses Chorenensis, _Hist. Armen._, 128.

  Moses Maimonides, 114, 225.

  Motthe, Georges de la, 326.

  Mountjoy, Blount, Lord, donor, 22.

  Mozarabic Breviary, 280.

  Mueller, A., donor, 228.

  Mueller, Max., M.A., Sub-librarian, 303;
    resigned, 304.

  Mummy, an Egyptian, 105.

  Munich, duplicates from, 276.

  Muris, Joh. de, 76.

  Murr, -- de, _Memorab. Bibl. Norimb._ cited, 230.

  Murray, Dr. Alex., 267.

  Murray, John, 184.

  Musca, --, 9 _n._

  Music, printed books bought, 22;
    from Stat. Hall, 189;
    MSS., 205.

  Musonius, 43.


  NAHUMUS, Jod., _Conc. in Evang._, 80 _n._

  Nairne, David, his papers, 166.

  Nalson, John, LL.D., papers, 153-4.

  Napier, Sir Richard, letter cited, 73.

  Napier, Rev. Richard, 74.

  Napoleon I, portrait, 299;
    medals, 340.

  Nash, Thomas, 301.

  Nassyngton, William of, 177.

  Naunton, Sir R., 47.

  Neal, D., cited, 68.

  Needlework, Life of our Blessed Lord, 51 _n._;
    bindings, 51-53;
    samplers, 53.

  Neile, Rich., Bp. of Cov. and Lichfield, 36.

  Nelson, Robert, 127 _n._

  Nemnivus, 20 _n._

  Neubauer, Dr. A., 272.

  Nevile, Sir H., 48.

  Nevile, Thomas, donor, 48.

  New, E. P., B.D., 236.

  Newcastle, William Cavendish, Marq. of, 216.

  Newcastle, John Holles, Duke of, 180.

  Newey, Thomas, M.A., 106.

  Newington, Kent, parish register, 234.

  Newman, F., 83 _n._

  Newman, G., 36.

  Newman, Henry, papers, 176.

  New South Wales, first printed book, 233.

  Newspapers, 1672-1737, 302.

  Newton, Richard, M.A., 106.

  Newton, Thomas, 87.

  New-Zealand Newspaper, 233 _n._

  Nichols, John, _Progr. of James I_ cited, 48;
    _Lit. Anecd._ cited, 78 _n._, 166 _n._, 200-1, 211 _n._;
    _Lit. Hist._ cited, 188, 211, 214 _n._, 217, 231, 257, 342;
    _Letters of Nicolson_, 187 _n._;
    mentioned, 214, 302.

  Nichols, John Gough, 325 _n._

  Nicoll, Alex., D.D., Sub-librarian, 220;
    mentioned, 65, 95, 199, 215, 233.

  Nicolson, Wm., Archbp. of Cashel, 187 _n._

  Noel, Rev. John, 184.

  Norris, Edwin, 44.

  Norris, John, Janitor, 134 _n._, 189.

  Norfolk Tracts, 280.

  Norkoping, Norway, 241 _n._

  North, Lord, donor, 193-4.

  Northamptonshire MSS., 204.

  Northumberland, Hen. Percy, Earl of, 87.

  Norton, John, 36, 53.

  _Notes and Queries_, 226 _n._, 250 _n._, 254 _n._, 338 _n._

  Nourse, Tim., donor, 124.

  Novello, Vincent, donor, 206.

  Nowell, Alex., Dean of St. Paul's, 336.

  Nugent, Lord, _Mem. of Hampden_, 203 _n._

  Nurigian, Luke, 127.

  Nutt, J. W., M.A., Sub-librarian, 304.


  OCCLEVE, Thomas, or _Hoccleve_, _q. v._

  Ochini, Bern., 331.

  O'Donnell, Magnus, 176.

  Offor, G., 233 _n._

  Ogilvie, James, of Boyn, 222.

  Ogilvie, J., 75.

  O'Grady, Standish H., 176 _n._

  Okeover family, 237.

  Opie, Mrs., 227.

  Oppenheimer, D., Hebrew library, 243.

  Orford, Lord, 212 _n._

  Ormesby, Robert de, 329.

  Ormonde, James, first Duke of, 165, 166.

  Ormonde, James, second Duke of, 175.

  _Ormulum_, 102.

  Osborne, T., bookseller, 216.

  Oseney Abbey, book which belonged to, 176.

  Osorius, Hier., Bishop of Faro, 24.

  Oswen, H., 264.

  Ouigour MS., 115.

  Ouseley, Sir Fred. A. G., Bart., donor, 206;
    MSS. bought from him, 289.

  Ouseley, Sir Gore, his MSS., 289, 290, 332;
    mentioned, 269.

  Ouseley, Sir William, his MSS., 269;
    _Orient. Collect._ cited, 206.

  Ousley, Rev. John, 174.

  Ovid, 20, 179, 252, 300.

  Owen, Humphrey, B.D., elected Librarian, 160;
    death, 192;
    mentioned, 170 _n._, 185, 192.

  Owen, John, D.D., 89.

  Owen, John, 227.

  Owun, 104.

  Oxford, statutes of various colleges, 179;
    the librarians of Cobham's and Duke Humphrey's libraries were
      Chaplains to the Univ., 5;
    almanacks, 211;
    books in the Library printed at Oxford before 1500, 111-2;
    map, 335;
    siege, 240;
    All Souls' Coll. MS. there, 19 _n._;
    Anatomy School, 132, 134, 136, 140;
    Ashmolean Museum, 105, 122, 163, 169 _n._, 189, 203 _n._;
      the Library transferred to the Bodleian, 286-9;
    Balliol Coll. MSS. there, 5;
      proposed catalogue of rare books, 201;
      list of books not in the Bodleian, 203;
    Ch. Ch. MSS. there, 49, 121;
    Corp. Chr. Coll. MS. there, 10;
      the old Univ. money chest there, 4 _n._;
    Divinity School, 5;
    Durham Coll., 4, 20 _n._;
    Exeter Coll., list of books not in Bodleian, 203;
    Hart Hall, 99;
    Jesus Coll., list of books not in Bodleian, 203;
    Magd. Coll. (see _J. R. Bloxam_), spur-royals, 84;
      muniments, 85 _n._;
      first Grammar-master, 112 _n._;
      list of books not in Bodleian, 203;
      catalogue of the library, 203;
      account-books returned to the College, 215;
      statutes refused to be returned, 261;
    Merton Coll., proposed catalogue of rare books, 201;
    Music School, 170 _n._;
    Oriel Coll. MS. there, 10;
      portrait of Bodley, on glass, 45 _n._;
      proposed catalogue of rare books, 201;
      list of books not in Bodleian, 203;
    Queen's Coll. gave some of Junius' papers to the Bodleian, 103 _n._;
      books bequeathed by Barlow, 111, 115;
      duplicates exchanged with Bodleian, 115;
      a person employed in the Library, 201;
      Dr. Mason's bequest, 265;
    Radcliffe Library, 202;
      the room assigned to the Bodleian, 293;
    St. John's Coll., book given by Laud, 53 _n._, and bust of
      Charles I, 61;
    St. Mary's Church, the first Library there, 3, 4;
      west window, 3;
      window of old Convocation House, 4 _n._;
      Fysher, the Librarian, buried in Adam de Brome's chapel, 160;
    Schools' tower, inscription renewed, 147;
    Univ. Coll. MSS. there, 18 _n._, 64 _n._;
      L50 due to the Bodleian from the College, 67;
      account-books returned to the College, 215;
    Wadham Coll., a person employed in the Library, 201;
      Friars Minor, 20 _n._

  Oxford, Rob. Harley, first Earl of, 175.

  Oxford, Edw. Harley, second Earl of, 9, 170 _n._, 184, 216.

  Oxfordshire MSS., 175.


  PACHYMERES, 159.

  Paine, James, donor, 248.

  Palares, Anthony, 303.

  Palmerston, Lord, 319.

  Palmyra, 189.

  Parasceve, S., 324.

  Paris, Mazarine Library, 47 _n._, 202;
    MS. in Bibl. Imp., 115;
    Church of Holy Sepulchre, 180.

  Paris, Rev. Thomas, 39.

  Park, Thomas, 258.

  Parker, John, 170 _n._

  Parker, John Henry, M.A., 214.

  Parker, Joseph, 271.

  Parker, Matthew, Archbp. of Canterbury, _De Antiq. Eccl. Brit._,
      170 _n._;
    _Psalter_, 250;
    mentioned, 19, 24.

  Parker, Samuel, son of the Bishop, 144.

  Parker, Thomas, 144, 192.

  Parkes, Mrs., 245.

  Parliamentary Committee for Augmentation of Livings, 129.

  Parr, Q. Katherine, inscription, 43;
    MS. dedicated to her, 52.

  Parret, --, 11 _n._

  Parsons, Joseph, M.A., donor, 191.

  Parthenius, Patriar. of Constant., 94.

  _Parthenope of Blois_, 178.

  Pate, William, donor, 196 _n._

  Patrick, St., 64.

  Patrick, Symon, Bp. of Ely, 185 _n._

  Patridge, Daniel, 125.

  Paul III., Pope, 283.

  Paulus, H. E. G., 81.

  Payne and Foss, Messrs., 229, 230, 245, 332.

  Peach, John and Samuel, 194.

  Peacock, --, 227.

  Pembroke, Philip Herbert, Earl of, donor, 76.

  Pembroke, William Herbert, Earl of, donor of the Barocci MSS., 54;
    letter to the Vice-Chanc., _ib._;
    gave licence for borrowing the MSS., 51, 54, 79;
    statue of him, given by Thomas, seventh Earl, 148.

  Penton, Stephen, B.D., donor, 124.

  Pepys, Samuel, his MS. papers, 172.

  Percy, Thomas, Bp. of Dromore, 232.

  Periam, William, M.A., 107.

  Perrott, Sir John, letters, 150.

  Perrott, Thomas, D.C.L., donor, 150.

  Persian MSS., 22, 33, 49, 63, 91, 113 _bis_, 199, 208, 215, 228, 240,
    269, 289, 290, 294 _n._

  Persius, 23.

  Peters, Hugh, donor, 88.

  Peters, Rev. William, 209.

  Petit, Sam, MS. Notes on Josephus, 94.

  Petrarch, 8, 298.

  Pett, Peter, LL.B., donor, 76.

  Phaedrus, 298.

  Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, 331.

  Phillips, Sir Thomas, 288.

  Ph[oe]nician Inscription, 162.

  Picus, Joh., 316 _n._

  Pickering, William, sale, 282.

  _Piers Plowman_, 101, 178.

  Pigott, Rev. G., donor, 269.

  Pigouchet, P., 312.

  Pindar, --, Consul at Aleppo, donor, 33.

  Pinelli, Mapheo, 200.

  Pipping, --, 241 _n._

  Pius V, Pope, 283.

  Plato, 8 _n._, 9, 10, 59, 115.

  Playford, John, 206.

  Plays, their admission discouraged by Bodley as a scandal to the
      Library, 66;
    collections purchased, 248.

  Plenus-Amoris, various scribes of this name, 18, 19 _n._

  Pliny, 8, 11, 250, 273, 310.

  Plot, R., _Nat. Hist. of Staff._ cited, 325.

  Plunket, O., R. C. Archbp. of Armagh, 337.

  Pococke, Edward, D.D., his MSS. and printed books, 113, 115, 268, 311;
    mentioned, 78, 199;
    references to MSS., 81.

  Pococke, Rich., Bp. of Meath, _Travels_ cited, 162.

  Pointer, Rev. John, _Oxon. Acad._ cited, 86 _n._, 161.

  Pole, Francis, 184.

  Polish Books, 276.

  Politian, Ang., 273.

  Polsted, Benj., donor, 92.

  Polyander, Dr. John, 178.

  _Pontifical, Salisbury_, 176.

  Pope, Alexander, donor, 158;
    letters, 178, 322;
    mentioned, 232;
    portrait, 336.

  Pope, Sir Thomas, 289.

  _Pore Helpe_, 155.

  Porret, Gilbert, 9 _n._

  Porter, --, M.D., 162.

  Powle, Henry, 184.

  Powney, Richard, LL.D., 164.

  _Prayer, Book of Common_, 237, 248, 264, 282.

  Preme, L. de, 226.

  Prendergast, J. P., 166.

  Prescott, W. H., 319.

  Preston, J., 81.

  Prestwich, --, 67.

  Price, Daniel, Dean of St. Asaph, 178.

  Price, John, B.D., elected Librarian, 192;
    complaint against him, 197;
    death, 217;
    portrait, 336;
    mentioned, 166, 194, 197, 204, 205, 209, 218.

  Price, J. M., M.A., 273.

  Prices of books, 65.

  Prichard, Constantine, Janitor, account of him, 98-9.

  Prideaux, Dr. John, 81.

  Priestley, Dr., 280.

  _Primer, Salisbury_, 296.

  Prince, Daniel, bookseller, 200.

  Prince, Mrs. Mary, donor, 148.

  Printers, clerical, 259-60.

  Prior, Matthew, 175.

  Proclus, 59.

  Prudentius, 23.

  Purcell, Henry, 205, 206.

  Purefoy, Humphrey and Thomas, 56.

  Pusey, Edward B., D.D., 82 _n._, 278;
    _Catal._, 65, 199, 225, 233.

  Puttick and Simpson, Messrs., 245.

  Pybrac, Sieur de, 49.

  Pyne, Rev. T., 210.

  Pynson, Richard, 312.


  _QUARTERLY REVIEW_ cited, 257 _n._

  Queensberry, Duke of, 164.

  Quignones, Cardinal, 284.

  Quivil, Peter, Bp. of Exeter, 317.


  RADCLIFFE, Joseph, 164.

  Radzivil, Prince N., 229.

  Raffaelle, 251, 334.

  Raleigh, Sir Walter, donor, 24.

  Ramsey, John, 316.

  Randolph, John, D.D., 198.

  Ranshoven, Bible which belonged to the church, 224.

  Rassam, Hormuzd, donor, 335.

  Ratelband, --, bookseller at Amsterdam, 92.

  Ravius, Constantine, 92.

  Rawlins, T., Pophills, 168 _n._, 173 _n._, 174 _n._

  Rawlinson, Richard, D.C.L., account of him, 168-9;
    his printed books, 170, 171, 183;
    MSS., 172-182, 216, 217;
    coins, seals, &c., 182, 183;
    some of his portraits, 336, 337;
    references to MSS., 19 _n._, 28, 38, 53, 77 _n._, 117 _n._, 126, 128
      _n._, 154 _n._, 155 _n._, 157 _n._, 160 _n._, 165 _n._, 216, 234,
      252, 261, 271, 322, 323, 325, 328, 335;
    book-plate, 3;
    _Continuation of Wood's Athenae_, cited, 130;
    _History of Hereford_, 120;
    endeavoured to compile a list of the annual Bodley Orators, 106.

  Rawlinson, Sir Thomas, 168.

  Rawlinson, Thomas, his son, 169, 170 _n._, 178, 184.

  Ray, William, donor, 24.

  Reade, William, 58.

  Reader, W., 298.

  Reay, Stephen, B.D., Sub-librarian, 242;
    resignation and death, 293;
    mentioned, 163, 286.

  Rebenstein, A., 275 _n._

  Record Commission, _Report_ for 1800 cited, 151, 167, 177, 185, 205;
    for 1837, 96;
    _Eighth Report of Dep.-Keeper of Records_, 170 _n._

  Red-letter books, 171 _n._

  Reggio, J. S., 280.

  Renouard, --, 242.

  Reynolds, Edward, D.D., 45 _n._

  Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 248.

  Richards, --, 164.

  Richmond, Margaret, Countess of, 105.

  Richmond, George, 337.

  Ridley, Thomas, 36.

  Rigaud, Lt.-col. Gibbes, donor, 33, 319, 338.

  Rigaud, John, B.D., donor, 303.

  Rigaud, Prof. S. P., M.A., 195.

  Rivers, Richard, Lord, 19.

  Rives, George, Warden of New College, donor, 22.

  Roberts, --, 340.

  Roberts, B. and E., 271.

  Roberts, J. P., M.A., 235, 239.

  Roberts, Lewis, donor, 51.

  Robertson, Prof. A., 194.

  Robertson, Rev. F. W., 297.

  Robins, George, 267.

  Robinson, --, clock-maker, Gracechurch-street, 182 _n._

  Robinson, John, Bp. of London, MS. papers, 175.

  Robson, Charles, B.D., donor, 56, 92.

  Roch, Thomas, Janitor, 88.

  Rochester, Henry Hyde, Earl of, 163, 164.

  Rock, Dr., _Church of our Fathers_, cited, 29.

  Rodd, Thomas, 258.

  Roe, Sir Thomas, his gift of MSS., 49, 50-51;
    sanctioned the lending of his books, 51, 79.

  Roger of Hereford, 58.

  Rogers, Samuel, M.A., 342.

  Roillet, Nicholas, 283

  Rolin, Cardinal John, 310.

  Rolle, R., of Hampole, 101, 177, 178.

  Rollright, Oxon, glass from the church, 30.

  Rome, reports from agents, 177;
    Rocca Library, 47 _n._

  Rood, Theodore, printer in Oxford, 112.

  Rosamond, Fair, her coffin, 30 _n._

  Ross, Alexander, donor, 91.

  Ross, John, _Hist. Angl._, 120, 138, 141.

  Rosse, John, 141.

  Rossingham, Captain, 77 _n._

  Rouceby, Walter de, 328.

  Rous, John, M.A., elected Librarian, 44;
    applies to Milton for his _Poems_, 45;
    reception of King James' _Works_, 48;
    hinders the breaking open of Bodley's chest, 45 _n._;
    appendix to catalogue, 60;
    complains of the neglect of the Stationers' Company, 31;
    refuses to lend a book to the king, 72;
    death, 76;
    legacy, _ibid._;
    mentioned, 56, 309.

  Routh, M. J., D.D., his printed library bequeathed to Durham, 4 _n._;
    sale of his MSS., 141 _n._;
    donor, 237;
    mentioned, 252;
    portrait, 337.

  Rowell, G. A., 309 _n._

  Roxburghe sale, 42 _n._

  Rubens, Sir P. P., 148.

  Runic alphabets, 20 _n._;
    almanacks, 105, 161.

  Rupert, Prince, letters, 154.

  Rushworth, John, donor, 104;
    cited, 31.

  Russel, Rev. Bertrand, donor, 205.

  Russell, Charles, D.D., President of Maynooth, 166.

  Russian books, 19, 22, 25 _bis_, 55, 63, 105, 107;
    cloak, 40, 307.

  Ruthin School, 157.

  Ryley, William, 174.

  Rymer, Thomas, 320 _n._

  Ryser, Jeorius, 65.


  S. W., bell-founder, 33.

  Saadiah, Rabbi, 82 _n._

  _Sacramentaria_, 262, 290.

  Sadler, Anne, wife of Ralph, donor, 333.

  Sadlington, Michael, M.A., 107.

  Saibante, Giovanni, 226, 230.

  St. Amand, James, his bequest, 185;
    _Catalogue_, 216.

  St. Amand, George and Martha, 185 _n._

  St. Bridget, Adam, 314.

  St. George, Sir Richard, 174.

  St. George, Sir Thomas, 174, 184.

  Sale, George, MSS., 294 _n._

  Salisbury, books which belonged to the Cathedral, 176.

  Salt, W., 303.

  Samaritan MSS., 107, 113, 126, 296.

  Sancroft, Archbp., mentioned, 125;
    his papers, 153-4.

  Sandford, Oxon, Chartulary, 110.

  Sandwich, Earl of, 166.

  Sandys, Lady K., donor, 28.

  Sanford, Jos., B.D., donor, 170 _n._

  Sanscrit MSS., 93 (the first);
    265, 269, 272, 291, 294 _n._, 323.

  Saona, Gul. de, 298.

  Sarpi, Paolo, 207.

  Saumarez, Sir James, 218.

  Savile, Sir H., donor, 19;
    mentioned, 82 _n._, 251.

  Saxon, --, 245.

  Say, William, 7 _n._

  Scarborough, Sir Charles, his auction, 115.

  Schelging, Samuel, 241 _n._

  Schneider, --, 283.

  Schoenleben, Conrad, 230.

  Schoiffer, Peter, see _Fust_, 310.

  Schoensperger, Hans, 310, 312.

  Schultens, H. A., 199, 320 _n._

  Schweighaeuser, Joh., 320 _n._

  Scotland, letters of Scottish bishops, 154, 237;
    Hooke's correspondence, 222.

  Scott, G. C. and R. A., Italian books, 271.

  Scott, G. G., 235, 284.

  Scott, Capt. Jon., 206.

  Scott, Thomas, first janitor? 88.

  Scott, Sir W., 227, 258.

  Scott, Will., Lord Stowell, 196.

  Scrope, Rich., D.D., 164.

  Seal, or 'sea-elephant,' a, bought, 104.

  Sebastian, St., 332.

  Secker, Thomas, Archbp. of Cant., 199.

  Secretan, C. F., M.A., _Life of Nelson_, cited, 127 _n._

  Seffrid, Bp. of Chichester, 314.

  Selden, John, his library, 77-87;
    death-bed, 77 _n._;
    book in his collection which belonged to Anne Boleyn, 27 _n._;
    some MSS. burnt at the Temple, 86;
    some of his books at Lincoln's Inn and Coll. of Physicians, _ib._;
    books placed at west end of Library, 60;
    references to books and MSS., 55, 111, 239 _n._, 243, 246, 320;
    gave an Arabic astrolabe to Laud, 61;
    his house broken into by robbers, 83;
    mentioned, 50, 51, 139;
    portraits, 336.

  Seligmann, Isaac, 243.

  Selwyn, G. A., Bp. of Lichfield, 319.

  Sermons, collections of, 273, 276.

  Servetus, Michael, 247.

  Sever, Henry, 316.

  Seward, Miss, _Anecdotes_, cited, 110 _n._, 203 _n._

  Seymour, Jane, Q. consort of Henry VIII, 334.

  Sforza, Bona, 249.

  Shakespeare, W., the first Folio, 41;
    _Venus and Adonis_, and other poems, 67, 247;
    editions of single plays, &c., 231, 248, 258;
    his autograph, 300-302.

  Sharp, John, Archbp. of York, 127.

  Sharpe, Dr. Gregory, 294 _n._

  Shaw, Henry, _Illuminated Ornaments_, cited, 250, 330 _bis_.

  Shaw, Thomas, D.D., donor, 163.

  Sheldon, Archbp. Gilbert, mentioned, 97;
    Papers, 155 _n._, 237;
    his family Bible, 237.

  Sheldon, William, 212 _n._

  Sherfiddin Iahia ben Almocar, 114.

  Shirley, W. W., D.D., 90.

  Shirman, Henry, M.A., 107.

  Shotover, near Oxford, 29 _n._

  Shropshire MSS., &c., 163, 263-4.

  Shuckbridge, Grace, 131.

  Siamese Prince, 319.

  Sichardus, Joh., 17 _n._

  Siddons, Mrs. 232.

  Sigismund I of Poland, 249.

  Silk, books printed on, 170 _n._

  Simeon, Sir John, 101.

  Simon, Thomas, 340 _n._

  Skeat, W. W., M.A., 101 _n._

  Simonides, Dr. Const., 199 _n._, 280-1.

  Skillerne, Richard S., M.A., 202.

  Slack, Samuel, M.A., 219.

  Sloane, Sir Hans, donor, 120.

  Slythers, --, 11 _n._

  Smalridge, George, Bp. of Bristol, 149.

  Smith, --, 42 _n._

  Smith, Edmund, M.A., MS. of his Bodley Speech, 106.

  Smith, Miles, Bp. of Gloucester, 82 _n._

  Smith, Richard, 141.

  Smith, R. Payne, D.D., mentioned, 65, 189, 296, 300;
    Sub-librarian, 286, 293;
    Regius Professor of Divinity, 303.

  Smith, Thomas, D.D., his MSS., 55, 152-3, 178, 180;
    _Vita Bernardi_, cited, 94, 114, 116.

  Smith, Thomas, 67.

  Smith, William, M.A., donor, 150.

  Smyth, Edward, account of a Russian cloak, 307.

  Smyth, Miles, 237.

  Smythe, Thomas, 19.

  Snetesham, John, D.D., 315.

  Sneyd, Rev. Walter, 226.

  Snoshill, William, grand-nephew to Bodley, petition to University, 39.

  Solly, --, 245.

  Somers, John, Lord, 172, 184.

  Somerset, Duke of, 256.

  Sonibanck, John, 120.

  Sophia, Electress of Hanover, 175.

  Sotheby and Wilkinson, Messrs., 297, 300.

  Sotheby, Samuel Leigh, cited, 45, 246, 281, 321;
    mentioned, 268, 273, 276.

  South, Professor John, 81.

  South, Robert, D.D., bequest, 143.

  Southampton, Jane Wriothesley, Countess of, book which belonged to
      her, 43;
    her daughters, 44.

  Southwell, Sir Robert, 173 _n._

  Spanish books, 76, 225, 238, 253.

  Sparchiford, Archdeacon Richard, 316 _n._

  Sparke, Thomas, M.A., 106.

  Spelman, Sir Henry, 184.

  Spencer, Earl, 251.

  Spencer, or Spicer, --, 67.

  Spencer, Sir Richard, donor, 177 _n._

  Spenser, John, 36.

  Spinckes, Bp. Nath., 177, 184.

  Sprat, Thomas, Bp. of Rochester, 173.

  Stacpoole, C. P., 311.

  Standish, Dr., 11 _n._

  Standish, John, 36.

  Stanhope, Lady Hester, donor, 229.

  Stanley, Edward, donor, 196.

  Stapiltone, Sir Miles de, 329.

  Stark, J. M., 286.

  Stationers' Company, grant to the Library of all books printed by
      them, 30;
    negligent in performance, 31, 41, 73;
    plate given them by Bodley, 32;
    first book given by them, 32;
    ordinance for supply of books to the Library, 34;
    payment from the Library to the Bedel of the Company, 40;
    Statutes for delivery of books, 92;
    books claimed personally by Hyde, 110;
    first Copy-right Act, 128;
    last Copy-right Act, 254;
    increased receipt of books, 218.

  Statius, 179.

  Steinschneider, Dr. M., 243, 244, 272.

  Steele, --, 120 _n._

  Stephanus, Robert, 320.

  Stephen, King of England, 185.

  Stephen, a Greek scribe, 208.

  Stevens, Henry, 232, 272.

  Stevenson, Rev. Joseph, 18 _n._, 105.

  Stewart, C. J., 112, 143.

  Stillingfleet, E., Bp. of Worc., 9, 124.

  St[=o]chs, George, 310.

  Stoke, Abbot John, 313.

  Stow Wood, near Oxford, 29 _n._

  Strafford, Thomas, third Earl of, 175.

  Strange, John, 202.

  Strange, Sir Thomas, 319.

  Strangwayes, Giles, 19.

  Strickland, H. E., M.A., 277.

  Strode, William, M.A., 55.

  Strype, John, M.A., 170 _n._

  Stubbe, H., M.A., Sub-librarian, 88, 89.

  Stukeley, William, M.D., 57.

  Suidas, 226.

  Summers, Prof., 284.

  Summerset, John, M.D., 8 _n._

  Sunderlin, Lord, donor of Malone collection, 231.

  Sunningwell, Berks, 109.

  Sussex, Duke of, his sale, 97, 321.

  Sutherland, Alexander H., 255, 258;
    portrait, 336.

  Sutherland, Mrs., illustrated Clarendon and Burnet, 254-258.

  Sutterton, Lincolnshire, churchwarden's accounts, 177.

  Sutton, Sir Robert, 143.

  Swallow, Joseph, B.A., 147.

  Swedenborg, Emmanuel, donor, 189.

  Sweynheym and Pannartz, 210, 232, 273.

  Swinton, John, D.D., _Inscr. Citieae_ cited, 162.

  Sydenham, Sir Philip, 136.

  Symonds, --, 11 _n._

  Symonds, Henry, M.A., 251, 266.

  Syriac MSS., 56, 63, 91, 107, 114, 296, 300, 326.


  TALBOT, William, Bp. of Oxford, 116.

  Talman, J., 333.

  Talmud, 244.

  Tamil MSS., 296.

  Tanner, Thomas. Bp. of St. Asaph, his printed books and MSS., 153-156;
    mentioned, 104, 106, 142, 190;
    references to his books, 81.

  Tartar MSS., 115, 208.

  Tasso, Torquato, 336.

  Tattam, Archdeacon, 150.

  Taunton, J. B., M.A., 266, 270.

  Taylor, Joseph, LL.D., donor, 92, 107.

  Taylor, Richard, 231.

  Telugu MSS., 319, 326.

  Tenison, Thomas, Archbp. of Canterbury, 173 _n._

  Tennyson, Alfred, 319.

  Terence, 230;
    _Vulgaria abs Terentio_, 112, 303.

  Terry, Thomas, M.A., 106.

  Teukesbury, John de, 316.

  Te Water, J. W., 236.

  Thame School, 180.

  Theocritus, 186.

  Thomas of Newmarket, 58.

  Thomas, E., 197.

  Thomas, John, Bp. of Winch., 132 _n._

  Thomas, John, M.A., 200.

  Thomas, Vaughan, B.D., 337.

  Thomson, --, 337.

  Thomson, Thomas, 303.

  Thoresby, Ralph, 187 _n._

  Thorkelin, G. T., 242 _n._

  Thorpe, Benjamin, 102.

  Thorpe, Thomas, 286.

  Thurland, Francis, M.A., 219, 221.

  Thurland. F. E., M.A., 266.

  Thurloe, John, his State papers, 172.

  Thurston, William, donor of Oriental MSS., 91;
    reference to a MS., 56.

  Thwaites, Edward, donor, 333.

  Tibetan MSS., 208.

  Tickell, Rev. J., donor, 222.

  Tigernach, 175.

  Tippoo Sahib, 208.

  Tischendorf, Dr., 64, 282.

  Tomson, L., 52.

  Tonga dialect, books in the, 276.

  Tonstall, C., Bishop of Durham, 239.

  Torcy, M. de, 222.

  Torelli, Joseph, 201.

  Torinus, God., 312.

  Tour, Archd. de la, 245.

  Toynbee, Thomas, M.A., 156, 158.

  Tradescant, John, 309 _n._

  Treacher, J., M.A., 297 _n._

  Trefusis, John, donor, 324.

  Trent, Council of, 286.

  Trott, Nicholas, _Clavis Ling. Sanctae_, 108.

  Turck, John, 183 _n._

  Turkish MSS., 63, 125, 207.

  Turner, Dawson, sale, 280, 290.

  Turner, Francis, Bishop of Ely, 173 _n._, 174;
    papers, 176, 178.

  Turner, Dr. Peter, 55.

  Turner, Capt. Samuel, MSS., 208.

  Turner, Thomas, Dean of Canterbury, papers, 176, 178.

  Turner, William, 73.

  Twells, Rev. L., 78 _n._

  Twine, Thomas, M.D., donor, 34.

  Twyne, Brian, MS. of _Univ. Musterings_, 187;
    cited, 37 _n._, 70, 80, 307.

  Tyndale, W., 239, 248.

  Tyrrell, James, donor, 125.

  Tyrwhitt, Thomas, 196.


  UFFENBACH, Z. C., _Commerc. Epistol._ cited, 120, 130, 144, 145.

  _Ulster, Annals of_, 175.

  Upcott, W., 299.

  Uri, John, account of him, 199;
    _Catal._ mentioned, 65;
    cited, 114;
    autograph, 320 _n._

  Usher, Archbp., MSS., 125, 151, 176, 318;
    cited, 54;
    portrait, 336;
    absolved Selden on his death-bed, 77 _n._;
    mentioned, 90, 102.

  Utrecht, Treaty of, papers, 175.

  Utterson, E. V., sale, 112, 321.


  VALENTIN, Robert, 296.

  Vambery, A., 115.

  Vandyck, Sir Anthony, 196, 336.

  Vansittart, N., M.P., 223.

  Vansittart, Robert, D.C.L., 198.

  Vaughan, H. H., M.A., 277.

  Vaughan, P., Warden of Merton, donor, 223.

  Vaux, W. S., 340.

  Ven, --, a Dane, 68.

  Venice, reports of ambassadors, 177.

  Verard, Anthony, 310, 312.

  Verneuil, John, M.A., Sub-librarian, 73-4, 341;
    donor, 341;
    _Nomenclator_, 31, 67, 73, 130;
    Cat. of Commentators on Holy Script., 60.

  Vernon, Col. Edw., donor of the Vernon MS., 101.

  Vertue, George, 182.

  Vetericastro, S. de, 310.

  Victoria, Her Majesty Queen, donor, 264;
    her visits to the Library, 319.

  Vidoveus, Petr., 311.

  Villemarque, T. de la, cited, 20 _n._

  Vincent, William, D.D., 262.

  Viner, Charles, 294 _n._

  Viner, Sir Robert, donor, 107.

  Virgil, 179, 232, 233, 252;
    _Sortes Virgilianae_ tried by Charles I, 70.

  Virgil, Polydore, 10, 11.

  Vivian, William, M.D., 198.

  Vossius, Isaac, 129, 178, 207, 327.

  Vostre, Simon, 311, 312.


  WAKE, Edward, M.A., 106

  Wake, Sir Isaac, cited, 15, 16, 27.

  Wake, William, Archbp. of Canterbury, papers, 121, 174.

  Walden, Thomas, _Fascic. Zizan._, 90.

  Wales, Albert Edw., Prince of, 304, 319.

  Walker, Gen. Alex, his MSS., 269, 270.

  Walker, Endymion, 167.

  Walker, John, D.D., his MSS., 167;
    William, his son, 167.

  Walker, Rev. John, M.A., _Letters by Em. Persons_, cited, 59, 69, 106,
      116, 121, 123, 125 bis, 127 _n._, 130 _n._, 138, 139, 142, 144,
      155 _n._, 186 _n._, 187;
    _Oxoniana_, cited, 120.

  Walker, John, M.A., _another_, 229, 235.

  Walker, Robert Fr., M.A., 210.

  Walker, Sir William, 270.

  Wall, H., M.A., 277.

  Wallingford, Richard, 58.

  Wallis, John, D.D., 90, 251.

  Wallis, J., M.A., 123.

  Walpole, Horace, _Anecdotes of Painting_, cited, 30;
    _R. and N. Authors_, 258.

  Walters, Rev. John, 197.

  Walters, J., B.A., Sub-librarian, 196-7.

  Walton, Brian, Bp. of Chester, 95.

  Wanley, Humphrey, cited, 9, 20 _n._, 24, 90, 100;
    employed in the Library, 116;
    donor, 116 _n._;
    selected books from Bernard's library, 117;
    dispute with Hyde thereon, _ib._;
    Hyde desires Wanley to succeed him as Librarian, 118;
    portrait, 336.

  Warcupp, Sir Edmund, 178, 187.

  Ware, Sir James, 184.

  Warham, Archbp., 313.

  Waring, George, M.A., 105.

  Warneford, --, 160.

  Warton, Thomas, B.D., _Hist. of Eng. Poet._, cited, 18, 20, 46, 81,
      156 _n._, 188 _n._;
    _Life of Sir T. Pope_, cited, 331 _n._

  Wason, Abbot Thomas, 315.

  Waterson, Simon, 36.

  Watson, --, 11 _n._

  Watson, James, 248.

  Watson, Thomas, 206.

  Waynflete, Bp. William, 112 _n._

  Weelkes, Thomas, 206.

  Weever, John, 250 _n._

  Welles, --, 317.

  Wellesley, Henry, D.D., 225, 279, 285, 296, 333.

  Wellington, Duke of, 319.

  Welwood, J., M.D., _Memoirs_ cited, 70.

  Wentworth, St. Ex., M.A., 251.

  Werden, Major-General, 185 _n._

  Werfrith, Bp. of Worcester, 100.

  Wesley, Charles, admitted as a reader, 152, 320 _n._

  Wesley, Samuel, Mus. Doc., 206.

  West, James, 212 _n._

  West, Rev. W., 179.

  Westminster Abbey, 179.

  Westmoreland, Earl of, 336.

  Westphalia, J. de, 303.

  Westphaling, Herbert, Bp. of Hereford, donor, 19.

  Westwood, Professor J., 105, 327.

  Wettersten, P., 241 _n._

  Wey, William, 329.

  Whale caught in the Severn, 104.

  Whalley, Peter, donor, 88.

  Whalley, Peter, B.A., 204.

  Wharton, Henry, M.A., 153 _n._, 240, 322 _n._

  Wharton, Philip, Lord, 166, 178.

  Wheatly, Charles, M.A., 144.

  Whethamstede, John de, 8.

  Whetstone, George, 231.

  Whiston, William, M.A., donor, 141;
    mentioned, 149, 184, 320 _n._

  Whitchurch, E., 282.

  White, --, 341.

  White, Messrs., Appleton, 33.

  White, Edward, 36.

  White, John, M.A., 107.

  White, Joseph, D.D., 206, 208;
    portrait, 209.

  White, Peter, 9.

  White, R. M., D.D., 102.

  Whiting, Thomas, B.A., 197.

  _Whole duty of Man_, author of, MS. of _Decay of Piety_, 125.

  Whorwood, Robert, 322.

  Whytt, --, Librarian, 11.

  Wi[=e]b, W. de, 317.

  Wickliffe, John, 10, 90, 96, 252.

  Wick-Risington, Gloucestershire, 58.

  Wiggan, George, M.A., 107.

  Wight, Osborne, M.A., bequest, 205.

  Wigmore, Henry, 37.

  Wilbye, John, 206.

  Wild, Henry, the learned Norwich tailor, 142.

  Wildgoose, --, painter, 138.

  Wilkie, Sir D., 319.

  Wilkins, David, D.D., 78.

  Wilkinson, John, D.D., 84.

  Wilkinson, Rev. Thomas, MS. Pedigrees, 174.

  William III, 255.

  William, King of Scotland, Homage to Henry II, 30.

  Williams, Dr., St. John's College, Cambridge, 153, 154.

  Williams, Charles, D.D., Donor, 197.

  Williams, George, B.D., 329.

  Williams, John, Bp. of Lincoln, applies to borrow a book, but is
      refused, 50;
    _Funeral Sermon on James I_, 51.

  Williams, Sir John, 271.

  Williams, John, B.A., 157 _n._

  Williams, Rev. John, _Welsh Grammar_ cited, 20 _n._

  Williams, Moses, B.A., 157.

  Williams, Zach., 188.

  Willis and Sotheran, Messrs., 245.

  Willis, Browne, Letters to Owen, 160 _n._;
    Bequest of MSS. and coins, 190-1, 340.

  Willis, Thomas, M.D., 191.

  Wilson, D., Bp. of Calcutta, Portrait, 337;
    donor, 338.

  Wilson, H. H., M.A., his MSS., 265.

  Wilson, Lea, 233 _n._

  Wilson, Ralph, 147.

  Wilson, Thomas, Bp. of Sodor and Man, 289.

  Wilson, Thomas, 258.

  Wiltshire, MS. collections, 154 _n._

  Winbolt, Thomas, B.A., 158.

  Winchelsea, Heneage Finch, Earl of, 94.

  Windsor, Dean and Chapter of, donors, 34.

  Wingfield family, 214.

  Winwood, Sir Ralph, donor, 25.

  Wise, Francis, M.A., Sub-librarian, 146;
    defeated in election for Librarian, 151;
    mentioned, 160, 294 _n._;
    catalogue of Coins, 340.

  Wodecherche, Will. de, 317.

  Wolf, Jo. Christopher, 95.

  Wolfe, Reginald, 87.

  Wood, Antony a, bequest, 89;
    MSS. bought from him, 110;
    a MS. given by Ballard, 187;
    his Library, 287-8;
    MS. of his _History_, 270;
    illustrated copy of Gutch's translation of his _History_, 30;
    Rawlinson's Contin. of the _Athenae_, 181;
    Malone's copy of the _Athenae_, 232;
    Dr. Bliss's copy of the _Athenae_, 289;
    cited, 10, 17, 25, 41, 44, 45, 48, 79, 83 _n._, 85, 86 _n._, 106,
      110, 159, 201;
    _Life_, 192 _n._;
    mentioned, 289, 322.

  Wood, Robert, 189.

  Woodcock, John, M.A., 210.

  Worcester Cathedral, 179;
    MSS. from thence, 100, 103.

  Worde, Wynkyn de, 155, 183, 239.

  Wordsworth, Dr. Christopher, cited, 53 _n._

  Wordsworth, Will., 227.

  Wotton, Sir Henry, donor, 25, 58.

  Wren, Sir Christopher, 119, 251.

  Wright, --, 12.

  Wright, Abraham, B.A., _Delitiae Delitiarum_, 65.

  Wright, Francis, 67.

  Wuertzburg, books 'e Coll. Herbip.' 61, 65.

  Wyat, Sir Thomas, 336.

  Wyatt, Thomas, 330.

  Wyatt, William, M.A., 128.

  Wyberd, John, 68.

  Wyngaerde, Ant. van den, 255.

  Wyrley, William, 174.


  XIMENES, Cardinal, 280, 298.

  Xiphilinus, 320.


  YARNTON, Oxon, 30 _n._

  Yonge, Francis, M.A., Sub-librarian, 74;
    death, 89.

  Yonge, Nicholas, 206

  York Minster, 30;
    Tower of St. Mary, 96;
    Museum, 212 _n._

  Yorke, Sir Joseph, 199.

  Young, Edward, D.D., 178.

  Young, Patrick, 48, 51, 55, 61, 83;
    donor, 325.

  Yriarte, --, 253.


  ZAMBONI, J. J., 178.

  Zell, Ulric, 210.

  Zend MSS., 149, 191, 269.

  Zernichaus, Adam, 143.

  Zeuss, J. C., _Grammat. Celtica_ cited, 20 _n._

  Zoroaster, 149, 159.

  Zunz, Dr. L., 272.




ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA.


P. 3, l. 9. [The University Seal is engraved in Ingram's _Memorials of
Oxf._, iii. 17, where it is said to be '_c._ A.D. 1200.']

P. 15, _note_ 2 [=Footnote 20]. [The University Arms are engraved in
Ingram's _Memorials_, iii. 1, from the painted glass in the great east
window of the Library. In this representation three mottos are given:
_Dominus_, &c., on a scroll above, _Sapientia et Faelicitate_ on the
Book, and _Bonitas regnabit, Veritas liberabit_, on a scroll below.]

P. 50, l. 1. _for_ William _read_ Williams.

P. 50, l. 2 from bottom. _for_ ignoit _read_ ignotis.

P. 81, l. 19 (=Footnote [114]). _for_ Wharton _read_ Warton.

P. 93, l. 6 from bottom. _for_ Kerr _read_ Ken. Gentoo, _add_ [_i.e._
Sanscrit.] [See p. 265, _note_.]

P. 115, l. 5. _for_ M. Vainbery ... to form _read_ M. Va['m]bery, the
traveller in Tartary, who is engaged in forming.

P. 129, l. 6. _for_ one volume of Index _read_ one earlier volume
containing a list of livings in the diocese of Norwich, with their
values and incumbents.

P. 156, l. 14. _for_ third Catalogue _read_ fourth Catalogue.

P. 187, _note_ (=Footnote [255]). _Dele_ comma after _White_.

P. 230, _Codex Ebn._ [A facsimile, from the commencement of St. Luke,
with a notice of the MS., is given in Shaw's _Illuminated Ornaments_.]

                               OXFORD:

  BY T. COMBE, M.A., E. B. GARDNER, E. P. HALL, AND H. LATHAM, M.A.

                     PRINTERS TO THE UNIVERSITY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Minor punctuation and format changes have been made without special
comment here.

Variant spellings (and some apparent typographical errors) have
generally been retained (e.g. "caligraphy" for "calligraphy") and
especially in quoted documents. Where changes to the text have been made
these are listed as follows:

Page 23: added left single quote (described in the 'Registrum
Benefactorum')

Page 131: changed comma to right parenthesis "(as his solitary claim to
a place in the _Athenae_)"

Page 136: changed "exspected" to "expected" (he was not one of those
good men I expected)

Page 141: changed "2/3" (two-thirds) to footnote anchor.

Page 253: changed "Abury" to "Avebury" (Accounts of Avebury and
Stonehenge, ...)

Pge 314: changed semi-colon to comma in "(given by Hugh, Archd. of
Taunton), ..."

Footnote [374]: added missing close single quote mark (John Macbride,
'ex Coll. Exon.')

Addenda et Corrigenda: changed "P. 1" to "P. 3" (P. 1, l. 9. [The
University Seal ...)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Annals of the Bodleian Library,
Oxford, A.D. 1598-A.D. 1867, by William Dunn Macray

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNALS OF THE BODLEIAN ***

***** This file should be named 38317.txt or 38317.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/3/1/38317/

Produced by Simon Gardner, Adrian Mastronardi and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
