The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ancient Phonetic Alphabet of Yucatan, by
Daniel G. Brinton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Ancient Phonetic Alphabet of Yucatan

Author: Daniel G. Brinton

Release Date: December 20, 2011 [EBook #38352]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT PHONETIC ALPHABET--YUCATAN ***




Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





Transcriber's Note

A number of typographical errors have been maintained in this version
of this book. They have been marked with a [TN-#], which refers to a
description in the complete list found at the end of the text.



  THE

  Ancient Phonetic Alphabet

  OF

  YUCATAN.

  BY D. G. BRINTON, M. D.

  [Illustration]

  New York:

  J. SABIN & SONS, No. 84 NASSAU STREET.
  1870.




[Illustration]

THE

ANCIENT PHONETIC ALPHABET

OF

YUCATAN.


Most readers are quite familiar with the fact that a well-developed
method of picture writing, or "didactic painting," as it has been
appropriately named, prevailed through Mexico and Central America for
centuries before the conquest. But that, in the latter country, there
was a true phonetic alphabet, is one of the more recent discoveries of
American archaeology, and certainly one of the most interesting, as it
promises to restore to us the records of the most cultivated nation of
ancient America for a number of centuries previous to the advent of the
white man.

It is well-known that the forests of Yucatan conceal the ruins of cities
and palaces built of stones covered with inscribed characters. All
travelers who had seen these characters were convinced that they were
intended to perpetuate ideas, but the key seemed to be irrevocably lost.
Fortunately, within the last few years (to be exact, in December, 1863),
a diligent antiquarian, the Abbe Brasseur de Bourbourg, unearthed in a
library in Madrid--that of the Royal Academy of History--a copy of an
unpublished description of Yucatan composed by Diego de Landa, the first
bishop of the country. In this was contained the phonetic alphabet
employed by the aboriginal Mayas, with a tolerably full, but an
intolerably obscure, explanation of their mode of using it. As De
Landa's words are so important, and also not a little difficult to
comprehend, we cannot do better than transcribe them exactly as they
appear in the copy of his work published at Paris, in 1864.

He premises his remarks by saying that the natives used certain
characters or letters with which they wrote in books their ancient
histories and sciences, and by means of these letters, and figures, and
certain signs in the figures, they could understand and teach from these
manuscripts. The missionaries found very many of them, all of which, the
good bishop informs us, proved on examination to contain more lies and
superstitions, and were consequently burned, which pained the natives in
the most marvelous manner (lo qual a maravilla sentian, y les dava
pena).

He then continues:--

     "De sus letras porne aqui un _a_, _b_, _c_, que no permite su
     pesadumbre mas, porque usan para todas las aspiraciones de las
     letras de un caracter, y despues, al puntar de las partes otro, y
     assi viene a hazer _in infinitum_, como se podra ver en el
     siguiente exemplo. _Le_ quiere dezir laco y cacar con el; para
     escrivirle con sus caracteres, haviendolos nosotros hecho entender
     que son dos letras, lo escrivian ellos con tres, poniendo a la
     aspiracion de la _l_ la vocal _e_, que antes de si trae, y en esto
     no hierran, aunque usense, si quisieron ellos de su curiosidad.
     Exemplo:--

[Illustration]

     Despues al cabo le pegan la parte junta. _Ha_ que quiere dezir
     agua, porque la _hache_ tiene _a_, _h_, antes de si la ponen ellos
     al principio con _a_, y al cabo desta  manera:--

[Illustration]

     Tambien lo escriben a partes, pero de la una y otra manera, yo no
     pusiera aqui ni tretara dello sino por dar cuenta entera de las
     cosas desta gente. _Ma in kati_ quiere decir no quiero, ellos lo
     escriben a partes desta  manera:--

[Illustration]

This is all on the subject the bishop vouchsafes us. Let us now attempt
a free translation of his words, premising that they are so obscure in
parts, and the composition so careless and provincial, that we shall not
take it at all amiss if any reader thinks he can improve our rendering:

"Of their letters, I shall place here an A, B, C, their clumsiness not
allowing more; for they employ one character for all the aspirations of
the letters, and another to denote their repetitions, and so they go on
_in infinitum_, as one may see in the following example: _Le_ means a
lasso and to hunt with one. In order to write with their characters,
although we told them it contains but two letters, they make use of
three, giving to the aspiration of the _l_ the vowel _e_, which is
before it, and in this they are not in error, if they wish to write it
in their curious manner. Example:

  e  l  e  le

Afterwards they put at the end the part which is joined. Again in _ha_,
which means water, because the letter _h_ contains the sounds a, h, they
place the _a_ both at the beginning and at the end, in this manner:--

  a  h  a

They can write it either with separate letters or united together. I
would not have inserted nor have mentioned this but that I wished to
give a complete description of this people. _Ma in kati_ means _I do not
wish_; they write it in separate letters in this way:--

  ma  i  n  ka  ti ."

From these valuable though too scanty hints we learn that the letters
were employed connected together in a manner somewhat analogous to,
though more intimately than our cursive shrift, and also separately,
as in the Roman alphabet. When the latter was the case, they were
repeated apparently in their connected form. Further, the vowel sound
which is necessarily associated with the enunciation of every consonant
(_la aspiracion_), and which in the Maya language of Yucatan is so
pronounced as to have been called by the Abbe de Bourbourg, "_une
certaine affectation gutturale_," was taken account of, and expressed
in writing. Then there were a number of arbitrary signs, figures, and
symbols, with syllabic values, as we see in the last example given. These
peculiarities, of course, make the system clumsy, but are by no means
insurmountable difficulties in the way of elucidating it.

Immediately at the close of the foregoing extract Bishop Landa gives the
alphabet subjoined, which has been carefully copied on wood, by Mr.
Edward Bensell, of Philadelphia, the arrangement of the letters being
slightly altered:--


[Illustration: 1 _a_]

[Illustration: 2 _a_]

[Illustration: 3 _a_]

[Illustration: 4 _a_]

[Illustration: 5 _b_]

[Illustration: 6 _b_]

[Illustration: 7 _c_]

[Illustration: 8 _ca_]

[Illustration: 9]

[Illustration: 10 _t_]

[Illustration: 11 _e_]

[Illustration: 12 _h_]

[Illustration: 13 _h_]

[Illustration: 14 _ha_]

[Illustration: 15 _i_]

[Illustration: 16 _k_]

[Illustration: 17 _ku_]

[Illustration: 18 _l_]

[Illustration: 19 _l_]

[Illustration: 20 _m_]

[Illustration: 21 _n_]

[Illustration: 22 _o_]

[Illustration: 23 _o_]

[Illustration: 24 _p_]

[Illustration: 25 _pp_]

[Illustration: 26 _x_]

[Illustration: 27 _x_]

[Illustration: 28 _u_]

[Illustration: 29 _u_]

[Illustration: 30 _z_]

Besides these elementary sounds, he gives twenty arbitrary signs, one
for each day of the Maya month, which signs seem also to be used at
their syllabic value in writing words. All of them have the same
peculiar rounded or circular form which is observable in most of the
letters, and which has induced some writers to call this the
"Calculiform" alphabet.

But returning to the A, B, C, let us inquire the meanings of the figures
adopted. Knowing these, we shall be in better position to recognise
their variations on existing inscriptions and manuscripts--for these, as
we expect, are considerable; but not more so, perhaps, than the
variations in the forms of the Roman letters.

_a._ Nos. 1, 2, and 4, are representations of the heads of some animals,
No. 2 being evidently the head of a bird with a long curved beak,
probably a species of parrot. No. 3 has been supposed to represent a leg
or a boot of some kind, but is probably also a rude figure of a head,
(See Plate XXXVI. of the _manuscrit[TN-1] Troano_.)

_b._ Both these letters are supposed to represent a path or way bearing
the marks of foot prints, indicated by the small figures inside the
circle.

_c._ This letter should probably be pronounced _ka_ (_a_ as in mate),
and is imagined to represent a mouth displaying sharp teeth.

_ca._ This sign is explained as the jaw of an animal thickly set with
teeth; but a careful examination of its variations leads to the belief
that it is a representation of the eye lashes. (See the _Etudes sur le
Manuscrit Troano_, p. 55.)

_cu._ This has not been identified.

_t._ As there is no d in Maya this character stands for both t and d. It
signifies space, the four marks leading towards the center representing
the four cardinal points, and the phonetic base being the Maya,
preposition _ti_, in, toward, at, in space.

_e._ Probably a front view of the human face, surmounted by the hair,
the dots marking the eyes, nose and mouth.

_k._ Nos. 12 and 13, variations of the same, represent a joint of
bamboo. No. 14 is the guttural h, pronounced _ha_, which word in Maya
means water. The figure represents a stream flowing around some objects.

_i._ This letter stems formed after the analogy of c, but no
satisfactory analysis has yet been offered.

_k, ku._ The k is beyond doubt derived from a head seen in profile. The
upper figure within the circle is the closed eye with its lashes
(compare No. 8); that below on the right is the ear (compare No. 28);
that on the left the mouth. (See the variations in the _Etudes sur le
Manuscrit Troano_, p. 55.) The ku is supposed to be a drawing of the
sacred "medicine bag."

_l._ Neither of these has been resolved.

_m._ This also, is the figure of a head. It is distinguished from the k
by the eye being open, from the p by the absence of dots around the
mouth.

_n._ Possibly the figure of a serpent.

_o._ Variations of the same, of uncertain origin.

_p, pp._ Again the face in profile.

_x._ The first figure is easily recognised as the human hand, the second
as a face in profile, emitting breath from the mouth.

_u._ The first sign represents the ear, the second is of uncertain
derivation.

_z._ This seems to be a vase of some kind.

It is evident that many of these signs have received abbreviated and
conventional forms quite remote from their original figures, precisely
as we know occurred in the Phenician and derived alphabets. The
variations are numerous and puzzling.

It will be observed that the basis of most of them is a head seen in
front or in profile. Bearing this in mind, and fixing definitely the
differential marks, which alone were deemed of importance by the native
artists, we could venture with considerable confidence on the
interpretation of manuscripts and inscriptions, did we not meet with
very serious obstacles in other directions.

One of these is the resolution of the groups referred to by Landa as
_las partes juntas_. In these the rounded "Calculiform" letters are
arranged in quadrilateral masses, each representing a phrase, name, or
title. We may seek the origin of this arrangement in what philologists
call the incorporative, or "polysynthetic" character of the Maya in
common with all other American tongues, which tends to the expression of
an idea with all its modifications, in one intricate grammatical
synthesis. These groups must first be separated in their component
parts, and then arranged in proper order. Some of them read from right
to left, and alternately from top to bottom and bottom to top; or, to
illustrate by a diagram, as if we were to write the word _marvelous_,
thus:--

  O   L   M
  U   E   A
  S   V   R

But the artist had no hesitation in changing this arrangement, if
another would allow him to compose a neater group. Especially is this
the case on the sculptures, where the love of ornamentations constantly
obscures the design and renders the letters almost unrecognisable,
precisely as the fashion is at the present day to adorn the walls of our
churche[TN-2] with inscriptions in ornamental and Gothic characters,
hardly legible to unpracticed eyes.

There is also an obstacle in the very limited number of manuscripts in
this character which have been preserved. Of the vast number found among
the natives at the conquest, only three or four are known to be in
existence. One of these is the "Dresden Manuscript," another the
"Manuscript Troano," the third the "Manuscrit Mexican, No. 2," of the
Bibliotheque Imperiale; and perhaps the "Pesth Manuscript" is in the
same shrift. Of these the Dresden Manuscript may be seen in the large
collection of Lord Kingsborough on Mexican Antiquities, and the
Manuscript Troano was published in fac simile by the French government
under the editorship of M. Brasseur de Bourbourg. (_Mission Scentifique
au Mexique et a l'Amerique Centrale, Linguistique._ Paris, 1869.
Imprimeire Imperiale.) There is, however, material almost inexhaustible
in the inscriptions preserved upon the stone temples, altars, and
pillars of Yucatan, which we may with great confidence look to see
deciphered before many years.

The only serious difficulty which is at present in the way is our want
of knowledge of the ancient Maya language. All the published grammars
and vocabularies are extremely deficient and incomplete, and quite
inadequate to serve us in interpreting the inscriptions. But even this
alarming obstacle is only temporary. There exists in manuscript a most
complete and carefully composed dictionary of the Maya, written about
1650, two copies of which are in this country, one in the hands of the
Smithsonian Institution, and which we earnestly hope will shortly be
published under the efficient superintendence of Dr. Hermann Berendt,
the most accomplished Maya scholar living. With it in hand, the
deciphering of the inscriptions of Palenque, Uxmal, Itza, and the other
ruined cities of Yucatan, and of the manuscripts already mentioned, will
become certainly a less serious task than that of translating the
cuneiform inscriptions of Ninevah.

Even without other aids than the limited vocabularies already published,
some antiquarians have boldly set to work on the Yucatecan writings.
Most conspicuous of them is M. Brasseur de Bourbourg, who first
published Diego de Landa's work containing the alphabet. (_Relation des
choses de Yucatan de Diego de Landa. Texte espagnol et traduction
francaise en regard, comprenant les signes du calendrier, et de
l'Alphabet hieroglyphique de la langue Maya._ Paris, 1864.[TN-3]

His recent edition of the Manuscript Troano is prefaced by an _Etude_ in
which he attempts to interpret several of its pages. It is painful to be
unable to say a single word in favor of his views. They are thoroughly
untenable and groundless. The Abbe Brasseur deserves the highest praise
for his ardor and devotion to archaeological studies, but his theories do
not bear a moment's examination. They are so utterly wild that we are
almost afraid to state them. He imagines that these inscriptions and
manuscripts all contain geological reminiscences, chiefly concerning the
submersion of a portion of the American continent and the consequent
formation of the West India Islands. He explains all the letters as
"expressive images of the cataclysm of which they are the phonetic
expression." The culture of the Mayas and Aztecs he regards as the
debris of a far higher civilization, which once extended over most of
the American continent, and _from which_ that of ancient Egypt (!) was
derived. He insists on the identity of the ancient Maya and Aztec
tongues, for which there is not a shadow of proof, and going further,
claims that they are both derived from _Germanic_ roots. Of course, with
such notions as these, his "interpretation" of the Manuscript is an
absurdity, and can never obtain a serious hearing in scientific circles.

A very different student is M. H. de Charencey, long favorably known for
his researches into the Basque language, the dialects of Central
America, and other critical publications. In the first volume of the
_Actes la Societe Philologique_ (Paris, 1870) he has an "_Essai de
Dechiffrement d'un Fragment d'Inscription Palenquienne_." He takes for
his subject the famous "bas-relief of the Cross," found on the back of
the great altar at Palenque. It is portrayed in Stephens's Travels in
Central America,[TN-4] and more carefully in the work of Cabrera on the
ruins of Palenque, from a drawing by M. de Waldeck. It seems to
represent the ceremony of baptism, or something analogous to it. The
central figures are surrounded by inscriptions. Immediately above the
bird which surmounts the cross is found this character:--

[Illustration]

This he analyses as follows, commencing at the right: h (variation of
No. 13 of the alphabet), o (variation of No. 22 enclosed in a circle),
nab (the Maya word for the palm of the hand which supports the middle
letter), ku (variation of No. 17),=_honabku_. This, in the orthography
_hunabku_, a discrepancy of no great moment, is a familiar Maya name of
divinity, and means _the only_, or _the one God_. The course of argument
by which he supports this analysis is careful and judicious.

The second group which M. de Charencey analyses is this:--

[Illustration]

This he resolves, commencing at the right hand upper figure, proceeding
from above downward, and from right to left, into the following letters
of Landa's alphabet:

  u, ku, ku, l, ca, nab,

meaning "it, or those, of the Kukulcan." Kukulcan, however was the name
of the hero god of the Mayas, corresponding to the Quetzalcoatl of the
Aztecs. His worship was introduced into Yucatan subsequent to the ninth
century of the Christian era, and his name means in Maya precisely what
Quetzalcoatl does in Aztec, namely, "the serpent with quetzal feathers,"
the quetzal being a species of parrot with bright green plumage. This
interpretation, therefore, if admitted, fixes an important date in
Central American history; for it proves that the erection of the
extraordinary monuments of Palenque, which were found in ruins at the
conquest, took place subsequent to the ninth century of our era.

It is not our object at present to go into the details of these
remarkable investigations, still less to criticise them at length, but
simply to give their outlines and results. They should excite an earnest
interest in this country, and stimulate our scholars to turn their
attention to the antiquities of our own continent, which thus acquire an
importance quite equal to those on the banks of the Euphrates and the
Nile, which have commanded such profound study from European scholars.

[Illustration]




Transcriber's Note


The following typographical errors were maintained in this version of the
book.

        Page  Error
  TN-1   5    _manuscrit Troano_ should read _Manuscrit Troano_
  TN-2   7    churche should read churches
  TN-3   7    Paris, 1864. should read Paris, 1864.)
  TN-4   7    Travels in Central America should read _Travels in Central
              America_

The following words were inconsistently spelled:

  Imperiale / Imperiale





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ancient Phonetic Alphabet of
Yucatan, by Daniel G. Brinton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT PHONETIC ALPHABET--YUCATAN ***

***** This file should be named 38352.txt or 38352.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/3/5/38352/

Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
