The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 94,
August 16, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 94, August 16, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: December 20, 2011 [EBook #38350]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, AUGUST 16, 1851 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





[Transcriber's note: Original spelling varieties have not been
standardized. Characters with macrons have been marked in brackets with
an equal sign, as [=e] for a letter e with a macron on top, or [C] for
a Roman angled C; the Roman numeral *C shows an inverted C, or closing
). Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts. A list of
volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has been added at the end.]




NOTES and QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--No. 94. SATURDAY, AUGUST 16. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition, 4_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Traditions from remote Periods through few Hands           113

      Minor notes:--Nelson's Coat--Strange Reason for keeping
      a Public-house--Superstitions with regard to Glastonbury
      Thorn--The miraculous Walnut-tree at Glastonbury--The
      Three Estates of the Realm                                 114

      QUERIES:--

      Bensleys of Norwich                                        115

      Minor Queries:--Heraldic Figures at Tonbridge
      Castle--English Translation of Nonnus--Of Prayer in One
      Tongue--Inscription in Ely Cathedral--Cervantes: what was
      the Date of his Death?--Meaning of "Agla"--Murderers buried
      in Cross Roads--Wyle Cop--The Devil's Knell--Queries on
      Poem of Richard Rolle--Did Bishop Gibson write a Life of
      Cromwell?--English Translation of Alcon                    115

      REPLIES:--

      John Bodley, by Dr. E. F. Rimbault and R. J. King          117

      Wither's "Hallelujah"                                      118

      First Panorama                                             118

      John a Kent                                                119

      The British Sidanen                                        120

      Petty Cury                                                 120

      The Word "Rack" in the Tempest.--The Nebular Theory        121

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Pseudo MSS.: The Devil,
      Cromwell and his Amours--Anonymous Ravennas--Margaret
      Maultasch--Pope's Translation or Imitations of
      Horace--Brother Jonathan--Cromwell's Grants of
      Land in Monaghan--Stanedge Pole--Baskerville the
      Printer--Inscription on a Claymore--Burton Family--Notation
      by Coalwhippers--Statue of Charles II.--Serius, where
      situated?--Corpse passing makes a Right of Way--The
      Petworth Register--Holland's "Monumenta Sepulchralia
      Ecclesiae S. Pauli"--Mistake as to an Eclipse--"A Posie
      of other Men's Flowers," &c.                               122

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     126

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               127

      Notices to Correspondents                                  127

      Advertisements                                             127




Notes.


TRADITIONS FROM REMOTE PERIODS THROUGH FEW HANDS.

On two or three occasions in the "NOTES AND QUERIES" instances have been
given of "Traditions from remote periods through few hands," of which it
would not be difficult to adduce numerous additional examples; but my
present purpose is to mention some within my personal experience, or
derived from authentic communication.

In 1781, and my eleventh year, a schoolfellow took me to see his
great-grandmother, a Mrs. Arthur, in Limerick, then aged one hundred and
eight years, whose recollection of that city's siege in 1691, when she
was eighteen, was perfectly fresh and unimpaired, as, indeed, she was
fond of showing by frequent and even unsolicited recurrence to its dread
scenes, in which the women, history tells us, fearlessly participated.
We are here then presented with an interval of one hundred and sixty
years between a memorable event and my recollection of its narrative by
a person actively engaged in it. The old lady's family had furnished a
greater number of chief magistrates to Limerick than any other recorded
in its annals.

Again in 1784, on a visit to my grandfather in the county of Limerick,
during a school vacation, I heard him, then in his eighty-sixth year,
say, that in 1714, on the accession to the British throne of the present
royal dynasty, he heard in Cork, where he was at school, a conversation
between several gentlemen on this change of the reigning family, when
one of them, a Mr. Martin, said that he was born the same day as Charles
II., on the 29th of May, 1631, and was present at the execution of
Charles I., the 29th of January, 1649. His family then resided in
London, where he joined Cromwell's Ironsides, and thence accompanied
them to Ireland. The transfer to him of some forfeited property
naturally induced him to settle there. Thus, between me and the
eye-witness of the regicidal catastrophe, only one person intervenes.

In 1830 there died in London, at the eastern extremity, called the
World's End, an Irishman, aged one hundred and eleven, named Gibson,
whose father, a Scotchman, he told me, served under the Duke of Monmouth
at the battle of Sedgemore in July, 1685, and afterwards, in July, 1690,
under William, at the Boyne. Supposing, as we well may, the father to
have been born about 1660, in 1830, before the son's decease, the two
successive lives thus embrace one hundred and seventy years. I had
rendered the son some services which made him very communicative to me.
The father married and settled in Tipperary, where he became a Roman
Catholic, and no adherent of O'Connell could be more ardent in his cause
than the son. This veteran had served full seventy years in the royal
navy.

In 1790 I recollect an old man of a hundred and twenty, who appeared
before the French National Assembly, and gave clear answers to questions
on events which he had witnessed one hundred and ten years before.

Similar lengths of personal remembrance are related of old Parr, Lady
Desmond, and others, whose ages exceeded one hundred and forty years.
The daughter-in-law of the French king, Charles IX. (widow of his
natural son, the Duke of Angouleme), survived that monarch by a hundred
and thirty-nine years (1574-1713),--a rare, if not an unexampled fact.
The famous Cardan, in his singular work, _De Vita Propria_, states that
his grandfather's birth anteceded his own by a hundred and fifty years
(1351-1501). Franklin relates that his grandfather was born in the
sixteenth century, and reign of Elizabeth, as Sir Stephen Fox, the
grandfather of our contemporary statesman, Charles, was born shortly
after the death of James I., in 1627. A very near connexion of my own,
though much younger, is the grandson of a gentleman whose birth
retrocedes to Charles II., in 1672. Niebuhr grounds one of his
objections to the truth of the early Roman history on the very great
improbability of the long period of two hundred and forty-five years
assigned to the collective reigns of the seven kings. It does, indeed,
exceed the average of enthroned life; but the seven monarchs of Spain,
from Ferdinand (the Catholic) to the French Bourbon, Philip V.,
inclusively, embraced a period of two hundred and sixty-seven years in
their successive rule (1469, when Ferdinand obtained the crown of
Arragon, and 1746, the date of Philip's death). The eminent German
historian offers, however, much stronger arguments in disbelief of the
Roman annals; but he had many predecessors in his views, though himself,
unquestionably, the most powerful writer on the subject.

    J. R. (An Octogenarian.)

P.S.--In Vol. iv., p. 73., Madame du Chatelet's epitaph on Voltaire
contains an error, where _canis_ twice appears, but should be _carus_.
The lady's object was certainly complimentary, not sarcastic. My crampt
writing was of course the cause of the mistake, though, in the _opinion
of many_, the substituted word would not appear inapplicable to
Voltaire. A subjoined article of the same page, "Children at a Birth,"
reminds me of something analogous in Mercier's _Tableau de Paris_, where
reference is made to the _Memoires de l'Academie des Sciences_ for the
fact. The wife of a baker, it is there stated, in the short space of
seven years, produced one-and-twenty children, or three at each annual
birth; and, to prove that the prolific faculty was exclusively his, he
made a maid servant similarly the mother of three children at a birth.
The major portion, it appears, of this numerous progeny long survived.
Bayle, in his article of Tiraqueau, a French advocate of the sixteenth
century, quotes an epigram, which would make him the father of
forty-five children, and, it is added, by one wife. If so, several must
at least have been twins:

      "Faecundus facundus aquae Tiraquellus amator,
      Terquindecim librorum et liberum parens;
      Qui nisi restinxisset aquis abstemius ignes,
      Implesset orbem prole animi atque corporis."

The accomplished authoress of _A Residence on the Shores of the Baltic_
(1841, 2 volumes) was, it is well known, one of _four_ congenital
children in Norwich, where her father was an eminent physician.

    J. R.

  Cork, August, 1851.


Minor Notes.

_Nelson's Coat_ (Vol. iii., p. 517.).--The recognition of the coat
Nelson wore at Trafalgar depends on its fulfilling a detail in the
following fact. The present Captain Sir George Westphal was a midshipman
on board the Victory, and was wounded on the back of the head: he was
taken into the cockpit, and placed by the side of Nelson. When
Westphal's wound was dressed, nothing else being immediately available,
Nelson's coat was rolled up and used as a support to Westphal's head.
Blood flowed from the wound, and, coagulating, stuck the bullion of one
of the epaulettes to the bandage; it was deemed better to cut off some
of the bullion curls to liberate the coat: so that the coat Nelson wore
on that day will be found minus of bullion in one of the epaulettes.

    AEGROTUS.

_Strange Reasons for keeping a Public-house._--A clergyman in the
south-west of England, calling lately on one of his parishioners, who
kept a public-house, remarked to her how sorry he was, when passing
along the road, to hear such noises proceeding from her house. "I
wonder," said he, "that any woman can keep a public-house, especially
one where there is so much drunkenness and depravity as in yours." "Oh,
Sir," she replied, "that is the very reason why I like to keep such a
house, because I see every day so much of the _worst part of human
nature_."

    T. W.

_Superstitions with regard to Glastonbury Thorn._--It is handed down,
that when Joseph of Arimathea, during his mission to England, arrived at
Weary-all-hill, near Glastonbury, he struck his travelling staff into
the earth, which immediately took root, and ever after put forth its
leaves and blossoms on Christmas Day, being converted into a miraculous
thorn.

This tree, which had two trunks, was preserved until the time of Queen
Elizabeth; when one of the trunks was destroyed by a Puritan, and the
other met with the same fate during the Great Rebellion.

Throughout the reign of Henry VIII., its blossoms were esteemed such
great curiosities, and sovereign specifics, as to become an object of
gain to the merchants of Bristol; who not only disposed of them to the
inhabitants of their own city, but _exported_ these blossoms to
different parts of Europe. There were, in addition to these, relics for
rain, for avoiding the evil eye, for rooting out charlock, and all weeds
in corn, with similar specifics, which were considered, at this time,
_the best of all property_!

    T. W.

_The miraculous Walnut-tree at Glastonbury._--This far-famed tree was at
the north of St. Joseph's chapel, in the abbey churchyard. It was
supposed to have been brought from Palestine by some of the pilgrims,
and was visited in former days, and regarded as sacred by _all ranks_ of
people; and, even so late as the time of King James, that monarch, as
well as his ministers and nobility, paid large sums for sprigs of it,
which were preserved as holy relics.

    T. W.

_The Three Estates of the Realm._--Some, even educated persons of this
day, if asked which are the three estates of the realm, will reply, the
Queen, Lords, and Commons. That the three estates do not include the
Queen, and are therefore the Lords, the Clergy in Convocation, and the
Commons, is obvious from the title of the "Form of Prayer with
Thanksgiving to be used yearly upon the 5th day of November, for the
happy Deliverance of _King James I._ and the Three Estates of England
from the most Traitorous," &c.; and also from the following passage of
the Communion Collect for Gunpowder Treason:--

  "Eternal God, and our most mighty Protector, we Thy unworthy
  servants do humbly present ourselves before Thy Majesty,
  acknowledging Thy power, wisdom, and goodness, in preserving _the
  king_, AND _the three estates_ of the realm of England assembled
  in Parliament, from the destruction this day intended against
  them."

    W. FRAER.




Queries.


BENSLEYS OF NORWICH.

As I am much interested in the above family, which I know to have
existed at Norwich, or the vicinity, for a century or more, and have
reason to think was one of some consequence, will you, through the
medium of your useful columns, allow me to ask some of your intelligent
correspondents who reside in that neighbourhood the following Queries?

1. Is anything known of the family of the late Sir William Bensley
farther back than his father, Thomas Bensley? Sir William was born in
the county of Norfolk, and at an early age entered the navy; transferred
himself to the Honourable East India Company's service, made a large
fortune, was elected a Director of the Company 1771, created a baronet
1801, and died without issue 1809.

2. Was Mr. Richard Bensley, an actor of some celebrity, who made his
"first appearance" in 1765 (he had previously been an officer in the
Marines, and, as I am informed, held the appointment of barrack-master
at Knightsbridge till his death in 1817), any connexion of the above, or
at all connected with Norwich?

3. Cowper, in one of his letters [to Joseph Hill, Esq., dated
Huntingdon, July 3, 1765], says:

  "The tragedies of Lloyd and Bensley are both very deep. If they
  are of no use to the surviving part of society, it is their own
  fault," &c.

Any information as to who this Bensley was, will be very acceptable; or
anything concerning the tragedies mentioned.

4. Any intelligence respecting one "Isaac Bensley" of Norwich, weaver;
who was alive in 1723, as his son was in that year baptized at the
Octagon Chapel in that city.

If any of your contributors, in their archaeological researches among
tombstones and parish registers, should have met with the name of
Bensley, by addressing a "note" to you thereon they will confer a great
obligation on your constant reader and occasional contributor.

    TEE BEE.


Minor Queries.

68. _Heraldic Figures at Tonbridge Castle._--In the court of the castle
of this place, there stands a colossal figure of what I take to be an
heraldic panther gorged with a ducal crown, supporting a shield of the
royal arms of France and England quarterly, as borne before the
accession of James I.

The corresponding supporter is gone, but the base and one claw remain,
showing it to have been a beast of prey, and with it is a broken shield,
thereon, "party per pale three lions rampant;" the arms, and probably
the supporter of the Herberts, earls of Pembroke. The two figures have
evidently capped the piers of a gateway.

Can any of your readers account for the presence of these figures here,
where the Herberts are not recorded to have possessed any property?

    ERMINES.

  Tonbridge, July 29. 1851.

69. _English Translation of Nonnus._--I shall be obliged if any of your
correspondents will inform me if any translation of the poet Nonnus,
which contains, perhaps, most that is known about Bacchus, has ever been
made into English; if so, by whom, and when?

    AEGROTUS.

70. _Of Prayer in one Tongue._--Bishop Jewel, in his celebrated sermon
preached at Paul's Cross, quotes the following argument as used by
Gerson, sometime Chancellor of Paris:

  "There is but one only God; ergo, all nations throughout the world
  must pray to Him in one tongue."

The editor of the Parker Society's edition of Jewel cannot discover the
argument in the works of Gerson; but if any of your readers can point
out where it may be found, I shall be much obliged.

    N. E. R. (a Subscriber).

71. _Inscription in Ely Cathedral._--M. D. (Great Yarmouth) is anxious
to have the meaning of the following inscription explained. It is on a
tombstone in Ely Cathedral.

                       Human
                     Redemption
      590      [x]     590      [x]     590
      Born     [o]     Sara     [o]   Watts

                       Died
      600      [x]     600      [x]     600
       30      [x]      00      [x]      33

                       Aged
      Y 30     [x]      00      [x]      33
      M  3     [x]     d 31      -        3
      h  3     [x]      3       [x]       3     [x]     12

                 Nations make fun of his
                       Commands.

                       --------

                      S.  M.  E.
                Judgements begun on Earth.

                      In memory of
                    JAMES FOUNTAIN.
                 Died August 21, 1767.
                     Aged 60 years.

72. _Cervantes--what was the Date of his Death?_--In the Life prefixed
to a corrected edition of Jarvis's translation, published by Miller,
1801, it is stated to be April 23, 1616; and it is added:

  "It is a singular coincidence of circumstances, that the same day
  should deprive the world of two men of such transcendent abilities
  as Cervantes and Shakspeare, the latter of whom died in England on
  the very day that put an end to the life of the former in Spain."

Dr. Christopher Wordsworth, in his Life of his uncle, the poet, remarks
on his decease on the anniversary of the death of Shakspeare, but makes
no allusion to the double anniversary; and in the Life of Cervantes
prefixed to Smollet's translation of _Don Quixote_, the day of
Cervantes' death is somewhat differently stated.

    GEO. E. FRERE.

73. _"Agla," Meaning of._--I have in my possession a silver ring, found
some time since at a place called "Grungibane" in this neighbourhood.
The hoop is flat both inside and out, about a quarter of an inch broad.
On the outside, occupying about half the length, is the following
inscription: "+ AGLA."

I should feel great obliged by some of your learned correspondents
decyphering the above.

    JOHN MARTIN.

  Downpatrick.

74. _Murderers buried in Cross Roads._--Though the lines of Hood's,

      "So they buried him where the cross roads met
      With a stake in his inside."

occur in one of his comic poems, I have often heard it gravely stated
that it was formerly the custom to bury murderers with a stake driven
through the body, where cross roads meet. Was this ever a _custom_, and
when was "formerly?" Are there many such tragic spots in England and can
I find them enumerated anywhere?

    P. M. M.

75. _Wyle Cop._--This is the name of a street, or rather bank in
Shrewsbury, leading from the English Bridge to High Street. It has
always struck me as being a curious name; and I should feel obliged to
any of your readers who could inform me what is the origin of the place
being so called, or if there is any meaning in the words beyond being
the name of a place.

    SALOPIAN.

76. _The Devil's Knell._--In the _Collectanea Topographica_, vol. i. p.
167., is the following note:

  "At Dewsbury, Yorkshire, there is a bell called 'Black Tom of
  Sothill:' the tradition is, that it is as expiatory gift for a
  murder. One of the bells, perhaps this one, is tolled on
  Christmas-eve as at a funeral, or in the manner of a passing-bell:
  and any one asking whose bell it was, would be told that it was
  the _devil's knell_. The moral of it is, that the devil died when
  Christ was born. The custom was discontinued for many years, but
  was revived by the vicar in 1828."

Is the gift of a bell a common expiatory gift for crime? And does the
custom of tolling the _devil's knell_ on Christmas eve exist in any
other place at the present time?

    EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

77. _Queries on Poems of Richard Rolle_ (Vol. iv., p. 49.).--I should be
glad to ask a question or two of your Cambridge correspondent, touching
his very interesting contribution from the MS. remains of Richard Rolle
of Hampole.

What language is meant by the _deuenisch_?

What is a _guystroun_?

How does the word _chaunsemlees_ come to mean shoes?

An expression very strange to English verse occurs in the line,

      "Hir cher was ay _semand_ sori."

I can think of nothing to throw light upon this intensive adverb, except
the Danish _saamaend_, which is generally used in that language (or
rather _was_ used, i.e. when Holberg wrote his comedies) as an
affirmatory oath. Native authorities explain it to mean "_so_ it is, by
the holy _men_," or in other terms, "by the saints I swear."

I have no doubt that the same kindness which led your correspondent to
communicate those delightful extracts, will also make him willing to
assist the understanding of them.

    J. E.

  Oxford.

78. _Did Bishop Gibson write a Life of Cromwell?_--Mr. Carlyle, in
treating on the biographies of Oliver Cromwell, says that the _Short
Critical Review of the Life of Oliver Cromwell_, by a gentleman of the
Middle Temple, was written by a certain "Mr. Banks, a kind of a lawyer
and playwright," and that the anonymous _Life of Oliver Cromwell, Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth, impartially collected, &c._, London,
1724, which Noble ascribes to Bishop Gibson, was by "one Kember, a
dissenting minister of London."

On the other hand, Mr. Russell, in his _Life of Oliver Cromwell_, 2
vols. 12mo. 1829, says:

  "There is an anonymous work deserving of some notice, entitled _A
  Short Critical Review of the Political Life of Oliver Cromwell_.
  The title professes that it was written by a gentleman of the
  Middle Temple, but there is reason to believe that it proceeded
  from the pen of the learned Bishop Gibson."

It would seem, therefore, by these statements, that two different lives
of the Great Protector have been ascribed to Gibson. Query, Did Gibson
ever write a life of Cromwell; and if so, which is it?

It is well worth knowing which Gibson did write, if he wrote one at all,
for he was connected with the Cromwell family, and, what is of more
consequence, a learned, liberal man, not given to lying, so that his
book probably contains more truth than any of the other Cromwell
biographies of that time.

    DRYASDUST.

79. _English Translation of Alcon._--Is there any translation of _Alcon_
by Baldisare Castiglione? The _Lycidas_ of Milton is a splendid
paraphrase of it. The parallel passages are to be found in (I think) No.
47. of the _Classical Journal_, published formerly by Valpy. The
prototypes of L'Allegro and Il Penseroso are at the beginning of
Burton's _Anatomy of Melancholy_. Thus three of Milton's early poems
cannot be termed wholly original.

    AEGROTUS.




Replies.


JOHN BODLEY.

(Vol. iv., p. 59.)

John Bodley is a name that ought not to be passed over without due
reverence. He not only fostered the translation of the Genevan Bible,
but was specially interested in its circulation throughout England.
Neither Fox, Burnet, or Strype, Mr. Todd, or Mr. Whittaker give us any
particular information respecting him. Lewis glances at him as _one_
John Bodley; and Mr. Townley, in his valuable _Biblical Literature_,
after some notice of Whittingham, Gilby, Sampson, &c., closes by saying,
"Of John Bodleigh no account has been obtained."

This good and pious man was the father of the celebrated Sir Thomas
Bodley. He was born at Exeter, and according to the statement of his son
(_Autobiography_, 4to., Oxf. 1647),--

  "In the time of Queen Mary, after being cruelly threatened and
  narrowly observed by those that maliced his religion, for the
  safety of himself and my mother (formerly Miss Joan Hone, an
  heiress in the hundred of Ottery St. Mary), who was wholly
  affected as my father, knew no way so secure as to fly into
  Germany; where, after a while, he found means to call over my
  mother, with all his children and family, when he settled for a
  while at Wesel, in Cleveland, and from thence we removed to the
  town of Frankfort. Howbeit, we made no long tarriance in either of
  these towns, for that my father had resolved to fix his abode in
  the city of Geneva, where, as far as I remember, the English
  Church consisted of some hundred members."

John Bodley returned to England in 1559, and on the 8th of January,
1560-61, a patent was granted to him by Queen Elizabeth, "to imprint, or
cause to be imprinted, the English Bible, with annotations." This
privilege was to last for the space of seven years. In 1565 Bodley was
preparing for a new impression; and by March the next year, a careful
review and correction being finished, this zealous reformer wished to
_renew_ his patent beyond the seven years first granted. It does not
appear, however, that his application to the authorities had the desired
effect; for it will be remembered that Archbishop Parker's Bible was now
in the field, and the Queen's Secretary, Sir William Cecil, was
compelled to act with caution. A curious letter, addressed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London to Sir William Cecil,
concerning the extension of Bodley's privilege, is printed from the
Lansdown MS. No. 8. (Art. 82.), in _Letters of Eminent Literary Men_,
edited by Sir Henry Ellis for the Camden Society.

For a full history of the Geneva Bible, I beg to refer S. S. S. to the
second volume of Anderson's _Annals of the English Bible:_ Lond. 2 vols.
8vo. 1845.

    EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

In the notice of Sir Thomas Bodley contained in Prince's _Worthies of
Devon_, S. S. S. will find some particulars relating to his father, John
Bodley. Prince's account of Sir Thomas is "from a MS. on probable
grounds supposed to be his own handwriting, now in the custody of a
neighbour gentleman," (Walter Bogan of Gatcombe, near Totnes.) From
this it appears that John Bodley was long resident at Geneva--

  "Where [says Sir Thomas], as far as I remember, the English church
  consisted of some hundred persons. I was at that time of twelve
  years of age, but through my father's cost and care sufficiently
  instructed to become an auditor of Chevalerius in Hebrew, of
  Beraldus in Greek, of Calvin and Beza in divinity, and of some
  other professors in the university, which was then newly erected:
  besides my domestical teachers in the house of Philibertus
  Saracenus, a famous physician in that city, with whom I was
  boarded, where Robertus Constantinus, that made the Greek Lexicon,
  read Homer unto me."

There is, however, no mention of John Bodley's having been one of the
translators of the Bible.

    R. J. KING.


WITHER'S "HALLELUJAH."

(Vol. iii., p. 330.)

A correspondent, S. S. S., inquires concerning one of the numberless,
and now almost fameless, works of George Wither, a poet of the
seventeenth century, famous in his generation, but unworthily disparaged
in that which followed him; the names of Quarles and Wither being
proverbially classed with those of Bavius and Maevius in the Augustan
age. The _Hallelujah_ of the latter has become precious from its rarity.
A copy of this volume (of nearly 500 pages) was lent to me several years
ago, by a collector of such treasures. On the blank at the back of the
cover, there was written a memorandum that it had been bought at Heber's
sale by Thorpe the bookseller for sixteen guineas; my friend, I had
reason to believe, paid a much higher price for it, when it fell into
his hands. The contents consist of several hundreds of _hymns_ for all
sorts and conditions of men, on all the ordinary, and on many of the
extraordinary circumstances of human life. Of course they are very
heterogeneous, yet no small number are beyond the average of such
compositions in point of devotional and poetical excellence.

The author himself, with the consciousness of Horace, in his

      "Exegi monumentum aere perennius,"

crowns his labours at the 487th page with the following "Io triumphe"
lines:--

      "Although my Muse flies yet far short of those,
      Who perfect Hallelujahs can compose,
      Here to affirm I am not now afraid,
      What once in part a heathen prophet said,
      With slighter warrant, when to end was brought
      What he for meaner purposes had wrought;
      _The work is finished_, which nor human power,
      Nor flames, nor times, nor envy shall devour,
      But with devotion to God's praise be sung
      As long as Britain speaks her English tongue,
      Or shall that Christian saving faith possess,
      Which will preserve these Isles in happiness;
      And, if conjecture fail not, some, that speak
      In other languages, shall notice take
      Of what my humble musings have composed,
      And, by these helps, be often more disposed
      To celebrate His praises in their songs,
      To whom all honour and all praise belongs."

How has this fond anticipation been fulfilled? There are not known (says
my authority) to be more than _three_ or _four_ copies in existence of
this indestructible work; and the price in gold which a solitary
specimen can command, is no evidence of anything but its market value.
Had its poetic worth been proportionate, its currency might have been as
common as that of Milton's masterpiece, and its trade price as low as
Paternoster Row could afford a cheap edition of the _Pilgrim's
Progress_.

    J. M. G.

  Hallamshire.

P.S.--Lowndes says:

  "Few books of a cotemporary date can more readily be procured than
  Wither's first _Remembrancer_ in 1628; few, it is believed, can be
  more difficult of attainment than his second _Remembrancer_,
  licensed in 1640, of which latter Dalrymple observes, 'there are
  some things interspersed in it, nowhere, perhaps, to be
  surpassed.'"--_Bibliographer's Manual_, p. 1971.


FIRST PANORAMA.

(Vol. iv., p. 54.)

I did not speak of my own recollection of Girtin's panorama; my memory
cannot reach so far back. It was my father who does perfectly remember
_Girtin's_ semicircular panorama. I think the mistake must be with H. T.
E. Some years back a large collection of Girtin's drawings and sketches
were sold at Pimlico; my father went to see them, and was delighted to
find among them some of the original sketches for this panorama, which
he immediately recognised and bought. He afterwards showed them to
Girtin's son, now living in practice as a surgeon at Islington (I
believe), who identified them as his father's work, and with whom I went
to see the painting, when not many years back it was found in a
carpenter's loft. Girtin certainly was a painter principally in water
colour, and one who, with the present J. M. W. Turner, contributed much
to the advancement of that branch of art; but I do not see how that is a
reason why he did not paint a panorama. I should think it not unlikely
that two semicircular panoramas of the same subject were painted; and,
therefore, with all deference, believe that the mistake is with H. T. E.
Girtin's son, if applied to, could, and I am sure would, give any
information he possessed readily.

    E. N. W.

We are not yet quite right about the first panorama, but perhaps the
following will close the discussion.

I have lately been sitting with Mr. Barker (aetat 78), and he tells me
that, when quite a boy, he sketched for his father the view of Edinburgh
from the observatory on the Calton Hill: in the foreground was Holyrood
House; that _that_ was a half circle, and was exhibited in Edinburgh.

So much was thought of the discovery of its being _possible_ to take a
view beyond the old rule of sixty degrees, that they went to London, and
then he took the view from the top of the Albion Mills, as was stated in
Vol. iv., p. 54.

That was three quarters of a circle, and was exhibited in Castle Street,
Leicester Square. Afterwards the whole circle was attempted. The idea of
painting a view more than sixty degrees, was suggested by his mother.
His father did not work at them, he being a portrait painter; but _he_
did, young as he was. Mr. Robert Barker and his wife were both Irish;
but Henry Aston the son was born in Glasgow.

    H. T. ELLACOMBE.

  Clyst St. George.


JOHN A KENT.

(Vol. iv., p. 83.)

As I have not seen the _Athenaeum_, I send the following notes, in
uncertainty whether or not they may prove acceptable to MR. COLLIER.

_Sion y Cent_, i.e. John a Kent, or John of Kentchurch, is very
generally believed in Wales to have been Owen Glendowr; though some
few--unable to account for the mysterious disappearance of the hero--are
still firmly convinced that he sleeps, like Montezuma and various other
mighty men, in some deep cavern, surrounded by his warriors, until the
wrongs of his country shall call him forth once more to lead them on to
battle.

The following extracts are from notes appended [by the editors] to some
poems of John a Kent which are published amongst the "Iolo MSS." by the
"Welsh MSS. Society."

  "... John of Kent, as he is called, is said to have been a priest
  at Kentchurch in Herefordshire, on the confines of Wales, about
  the beginning of the fifteenth century. He still enjoys a high
  degree of popularity, in the legendary stories of the
  principality, as a powerful magician. There is in the possession
  of Mr. Scudamore, of Kentchurch, an ancient painting of a monk,
  supposed to be a portrait of John of Kent; and as the family of
  Scudamore is descended from a daughter of Owen Glendowr, at whose
  house that chieftain is believed to have passed in concealment a
  portion of the latter part of his life, it has been supposed that
  John of Kentchurch was no other than Owen Glendowr himself," &c.
  &c.--Page 676., note to the poem on _The Names of God_.

  "... The author was a priest of Kentchurch in Herefordshire, on
  the confines of Monmouthshire and Breconshire, and is said to have
  lived in the time of Wickliffe, and to have been of his party. As
  the parish of Kentchurch is adjacent to that of Oldcastle, the
  residence of Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, it is by no means
  impossible that John of Kentchurch may also have favoured the same
  opinions; and may in some measure sanction the idea."

  "... The poet then proceeds to speak of the indignation of the
  well-robed bishops, the monks, friars and priests; and in the
  course of the composition he makes some strong animadversions on
  the luxurious living of the churchmen, stating that formerly the
  friars were preachers, who possessed no wealth, and went about on
  foot with nothing but a staff; but that they now possessed horses,
  and frequented banquets," &c. &c.--Page 687., notes to _A Poem to
  another's Book_, by John of Kentchurch; from the collection of
  Thomas ap Jevan of Tre'r Bryn, made about 1670.

The following words occur in this poem:--

        "... onid cof cwymp
      Olcastr, ti a gair ailcwymp."

      "---- rememberest thou not the fall
      Of Oldcastle?--Thou shall have a repetition of the fall."

In addition to the two poems here mentioned, the collection contains one
"_Composed by John of Kent on his death-bed_;" in which are some lines
of considerable beauty: and also one on _The Age and Duration of
Things_.

The parish church of Kentchurch is dedicated to St. Mary. I hope to be
able to send you some further information on the subject, but I well
know that quotations from memory are _nearly_ valueless. Meanwhile, the
following note on the mysterious disappearance to which I have already
alluded may be not uninteresting: I give it as translated by the editors
of the Iolo MSS.

  "In 1415, Owen disappeared, so that neither sight nor tidings of
  him could be obtained in the country. It was rumoured that he
  escaped in the guise of a reaper; bearing[1] ... according to the
  testimony of the last who saw and knew him; after which little or
  no information transpired respecting him, nor of the place or
  manner of his concealment. The prevalent opinion was, that he died
  in a wood in Glamorgan; but occult chroniclers assert that he and
  his men still live, and are asleep on their arms, in a cave called
  Govog y ddinas, in the Vale of Gwent, where they will continue,
  until England becomes self-debased; but that then they will sally
  forth, and reconquer their country, privileges, and crown for the
  Welsh, who shall be dispossessed of them no more until the day of
  judgment, when the world shall be consumed with fire, and so
  reconstructed, that neither oppression nor devastation shall take
  place any more: and blessed will be he who shall see the
  time."--Page 454. _Historical Notices extracted from the Papers of
  the Rev. Evan Evans, now in the Possession of Paul Panton, Esq.,
  of Anglesea._

  [Footnote 1: The manuscript is defective here. "A sickle" was
  probably the word.]

    SELEUCUS.


THE BRITISH SIDANEN.

(Vol. iv., p. 83.)

MR. J. P. COLLIER will find all the information that Cambrian
antiquaries can give him respecting Sidanen in Powell's _Cambria_,
Matthew Paris, Wynne's _Caradoc_, and Warrington's _History of Wales_,
under the year 1241. The history is given at most length in Warrington;
where the share which Sidanen had in an interesting episode in Cambrian
history is fully developed. There were two Welsh princes named Llywelyn,
who stood to each other in the following relation:

      LLYWELYN AB JORWERTH
         (died in 1240).
                |
         +------+-------+-----------+
         |              |           |
      GRIFFITH,      DAVID.      GLADYS, a
      married to                 daughter.
      _Senena_,
      daughter of a
      Cambrian lord
      named Caradoc
      ab Thomas.
            |
         +--------------------------+--------+
         |                          |        |
      LLYWELYN AB GRIFFITH,      OWEN.    DAVID.
      last Prince of Wales.

The Prince of Wales mentioned by Munday is the first, Llywelyn ab
Jorwerth, whose descent, as his father was not allowed to reign on
account of personal deformity, we had better indicate:

                     OWEN, king of North Wales.
                      |
      (Eldest son) JORWERTH, the _Broken-nosed_.
                      |
            LLYWELYN AB JORWERTH.

Llywelyn, as has been shown, had two sons, Griffith and David, the first
and eldest of whom, being a turbulent prince, was set aside by his
father at a solemn assembly of Cambrian lords, in 1238, and David was
elected to succeed his father. In 1240, David became king of North
Wales, and one of his first acts was to apprehend his brother and his
son Owen, and put them in prison. This was done with the connivance of a
Bishop of Bangor: but that worthy, fearing that the scandal would spread
abroad, intrigued with _Senena_, the _daughter-in-law_, and not the
daughter of Prince Llywelyn, and wife of his son Griffith, for his
release. Overtures were made to Henry III.; and certain lords having
joined the confederacy, stipulations were entered into, and Henry
marched against King David. David, who had married the king's daughter,
now began to counterplot, in which he was quite successful; for Henry,
who had come to release Griffith, by _special contract_ with his
brother, took him, with his wife Senena, and his son Owen, with him to
London, and imprisoned them in the Tower, in attempting to escape from
whence, two years afterwards, Griffith lost his life. Such is a brief
outline of all that is known of Senena, who is undoubtedly the Sidanen
of Munday, and whose name is variously written _Sina_, _Sanan_,
_Sanant_, and in the Latin chronicle _Senena_. The negotiations here
alluded to, with the names of all the parties engaged in them, will be
found in the authorities herein named; all of which being in English,
MR. COLLIER can easily consult.

John a Cumber is probably John y Kymro, or John the Cambrian; but I know
nothing of him.

Respecting John of Kent there is but little else known than may be found
in Coxe's _Monmouthshire_, and Owen's _Cambrian Biography_, sub "Sion
Cent." There is, however, a tradition in this neighbourhood that he was
born at Eglwys Ilan, in the county of Glamorgan; and the road is shown
by which he went to Kentchurch, in Herefordshire. It was at Eglwys Ilan
that he is reported to have pounded the crows by closing the park gates.
As this story has not appeared in English print, I will endeavour to
furnish you again with a more circumstantial statement. Sion Kent, who
lived about 1450, appears to have derived his name from Kent Chester, or
Kent Church. He was a monk, holding Lollard opinions; and a bard of
considerable talent and celebrity. As a matter of course, he was on good
terms with his Satanic majesty; for he was a mighty reputation as a
conjuror. MR. COLLIER may find a portion of one of his poems, translated
in the Iolo MSS., page 687. Should this, or any other authority herein
named, not be accessible to MR. COLLIER, it would afford me great
pleasure to send him transcripts.

There is a very gross anachronism in making Sion, _lege_ Shon Kent, to
be the contemporary of Senena.

    T. STEPHENS.

  Merthyr Tydfil, Aug. 7. 1851.


PETTY CURY.

(Vol. iv., p. 24.)

I believe that Petty Cury signifies the Little Cookery. See a note in my
_Annals of Cambridge_, vol. i. p. 273.

    C. H. COOPER.

  Cambridge, July 12. 1851.

To those who are familiar with the _Form of Cury_, edited by Dr. Pegge,
no explanation can be necessary for the name of this street, or rather
lane. It seems, indeed, strange that any one who calls himself a
Cambridge man should have failed to discover that it was the peculiar
quarter of the _cooks_ of the town; as we in London have our Poultry
named from the _Poulters_ (not _Poulterers_, as now corruptly
designated) who there had their shops.

    F. S. Q.

The Cambridge senate-house is called "Curia," and therefore it may be
supposed that "Petty Cury" means "_parva curia_," from some court-leet
or court-baron formerly held there; the town-hall is at the end of it to
this day. The only objection to the above is, that in the Caius map of
Cambridge, A.D. 1574, now in the British Museum, Petty Curie is a large
street even then, whilst neither town-hall nor senate-house exist.

    J. EASTWOOD.

Surely there can be little doubt that the name of this street at
Cambridge is a corruption from the French "petite ecurie." We knew
little enough about such matters when I was an undergraduate there; but
still, I think, we could have solved this mystery. Might I be permitted
to suggest that as the court stables at Versailles were called "les
petites ecuries," to distinguish them from the king's, which were styled
"les grandes ecuries," although they exactly resembled them, and
contained accommodation for five hundred horses; so the street in
question may have contained some of the fellows' stables, which were
called "les petites ecuries," to distinguish them from the masters'.
Should this supposition be correct, it would seem to imply that at one
time the French language was not altogether _ignored_ at Cambridge.

    H. C.

  Workington.


THE WORD "RACK" IN THE "TEMPEST."--THE NEBULAR THEORY.

(Vol. iii., p. 218.; Vol. iv., p. 37.)

MR. HICKSON seems to court opinion as to the justness of his
interpretation of _rack_. I therefore express my total and almost
indignant dissent from it.

Luckily, neither in the proposition itself, nor in the manner in which
it is advocated, is there anything to disturb my previous conviction as
to the true meaning of this word (which, in the well-known passage in
the _Tempest_, is, beyond all doubt, "haze" or "vapour"), since few
things would be more distasteful to me than to encounter any argument
really capable of throwing doubt upon the reading of a passage I have
long looked upon as one of the most marvellous instances of
philosophical depth of thought to be met with, even in Shakspeare,--one
of those astonishing speculations, in advance of his age, that now and
then drop from him as from the lips of a child inspired,--wherein the
grandeur of the sentiment is so out of all proportion to the simplicity
and absence of pretension with which it is introduced, that the reader,
not less surprised than delighted, is scarcely able to appreciate the
full meaning until after long and careful consideration.

It is only lately that the nebular theory of condensation has been
advanced, for the purpose of speculating upon the probable formation of
planetary bodies. Yet it is a subject that possesses a strange
coincidence with this passage of Shakspeare's _Tempest_.

Perhaps the best elucidation I can give of it will be to cite a certain
passage in Dr. Nichols' _Architecture of the Heavens_, which happens to
bear a rather remarkable, although I believe an accidental, resemblance
to Shakspeare's words: _accidental_, because if Dr. Nichols had this
passage of the _Tempest_ present to his mind, when writing in a
professedly popular and familiar style, he would scarcely have omitted
allusion to it, especially as it would have afforded a peculiarly happy
illustration of his subject.

I shall now quote both passages, in order that they may be conveniently
compared:

      "Our revels now are ended--these our actors
      As I foretold you, were all spirits, and
      Are melted into air--INTO THIN AIR:
      And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
      The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
      The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
      Yea, all that it inherit--shall dissolve--
      And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
      Leave not a rack behind."

  "---- in the laboratory of the chemist matter easily passes
  through all conditions, the solid, liquid, and gaseous, as if _in
  a sort of phantasmagoria_; and his highest discoveries even now
  are pointing to the conclusion, that the bodies which make up the
  solid portion of our earth may, simply by the dissolution of
  existing combinations, _be ultimately resolved into a permanently
  gaseous form_."--Nichols' _Architecture of the Heavens_, p. 147.

Had we no other presumption to lead us to Shakspeare's true meaning but
what is afforded by the expression, "into air--thin air," it ought, in
my opinion, to be amply sufficient; for no rational person can entertain
a doubt that Shakspeare intended the repetition, "thin air," to have
reference to the simile that was to follow. The globe itself shall
dissolve, and, like this vision, leave not a _rack_ behind! In what was
the resemblance to the vision to consist, if not in melting, like it,
into _thin_ air? into air unobscured by vapour, rarified from the
slightest admixture of rack or cloud.

Shakespeare knew that atmospheric rack is not insubstantial; that it is
corporeal like the globe itself, of which it is a part; and that, so
long as a particle of it remained, dissolution could not be complete.

And shall we reject this exquisite philosophy--this profundity of
thought--to substitute our own mean and common-place ideas?

    A. E. B.

  Leeds, July 22.

P.S.--Apart from the philosophical beauty of this wonderful passage,
there are other aspects in which it may be studied with not less
interest.

How true is the poetical image of the _rack_ as the last object of
dissipation! the expiring evidence of combustion! the lingering
cloudiness of solution!


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Pseudo MSS._--_The Devil, Cromwell and his Amours._--It is too bad! In
Vol. iii., p. 282., there is a good page and a half taken up with a
verbatim extract from Echard, which has either been alluded to or quoted
by every writer on Cromwell from Echard's time down to a few months ago,
when it appeared in _Chambers's Papers for the People_, No. 11. Again,
in Vol. iv., p. 19., there is another page and a half relating to
Cromwell, which, I fearlessly assert, I have seen frequently in print,
but cannot at present tell where; and more important avocations forbid
me to search. As if that was not enough, in Vol. iv., p. 50. there is
another half page respecting the preservation of these _precious MSS._!
Is it not too bad? Do, worthy Mr. Editor, make the _amende honorable_ by
publishing the true characters of the MSS. forwarded by S. H. H., which
you have so inadvertently published as original.

    W. PINKERTON.

  [Our correspondent seems to doubt that the communications to which
  he refers were really printed from contemporary MSS. The Editor is
  able to vouch for that having been certainly the fact. They are
  not printed from transcripts from Echard, but from real MSS. of
  the time of Charles II., or thereabouts; while the fact of these
  early transcripts having been printed surely does not furnish any
  argument against the valuable suggestion of S. H. H. as to the
  preservation of similar documents for the use of the public, and
  in the manner pointed out in his communication.--ED.]

_Anonymous Ravennas_ (Vol. i., pp. 124. 220. 368.; Vol. iii., p.
462.).--Your correspondents have neglected to observe that this author's
Chorography of Britain was published by Gale, "ad calcem Antonini Iter
Britanniarum," viz., _Britanniae Chorographia cum Autographo Regis Galliae
Ms'o. et Codice Vaticano collata; Adjiciuntur conjecturae plurimae cum
nominibus locorum Anglicis, quotquot iis assignari potuerint_: Londini,
1709, 4to.

A copy of the edition of _Anonymi Ravennatis Geographiae Libri Quinque_
(of the last of which the Chorography of Britain forms a part) noticed
by J. I. (Vol. i., p. 220.) is now before me; as also a later edition,
published by the editor's son, Abram Gronovius: Lugduni Batavorum, 1722,
8vo.

Horsley's _Britannia Romana_, book iii. chap. iv., contains "1. Some
account of this author and his work; 2. The Latin text of this
writer[2]; 3. Remarks upon many of the places mentioned by him, and more
particularly of such as seem to be the same with the stations per lineam
valli in the Notitia." His remarks are diametrically opposite to the
conjectures of Camden and Gale.

  [Footnote 2: The Chorography from Gale's edition.]

    T. J.

_Margaret Maultasch_ (Vol. iv., p. 56.).--Your correspondent who
inquires where he can meet with the particulars of the life of Margaret,
surnamed _Maultasch_, Countess of Tyrol, will find them in the
Supplement of the _Biographie Universelle_, vol. lxxiii. p. 136.

The great heiress in question, though a monster of ugliness, was twice
married: first to John Henry, son of Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia (1331),
from whom she procured a divorce on the plea of his incapacity; and,
secondly (1341), to Louis of Bavaria, eldest son of the Emperor Louis
IV., by whom she had a son, Mainard, who died without issue during his
mother's lifetime.

I know not upon what authority rest the imputed irregularities of her
life, but her biographer, in the article above mentioned, casts no such
slur upon her character. Nor can I discover that the armorial bearings
of the town of Halle, in Tyrol, have any such significant meaning as has
been hinted at. They are to be found in Matthew Merian's _Topographia
Provinciarum Austriacarum_, printed at Frankfort on the Maine in 1649,
engraved on the view of Halle, at p. 139., and appear to be _a cask or
barrel, supported by two lions_. There is _no_ statue of Margaret
Maultasch among those which surround the mausoleum of Emperor
_Maximilian_ (not _Matthias_) in the Franciscan church at Inspruck; but
her ludicrously hideous features may be found amongst the historical
portraits engraved in the magnificent work descriptive of the Museum of
Versailles, published a few years ago at Paris, under the auspices of
King Louis Philippe.

    W. S.

  Denton, July 28.

_Pope's Translations or Imitations of Horace_ (Vol. i., p. 230.; Vol.
iv., p. 58.).--Is your correspondent C. correct in attributing _A true
Character of Mr. Pope and his Writings, in a Letter to a Friend_,
printed for Popping, 1716, to Oldmixon? In the Testimonies of Authors,
prefixed to the _Dunciad_, and the Appendix, and throughout the Notes,
Dennis is uniformly quoted and attacked as the author. Oldmixon's feud
with Pope was hardly, I think, so early.

Assuming your correspondent's quotation from the pamphlet to be correct,
the terms made use of will surely refer to Pope's _Imitation of Horace_
(S. ii. L. i.), a fragment of which was published by Curll about this
time (1716). It was afterwards republished in folio about 1734, printed
for J. Boreman, under the title of _Sober Advice from Horace to the
young Gentlemen about Town_, but in an enlarged state, and with some of
the initials altered, and several new adaptations. Mrs. Oldfield and
Lady Mary are not introduced in the first edition. I have both, but at
present can only refer to the second one in folio. From this the
_Imitation_ was transferred to the Supplement to Pope's Works,
published by Cooper: London, 1757, 12mo., and from thence to the
Supplementary Volumes to the later editions. The publication of it
formed an article of impeachment against Dr. Jos. Warton, by the author
of the _Pursuits of Literature_, as all who have read that satire will
well remember.

    JAS. CROSSLEY.

_Brother Jonathan_ (Vol. iii., p. 495.).--The origin of this term, as
applied to the United States, is given in a recent number of the
_Norwich Courier_. The editor says it was communicated by a gentleman
now upwards of eighty years of age, who was an active participator in
the scenes of the revolution. The story is as follows:

  "When General Washington, after being appointed commander of the
  army of the revolutionary war, came to Massachusetts to organize
  it, and make preparations for the defence of the country, he found
  a great want of ammunition and other means necessary to meet the
  powerful foe he had to contend with, and great difficulty to
  obtain them. If attacked in such condition, the cause at once
  might be hopeless. On one occasion at that anxious period a
  consultation of the officers and others was had, when it seemed no
  way could be devised to make such preparations as were necessary.
  His Excellency Jonathan Trumbull the elder was then governor of
  the State of Connecticut, on whose judgment and aid the general
  placed the greatest reliance, and remarked, 'We must consult
  Brother Jonathan on the subject.' The general did so, and the
  governor was successful in supplying many of the wants of the
  army. When difficulties afterwards arose, and the army was spread
  over the country, it became a by-word, 'We _must consult_ Brother
  Jonathan.' The term Yankee is still applied to a portion, but
  'Brother Jonathan' has now become a designation of the whole
  country, as John Bull has for England."--_Dictionary of
  Americanisms_, by John Russell Bartlett, 1849.

    H. J.

_Cromwell's Grants of Land in Monaghan_ (Vol. iv., p. 87.).--E. A. asks
whether there are any grants of land in the county of Monaghan recorded
as made by Cromwell, and where such records are preserved? I fear I can
give but a negative answer to the question: but among the stores of the
State Paper Office are many books of orders, letters, &c. during the
Commonwealth. Among them are two bundles dated in 1653, which relate to
the lands granted by lot, to the adventurers who had advanced money for
the army, in the different provinces of Ireland. Monaghan is not
mentioned.

    SPEC.

_Stanedge Pole_ (Vol. iii., p. 391.).--In answer to your correspondent
A. N., I beg to state that Stanedge Pole is between six and seven miles
from Sheffield, on the boundary line between Yorkshire and Derbyshire,
on a long causeway which was in former times the road from Yorkshire to
Manchester. Its only antiquity consists in having been for centuries one
of the meers marking the boundaries of Hallamshire. In Harrison's
_Survey of the Manor of Sheffield_, 1637, appears an account of the
boundaries as viewed and seen the 6th of August, 1574, from which the
following is an extract:--

  "Item. From the said Hurkling Edge so forward after the Rock to
  Stannedge, which is a meer between the said Lordshipps (of
  Hallamshire and Hathersedge).

  "Item. From Stannedge after the same rock to a place called the
  Broad Rake, which is also a meer between the said Lordshipps of
  Hallamshire and Hathersedge."

The situation is a very fine one, commanding a very beautiful and
extensive view of the surrounding country.[3]

  [Footnote 3: Its elevation is, according to the Ordnance Survey,
  1463 feet.]

    H. J.

  Stanedge.

_Baskerville the Printer_ (Vol. iv., p. 40.).--Baskerville was interred
in the grounds attached to the house in which he lived, near Easy Row,
Birmingham. The land becoming valuable for building purposes, he was,
after lying there about half a century, disinterred and removed to the
workshop of a lead merchant, named Marston, in Monmouth Street,
Birmingham. While there I saw his remains. They were in a wooden coffin,
which was enclosed in one of lead. How long they had been above ground I
do not know, but certainly not long. This, as far as I can recollect, is
about twenty-five years since. The person who showed me the body, and
who was either one of the Marstons or a manager of the business, told me
he had seen the coffins opened, and that the features were then perfect.
When exhibited to me the nose and lips were gone, as were also two front
teeth, which had been torn from the mouth surreptitiously and taken
away. I understood that it was known who had them, and that they would
be restored. The shroud was discoloured, I presume from natural causes,
being of a dirty yellow colour, as though it had been drawn through a
clay pit. The texture and strength of the cloth remained unaffected.
Baskerville entertained peculiar opinions on religious subjects. There
was a rumour of some efforts having been made to deposit his remains in
one of the church burial grounds, but they were not successful. A year
or two ago, while in Birmingham, a snuff-box was shown me, on the lid of
which a portrait of Baskerville was painted, which fully agreed with a
description of his person given me many years previously by one who had
known him. This portrait had not, from its appearance, been painted very
long. From its being there I infer that there is in existence at least
one original portrait of this eminent printer.

    ST. JOHNS.

_Inscription on a Claymore_ (Vol. iv., p. 59.).--Is your correspondent
"T. M. W., Liverpool," who inquires the translation of an "inscription
on a claymore," certain that his quotation is correct? To me it appears
that it should run thus:

      [x] GOTT BEWAR DE
      [x] _G_ERECHTE SCHOTTEN.

or, "God preserve the righteous (or just) Scots;" referring, no doubt,
to the undertaking in which they were then engaged.

I believe that formerly, and probably at the present time, many of the
finest sword blades were made abroad, and sent to England to be mounted,
or even entirely finished on the Continent. I have in my possession a
heavy trooper's sword, bearing the name of a celebrated German maker,
although the ornaments and devices are unquestionably English. Another
way of accounting for the inscription is, that it belonged to some of
those foreign adventurers who are known to have joined Charles Edward.

    W. SHIRLEY.

_Burton Family_ (Vol. iv., p. 22.).--In Hunter's _History of
Hallamshire_, p. 236., is a pedigree of Burton of Royds Mill, near
Sheffield, in which are the following remarks:--

  "Richard Burton of Tutbury, Staffordshire, died May 9th, 8 Henry
  V. Married Maud, sister of Robert Gibson of Tutbury; and had a
  son, Sir William Burton of Falde and Tutbury, Knight; slain at
  Towtonfield, 1461, from whom descended the Burtons of Lindley."

  "Thomas Burton of Fanshawgate, who died in 1643, left three sons;
  Michael, Thomas, and Francis. Michael was of Mosborough, and had a
  numerous issue; the names of his children appear on his monumental
  brass in the chancel of the church at Eckington. Thomas, the
  second son, was of London and Putney, married, and had issue.
  Francis, the youngest, was lord of the Manor of Dronfield, and
  served the office of High Sheriff of Derby in 1669. Was buried at
  Dronfield in 1687."

I find no account of any Roger Burton; but if your correspondent E. H.
A. is not in possession of the above pedigree, and should wish for a
copy, I shall be glad to send him it.

    JOHN ALGOR.

  Eldon Street, Sheffield.

_Notation by Coalwhippers_ (Vol. iv., p. 21.).--The notation used by
coalwhippers, &c., mentioned by I. J. C., is, after all, I expect, but a
part of a system which was probably the origin of the Roman notation.
The first four strokes or units were cut diagonally by the fifth, and
taking the first and last of these strokes we readily obtain V, or the
Roman five; but as the natural systems of arithmetic are decimal, from
the number of fingers, it is most probable that the _tens_ were thus
marked off, or by a stroke drawn across the last unit thus X, whence we
obtain the Roman ten: these tens were repeated up to a hundred, or the
second class of tens, which were probably connected by two parallel
lines top and bottom [C], which would be the sign of the second class of
tens, or hundreds; this became afterwards rounded into C: the third
class of tens, or thousands, was represented by four strokes M, and
these symbols served by abbreviation for some intermediate numbers; thus
X divided became V, or 5, the half of 10; then L, half of [C],
represented 50, half of 100; and M becoming rounded thus (M) was
frequently expressed in this manner CI*C; and this became abbreviated
into D, 500, half of CI*C; or 1000: and thus, by variously combining
these six symbols (though all derived from the one straight stroke),
numbers to a very high amount could be expressed.

    THOS. LAWRENCE.

  Ashby de la Zouch.

_Statue of Charles II._ (Vol. iv., p. 40.).--The following passage is
from Hughson's _History of London_, vol. ii. p. 521.:

  "Among the adherents and sufferers in the cause of Charles II. was
  Sir Robert Viner, alderman of London. After the Restoration the
  worthy alderman, willing to show his loyalty and prudence, raised
  in this place [_i. e._ the Stock's Market] the statue above
  mentioned. The figure had been carved originally for John
  Sobieski, king of Poland, but by some accident was left upon the
  workman's hands. Finding the work ready carved to his hands, Sir
  Robert thought that, with some alteration, what was intended for a
  king of Poland might suit the monarch of Great Britain; he
  therefore converted the Polander into an Englishman, and the Turk
  underneath his horse into Oliver Cromwell; the turban on the last
  figure being an undeniable proof of the truth attached to the
  story. The compliment was so ridiculous and absurd, that no one
  who beheld it could avoid reflecting on the taste of those who had
  set it up; but as its history developed the farce improved, and
  what was before esteemed contemptible, proved in the end
  entertaining. The poor mutilated figure stood neglected some years
  since among the rubbish in the purlieus of Guildhall; and in 1779,
  it was bestowed by the common council on Robert Viner, Esq., who
  removed it to grace his country seat."

The earliest engraving of "the King at the Stock's Market" may be seen
in Thomas Delaune's _Present State of London_, 12mo. 1681.

    EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

_Serius, where situated?_ (Vol. iii., p. 494.).--The Serius, now Serio,
rises in the chain of mountains in the south of the Valteline, between
the lakes Como and Ixo: it flows through a valley called the Val Seria,
passes near Bergamo and Cremona, and falls into the Adda a little before
that river joins the Po.

    J. M. (4)

_Corpse passing makes a Right of Way_ (Vol. iii., pp. 477. 507.
519.).--Some time ago, I buried in our churchyard a person from an
adjoining parish; but, instead of taking a pathway which led directly
from the house of the deceased to the church, they kept to the
high-road,--so going four miles instead of one. When I asked the
reason, I was told that the pathway was not a _lich-road_, and therefore
it was not lawful to bring a corpse along it.

    J. M. (4)

_The Petworth Register_ (Vol. iii., p. 510.; Vol. iv., p. 27.).--Your
correspondents LLEWELLYN and J. S. B. do not appear to be acquainted
with Heylyn's quotations from the book thus designated. In one place (p.
63., folio; vol. i. p. 132., 8vo.) he refers to it for a statement--

  "That many at this time [A.D. 1548] affirmed the most blessed
  Sacrament of the altar to be of little regard," &c.

And in another place (p. 65., folio; vol. i. p. 136., 8vo.), he gives an
extract relating to Day, Bishop of Chichester:--

  "Sed Ricardus Cicestrensis, (ut ipse mihi dixit) non subscripsit."

Hence the _Register_ would seem to have been a sort of chronicle, kept
by the rector of Petworth; and it does not appear whether it was or was
not in the same volume with the register of births, marriages, and
deaths. In the latter case, it may possibly be still in the Petworth
parish chest; for the returns to which your correspondents refer, would
probably not have mentioned any other registers than those of which the
law takes cognizance. On the other hand, if the chronicle was attached
to the register of births, &c., it may have shared the too common fate
of early registers; for, when an order of 1597 directed the clergy to
transcribe on parchment the entries made in the proper registers since
the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, they seem to have generally
interpreted it as a permission to make away with the older registers,
although there _are_ cases in which the proper books are still
preserved. (I am myself acquainted with two in this neighbourhood; and
J. S. B., if I am right in identifying him with the author of the very
curious and valuable _History of Parish Registers_, can no doubt mention
many others.) But how did Heylyn, who collected most of his materials
about 1638, get hold of the book?

    J. C. ROBERTSON.

  Bekesbourne.

_Holland's "Monumenta Sepulchralia Ecclesiae S. Pauli"_ (Vol. ii., p.
265.; Vol. iii., p. 427.; Vol. iv., p. 62.).--Sir Egerton Brydges, in
his _Censura Literaria_, vol. i. p. 305., attributes this work to
_Henry_ Holland. In his notice of _Heroologia Anglica_, he says:

  "The author was Henry Holland, son of Philemon Holland, a
  physician and schoolmaster at Coventry, and the well-known
  translator of Camden, &c. Henry was born at Coventry, and
  travelled with John, Lord Harrington, into the Palatinate in 1613,
  and collected and wrote (besides the _Heroologia_) _Monumenta
  Sepulchralia Ecclesiae S. Pauli, Lond._, 4to.; and engraved and
  published _A Book of Kings, being a true and lively effigies of
  all our English Kings from the Conquest till this present_, &c.,
  1618. He was not educated either in Oxford or Cambridge; having
  been a member of the society of Stationers in London. I think it
  is most probable that he was brother to Abraham Holland, who
  subscribes his name as 'Abr. Holland alumnus S. S. Trin. Coll.
  Cantabr.' to some copies of Latin verses on the death of John,
  second Lord Harrington, of Exton, in the _Heroologia_; which
  Abraham was the author of a poem called _Naumachia, or Holland's
  Sea-Fight_, Lond. 1622, and died Feb. 18, 1625, when his
  _Posthuma_ were edited by 'his brother H. Holland.' At this time,
  however, there were other writers of the name of Hen.
  Holland.--(See Wood's _Athenae_, i. 499.)"

    J. Y.

  Hoxton.

_Mistake as to an Eclipse_ (Vol. iv., p. 58.).--From your
correspondent's mention of it, I should have supposed Casaubon meant
that the astronomers had been mistaken in the _calculation_ of an
eclipse. But the matter is of another kind. In the _lunar_ eclipse of
April 3, 1605, two _observers_, Wendelinus and Lansberg, in different
longitudes, made the eclipse end at times far more different than their
difference of longitudes would explain. The ending of a lunar eclipse,
observed with the unassisted eye, is a very indefinite phenomenon.

The allusion to this, made by Meric Casaubon, is only what the French
call a _plat de son metier_. He was an upholder of the ancients in
philosophy, and his bias would be to depreciate modern successes, and
magnify modern failures. When he talks of the astronomer being "deceived
in the hour," he probably uses the word _hour_ for _time_, as done in
French and old English.

    M.

"_A Posie of other Men's Flowers_" (Vol. iv., p. 58.).--D. Q. is
referred to Montaigne, who is the author of the passage; but not having
access to his works, I am not able to give a paginal reference.

    H. T. E.

  Clyst St. George.

_Davies' History of Magnetical Discovery_ (Vol. iv., p. 58.).--The
_History, &c._, by T. S. Davies, is in the _British Annual_ for 1837,
published by Bailliere.

    M.

_Marriage of Bishops_ (Vol. iv., p. 57.).--A. B. C. will find his
questions fully answered in Henry Wharton's tract, entitled _A Treatise
of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein its Rise and Progress are
historically considered_, 1688, 4to. pp. 168. There is also another
treatise on the same subject, entitled _An Answer to a Discourse
concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy_, by E. Tully, 1687, in reply to
Abraham Woodhead.

    E. C. HARRINGTON.

  The Close, Exeter, July 28. 1851.

"_The Right divine of Kings to govern wrong_" (Vol. iii., p. 494.).--The
same idea as that conveyed in this line is frequently expressed, though
not in precisely the same words, in Defoe's _Jure Divino_, a poem which
contains many vigorous and spirited passages; but I do not believe that
Pope gave the line as a quotation at all, or that it is other, as far as
he is concerned, than original. The inverted commas merely denote that
this line is the termination of the goddess's speech. The punctuation is
not very correct in any of the editions of the _Dunciad_; and sometimes
inverted commas occur at the end of the last line of a speech, and
sometimes both at the beginning and end of the line.

    JAMES CROSSLEY.

_Equestrian Statues_ (Vol. iii., p. 494.).--In reply to F. M.'s Query
respecting the Duke of Wellington's statue being the only equestrian one
erected to a subject in her Majesty's dominions, I may mention that
there is one erected in Cavendish Square to William Duke of Cumberland,
who, though of the blood royal, was yet a subject.

    D. K.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

When Mr. Murray commenced that admirable series of _Guides_ which form
the indispensable companion of those restless spirits who delight with
each recurring summer--

      "To waft their _size to_ Indus or the Pole,"

he first sent his Schoolmaster abroad; with what success those who have
examined, used, and trusted to his _Continental Handbooks_ best can
tell. Whether Mr. Murray is now actuated by a spirit of patriotism, or
of moral responsibility under the remembrance that "charity begins at
home," we neither know nor care; since our "home-staying" friends, as
well as all who visit us, will benefit by the new direction which his
energy has taken. Among the first fruits of this we have Murray's
_Handbook for Modern London_, which did not need the name of our valued
contributor MR. PETER CUNNINGHAM at the foot of its preliminary
advertisement to show the mint in which it was coined; for it is in
every page marked with the same characteristics, the same laborious
research--the same scrupulous exactness--the same clear and distinct
arrangements, which won such deserved praise for that gentleman's
_Handbook for London, Past and Present_. Any visitor to London, be he
mere sight-seer or be he artist, architect, statist, &c., will find in
this neatly printed volume the most satisfactory replies to his
inquiries.

_The Handbook to the Antiquities in the British Museum, being a
Description of the Remains of Greek, Assyrian, Egyptian and Etruscan
Art, preserved there_, by W. S. W. Vaux, _Assistant in the Department of
Antiquities_, has been compiled for the purpose of laying before the
public the contents of one department of the British Museum--that of
antiquities--in a compendious and popular form. The attempt has been
most successful. Mr. Vaux has not only the advantage of official
position, but of great practical knowledge of the subject, and abundant
scholarship to do it justice; and the consequence is, that his _Handbook
to the Antiquities in the British Museum_ will be found not only most
useful for the special object for which it has been written, but a
valuable introduction to the study of Early Art.

There are probably no objects in the Great Exhibition which have
attracted more general attention than the Stuffed Animals exhibited by
Herrmann Ploucquet, of Stuttgart. Prince and peasant, old and young, the
pale-faced student deep in Goethe and Kaulbach, and the hard-handed
agriculturist who picked up his knowledge of nature and natural history
while plying his daily task,--have all gazed with delight on the
productions of this accomplished artist. That many of these admirers
will be grateful to Mr. Bogue for having had daguerreotypes of some of
the principal of these masterpieces taken by M. Claudet, and engravings
made from them on wood as faithfully as possible, we cannot doubt: and
to all such we heartily recommend _The Comical Creatures from
Wurtemburg; including the Story of Reynard the Fox, with Twenty
Illustrations_. The letter-press by which the plates are accompanied is
written in a right Reynardine spirit; and whether as a memorial of the
Exhibition--of the peculiar talent of the artist--or as a gift book for
children--this pretty volume deserves to be widely circulated.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--Neander's _General History of the Christian Religion
and Church_, vol. iv., is the new volume of Bohn's _Standard Library_;
and it speaks very emphatically for the demand for cheap editions of
works of learning and research that it can answer Mr. Bohn's purpose to
issue a translation of such a book as this by the great ecclesiastical
historian of Germany in its present form.

_The Stone Mason of Saint Pont, a Village Tale from the French of De
Lamartine_, a new volume of Bohn's cheap series, is a tale well
calculated to stir the sympathy of the reader, and to waken in him
thoughts too deep for tears. It must prove one of the most popular among
the works of imagination included in the series; as its companion
volume, _Monk's Contemporaries, Biographic Studies of the English
Revolution, by M. Guizot_, must take a high place among the historical
works. M. Guizot describes his Sketches as "constituting, together with
Monk, a sort of gallery of portraits, in which persons of the most
different character appear in juxtaposition;" and a most interesting
study they make--not the less, perhaps, because, as the author candidly
avows, "in spite of the great diversity of manners, contemporary
comparisons and applications will present themselves at every step,
however careful we may be not to seek them."

CATALOGUES RECEIVED.--W. Dearden's (Carlton Street, Nottingham)
Catalogue Part I. of Important Standard and Valuable Books; J.
Petheram's (94. High Holborn) Catalogue Part 125., No. 6. for 1851, of
Old and New Books; Joseph Lilly's (7. Pall Mall) Catalogue of a very
Valuable Collection of Fine and Useful Books; F. Butsch's, at Augsburg,
Catalogue (which may be had of D. Nutt, 270. Strand) of a Choice and
Valuable Collection of Rare and Curious Books; Edward Tyson's (55. Great
Bridgewater Street, Manchester) Catalogue, No. 1. of 1851, of Books on
Sale.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

BRITISH ESSAYISTS, by Chalmers. 45 Vols. Johnson and Co. Vols. VI. VII.
VIII. IX. and XXIII.

KNIGHT'S PICTORIAL SHAKSPEARE. Part XXV.

BUDDEN'S LIFE OF ARCHBISHOP MORTON, 1607.

THOMAS LYTE'S ANCIENT BALLADS AND SONGS. 12mo. 1827.

DODWELL (HENRY, M.A.), DISCOURSE PROVING FROM SCRIPTURES THAT THE SOUL
IS A PRINCIPLE NATURALLY MORTAL, &c.

REFLECTIONS ON MR. BURCHET'S MEMOIRS; or, Remarks on his Account of
Captain Wilmot's Expedition to the West Indies, by Colonel Luke
Lillingston, 1704.

GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE. Vol. I. 1731.

NEW ENGLAND JUDGED, NOT BY MAN'S BUT BY THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD, &c. By
George Bishope. 1661. 4to. Wanted from p. 150. to the end.

REASON AND JUDGMENT, OR SPECIAL REMARQUES OF THE LIFE OF THE RENOWNED
DR. SANDERSON, LATE LORD BISHOP OF LINCOLN. 1663. Sm. 4to. Wanted from
p. 90. to the end.

TRISTRAM SHANDY. 12mo. Tenth Edition. Wanted Vol. VII.

MALLAY, ESSAI SUR LES EGLISES ROMAINES ET BYZANTINES DU PUY DE DOME. 1
Vol. folio. 51 Plates.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE REMAINS OF THE WORSHIP OF PRIAPUS, to which is added a
Discourse thereon, as connected with the Mystic Theology of the
Ancients. London, 1786. 4to. By R. Payne Knight.

CH. THILLON'S (Professor of Halle) NOUVELLE COLLECTION DES APOCRYPHES,
AUGMENTE, &c. Leipsic, 1832.

SOCIAL STATICS, by Herbert Spencer. 8vo.

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE. The back numbers.

THE DAPHNIS AND CHLOE OF LONGUS, translated by _Amyot_ (French).

ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA. The part of the 7th edition edited by Prof.
Napier, containing the Art. MORTALITY.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE ON HEALTH AND MORTALITY, by
Arthur S. Thomson, M.D. (A Prize Thesis.)

REPORT ON THE BENGAL MILITARY FUND, by F. G. P. Neison. Published in
1849.

THREE REPORTS, by Mr. Griffith Davies, Actuary to the _Guardian_, viz.:

  Report on the Bombay Civil Fund, published 1836.

  ---- Bengal Medical Retiring Fund, published 1839.

  ---- Bengal Military Fund, published 1844.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE MORTALITY AND PHYSICAL MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN, by
Mr. Roberton, Surgeon, London, 1827.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices To Correspondents.

E. PEACOCK, Jun. _We have never heard of any magazine or newspaper on
the plan of_ "NOTES AND QUERIES" _published in America._

E. _is referred to our 84th No._ (Vol. iii., p. 451.) _for a full Reply
to his Query as to the_ ZOLLVEREIN.

HIPPARCHUS _is referred, as to the Jewish year, to Lindo's_ Jewish
Calendar, _London, 1838, 8vo., a work highly esteemed among the Jews,
and with good reason._

SPERIEND _will find a book at our Publisher's._

_Copies of our_ Prospectus, _according to the suggestion of_ T. E. H.,
_will be forwarded to any correspondent willing to assist us by
circulating them._

VOLS. I., II., _and_ III., _with very copious Indices, may still be had,
price_ 9_s._ 6_d. each, neatly bound in cloth._

NOTES AND QUERIES _is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers may receive it on Saturday. The subscription for the Stamped
Edition is_ 10_s._ 2_d. for Six Months, which may be paid by Post-office
Order drawn in favour of our Publisher_, MR. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet
Street; _to whose care all communications for the Editor should be
addressed._




JERDAN TESTIMONIAL.

      ROYAL SOCIETY OF LITERATURE,
      _No. 4. St. Martin's Place._

      COMMITTEE.

      Rt. Hon. Lord Brougham.
      Rt. Hon. the Lord Chief Baron.
      Rt. Hon. Lord Warren de Tabley.
      Rt. Hon. H. Tuffnell, M.P.
      Lord Lindsay.
      Hon. Francis Scott, M.P.
      Sir E. L. Bulwer-Lytton, Bart.
      Sir R. I. Murchison, F.R.S.
      Sir Peter Laurie, Kt., Alderman.
      W. Francis Ainsworth, Esq.
      J. Arden, Esq., F.S.A., _Treas._
      John Barrow, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A.
      Charles Barry, Esq., R.A.
      Wm. Beattie, M.D.
      Robert Bell, Esq.
      Francis Bennoch, Esq.
      Joshua W. Butterworth, Esq.
      B. Bond Cabbell, Esq., M.P.
      Joseph Cauvin, Esq.
      R. Chambers, Esq., Edinburgh.
      James Colquhoun, Esq.
      Patrick Colquhoun, Esq., D.C.L.
      Walter Coulson, Esq.
      Rev. George Croly, D.D.
      George Cruikshank, Esq.
      Peter Cunningham, Esq., F.S.A.
      Rev. John Davis.
      J. C. Denham, Esq.
      Charles Dickens, Esq.
      Henry Drummond, Esq., M.P.
      Joseph Durham, Esq.
      Professor Edward Forbes, F.R.S.
      Alfred Forrester, Esq.
      John Forster, Esq.
      Thomas Gaspey, Esq.
      Geo. Godwin, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A.
      Thomas Grissell, Esq., F.S.A.
      Wm. Grove, Esq., V.P., F.R.S.
      S. Carter Hall, Esq., F.S.A.
      Henry Haslam, Esq., F.R.S.
      J. O. Halliwell, Esq., F.R.S.
      Charles Hill, Esq.
      Leigh Hunt, Esq.
      Thomas Hunt, Esq.
      Douglas Jerrold, Esq.
      J. H. Jesse, Esq.
      John Laurie, Esq.
      P. Northall Laurie, Esq.
      John Gibson Lockhart, Esq.
      Samuel Lover, Esq.
      Chevalier Isidore de Loewenstern.
      Charles Mackay, L.L.D.
      W. Mackinnon, Esq., M.P.
      D. Maclise, Esq., R.A.
      R. Monckton Milnes, Esq., M.P.
      William C. Macready, Esq.
      Francis Mills, Esq.
      F. G. Moon, Esq., Alderman.
      James Prior, Esq., M.D.
      B. W. Procter, Esq.
      Frederick Salmon, Esq.
      J. Shillinglaw, Esq., _Hon. Sec._
      C. Roach Smith, Esq., F.S.A.
      Clarkson Stanfield, Esq., R.A.
      John Stuart, Esq., M.P.
      Charles Swain, Esq.
      Lieut.-Col. Sykes, F.R.S., &c.
      Captain Smyth, R.N., F.R.S.
      J. G. Teed, Esq., Q.C.
      W. M. Thackeray. Esq.
      T. Wright, Esq., M.A., _Hon. Sec._

  As a public acknowledgment of the literary labours of MR. JERDAN,
  animating to many, and instructive to all, since the commencement
  of the _Literary Gazette_ in 1817 to the close of last year, and
  of the value of his services to Literature, Science, and the Fine
  and Useful Arts, a Subscription has been opened under the auspices
  of the above Committee, and the following already received and
  announced:--
                                     L _s._ _d._
      The Lord Chief Baron           26  5  0
      Lady Pollock                    5  5  0
      Lord Willoughby de Eresby      50  0  0
      Lord Warren de Tabley          20  0  0
      Lord Londesborough             10 10  0
      Messrs. Longmans               50  0  0
      S. Carter Hall, Esq.           50  0  0
      John Murray, Esq.              25  0  0
      Sir E. Bulwer Lytton           20  0  0
      John Dickinson, Esq.           21  0  0
      Lord Colborne                  10 10  0
      James Colquhoun, Esq.           5  5  0
      Sir R. I. Murchison            10  0  0
      Sir Peter Laurie               10 10  0
      Northall Laurie, Esq.           5  5  0
      W. Cubitt, Esq., M.P.           5  5  0
      Charles Hill, Esq.              5  5  0
      Henry Hallam, Esq.             10  0  0
      J. C. D.                        3  0  0
      John Laurie, Esq.               5  5  0
      Robert Ferguson, Esq.           5  0  0
      Dr. Beattie                     5  5  0
      Wm. Thackeray, Esq.             3  0  0
      Robert Chambers, Esq.           3  3  0
      J. O. Halliwell, Esq.           2  2  0
      Thomas Hunt, Esq.              10  0  0
      E. Foss, Esq.                   3  0  0
      Francis Mills, Esq.             5  0  0
      Henry Foss, Esq.                3  0  0
      James Willes, Esq.              5  5  0
      T. Stewardson, Esq.             5  0  0
      Capt. Sir James C. Ross         5  0  0
      Lady Ross                       5  0  0
      Rev. J. M. Traherne             5  0  0
      J. C. Denham, Esq.              3  3  0
      J. Prior, Esq., M.D.            5  5  0
      George Godwin, Esq.             2  2  0
      Daniel Ball, Esq.               2  2  0
      Robert Gray, Esq.               2  2  0
      The Lord Bishop of Winchester  10 10  0
      D. Nicholl, Esq.                5  5  0
      Beriah Botfield, Esq.           5  0  0
      W. H. Fox Talbot, Esq.          5  0  0
      G. H. Virtue, Esq.              1  1  0
      Thomas Cubitt, Esq.             5  5  0
      R. Stephenson, Esq., M.P.       4  0  0
      Dr. Mackay                      2  2  0
      G. Cruikshank, Esq.             2  0  0
      David Roberts, Esq., R.A.       5  5  0
      Dr. P. Colquhoun                3  3  0
      J. E. Sanderson, Esq.           5  0  0
      J. W. Butterworth, Esq.         2  2  0
      B. B. Cabbell, Esq., M.P.      10  0  0
      Walter Coulson, Esq.            5  5  0
      T. Elde Darby, Esq.             2  2  0
      Joseph Durham, Esq.             3  0  0
      John Barrow, Esq.              10  0  0
      Dr. Croly                       2  0  0
      Capt. J. Mangles, R.N.          5  0  0
      R. Oakley, Esq.                 1  0  0
      George Grote, Esq.              5  0  0
      William Tooke, Esq.            10  0  0
      Mrs. Bray                       5  0  0
      Colonel Hodgson                 5  0  0
      Lord Lindsay                    5  5  0
      B. W. Procter, Esq.             5  0  0
      W. F. Ainsworth, Esq.           3  0  0
      T. Wright, Esq., M.A.           3  0  0
      Peter Cunningham, Esq.          3  0  0
      Thomas Grissell, Esq.          10  0  0
      Joseph Arden, Esq.              5  0  0
      John Forster, Esq.              5  0  0
      R. M. Milnes, Esq., M.P.        5  5  0
      J. R. Taylor, Esq.              1  1  0
      A. B. Richards, Esq.            1  1  0
      Joseph Cauvin, Esq.             5  5  0
      Dr. J. Conolly                 10  0  0
      Frederick Salmon, Esq.         10 10  0
      Francis Bennoch, Esq.          10 10  0
      Mrs. Bennoch                    3  3  0
      C. Roach Smith, Esq.            2  0  0
      John Shillinglaw, Esq.          2  0  0
      Mrs. Taylor                     1  1  0
      Col. J. Owen, C.B.              1  1  0
      W. Martin Leake, Esq.          10  0  0
      Sir J. Emmerson Tennent         5  5  0
      Hudson Gurney, Esq.            25  0  0
      Charles Swain, Esq.             3  3  0
      M. A. Lower, Esq., Lewes        2  2  0
      Herbert Ingram, Esq.            5  0  0

  Sir Claude Scott and Co., Messrs. Coutts and Co., Barnard,
  Dimsdale, and Co., Masterman and Co., and Prescott, Grote, and
  Co., will kindly receive Subscriptions. Subscriptions will also be
  received by the Treasurer, Joseph Arden, Esq., F.S.A., 27.
  Cavendish Square; by the Hon. Secretaries, Mr. Wright, 24. Sydney
  Street, Brompton, and Mr. Shillinglaw, 14. Bridge Street,
  Blackfriars; and by Mr. Nathaniel Hill, Royal Society of
  Literature, 4. St. Martin's Place, Trafalgar Square.


INTERESTING AND IMPORTANT LOCAL, HISTORICAL, and other MSS. and
AUTOGRAPHS, ORIGINAL DRAWINGS by ANCIENT and MODERN ARTISTS, all
warranted Genuine, BOOKS, TRACTS, PORTRAITS, a few Tokens in Copper of a
local interest, &c. &c., some remarkably curious, and of an early date.
A Catalogue of the whole preparing, and will be sent, on application
(enclosing two stamps), by C. HAMILTON, 22. ANDERSON'S BUILDINGS, CITY
ROAD. Similar Collections purchased or exchanged.


KING AELFRED.

  Just published, price 6_s._; or 6_s._ 6_d._ post free,

  KOENIG AELFRED UND SEINE STELLE _in der Geschichte Englands_, von
  DR. REINHOLD PAULI.

  The work of a scholar long resident in England, who has studied
  the sources at Oxford and elsewhere. The book is dedicated to
  Chevalier Bunsen.

  WILLIAMS and NORGATE, 14. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.


THE PRIMAEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF ENGLAND ILLUSTRATED BY THOSE OF DENMARK.

  THE PRIMAEVAL ANTIQUITIES OF DENMARK. By J. J. A. WORSAAE, Member
  of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Copenhagen. Translated and
  applied to the illustration of similar Remains in England, by
  WILLIAM J. THOMS, F. S. A., Secretary of the Camden Society. With
  numerous Woodcuts. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

  "The best antiquarian handbook we have ever met with--so clear is
  its arrangement, and so well and so plainly is each subject
  illustrated by well-executed engravings.... It is the joint
  production of two men who have already distinguished themselves as
  authors and antiquarians."--_Morning Herald._

  "A book of remarkable interest and ability.... Mr. Worsaae's book
  is in all ways a valuable addition to our literature.... Mr. Thoms
  has executed the translation in flowing and idiomatic English, and
  has appended many curious and interesting notes and observations
  of his own."--_Guardian._

  "The work, which we desire to commend to the attention of our
  readers, is signally interesting to the British antiquary. Highly
  interesting and important work."--_Archaeological Journal._

  See also the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for February 1850.

  Oxford: JOHN HENRY PARKER, and 337. Strand, London.


Just published, with Twelve Engravings, and Seven Woodcuts, royal 8vo.
10_s._, cloth.

  THE SEVEN PERIODS OF ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE DEFINED AND ILLUSTRATED.
  An Elementary Work, affording at a single glance a comprehensive
  view of the History of English Architecture, from the Heptarchy to
  the Reformation. By EDMUND SHARPE, M.A., Architect.

  "Mr. Sharpe's reasons for advocating changes in the nomenclature
  of Rickman are worthy of attention, coming from an author who has
  entered very deeply into the analysis of Gothic architecture, and
  who has, in his 'Architectural Parallels,' followed a method of
  demonstration which has the highest possible
  value."--_Architectural Quarterly Review._

  "The author of one of the noblest architectural works of modern
  times. His 'Architectural Parallels' are worthy of the best days
  of art, and show care and knowledge of no common kind. All his
  lesser works have been marked in their degree by the same careful
  and honest spirit. His attempt to discriminate our architecture
  into periods and assign to it a new nomenclature, is therefore
  entitled to considerable respect."--_Guardian._

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


2 vols., sold separately, 8_s._ each.

  SERMONS. By the Rev. ALFRED GATTY, M.A., Vicar of Ecclesfield.

  "In the effective simplicity with which Mr. Gatty applies the
  incidents and precepts of the Gospel to the every-day concerns of
  life, he has no superior. His faith is that of a sincere and
  genuine scriptural Churchman."--_Britannia._

  "Of all sermons I have ever seen, they are by far the best adapted
  to such congregations as I have had to preach to; at any rate, in
  my opinion. And, as a further proof of their adaptation to the
  people's wants (and indeed the best proof that could be given), I
  have been requested by some of my parishioners to lend them
  sermons, which were almost _verbatim et literatim_ transcripts of
  yours. That you may judge of the extent to which I have been
  indebted to you, I may mention that out of about seventy sermons
  which I preached at W--, five or six were Paley's and fifteen or
  sixteen yours. For my own credit's sake I must add, that all the
  rest were entirely my own."--_Extracted from the letter of a
  stranger to the Author._

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


CUTTINGS FROM OLD NEWSPAPERS AND MAGAZINES.

  VERY interesting COLLECTIONS of OLD NEWSPAPER AND MAGAZINE
  CUTTINGS, curious EXHIBITION and PLAY BILLS, VIEWS, and PORTRAITS:
  relating to all the ENGLISH COUNTIES and LONDON PARISHES, to
  REMARKABLE EVENTS, and to CELEBRATED and EXTRAORDINARY CHARACTERS,
  may be had at moderate prices on application to

  MR. FENNELL, 1. Warwick Court, Gray's Inn.

  N. B. All the articles are carefully dated, and many of the
  Cuttings are from Newspapers above a century old, and of great
  rarity.


Now ready, Price 25_s._, Second Edition, revised and corrected.
Dedicated by Special Permission to

  THE (LATE) ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.

  PSALMS AND HYMNS FOR THE SERVICE OF THE CHURCH. The words selected
  by the Very Rev. H. H. MILMAN, D.D., Dean of St. Paul's. The Music
  arranged for Four Voices, but applicable also to Two or One,
  including Chants for the Services, Responses to the Commandments,
  and a Concise SYSTEM OF CHANTING, by J. B. SALE, Musical
  Instructor and Organist to Her Majesty. 4to., neat, in morocco
  cloth, price 25_s._ To be had of Mr. J. B. SALE, 21. Holywell
  Street, Millbank, Westminster, on the receipt of a Post Office
  Order for that amount; and, by order, of the principal Booksellers
  and Music Warehouses.

  "A great advance on the works we have hitherto had, connected with
  our Church and Cathedral Service."--_Times._

  "A collection of Psalm Tunes certainly unequalled in this
  country."--_Literary Gazette._

  "One of the best collections of tunes which we have yet seen. Well
  merits the distinguished patronage under which it
  appears."--_Musical World._

  "A collection of Psalms and Hymns, together with a system of
  Chanting of a very superior character to any which has hitherto
  appeared."--_John Bull._

  Also, lately published,

  J. B. SALE'S SANCTUS, COMMANDMENTS and CHANTS as performed at the
  Chapel Royal St. James, price 2_s._

  C. LONSDALE, 26. Old Bond Street.


8vo., price 1_s._ 6_d._

  THE TIPPETS OF THE CANONS ECCLESIASTICAL, with Illustrative
  Woodcuts. By GILBERT J. FRENCH.

  Also, by the same Author, Second Edition, 18mo., price 6_d_.

  HINTS ON THE ARRANGEMENT OF COLOURS IN ANCIENT DECORATIVE ART,
  with some Observations on the Theory of Complementary Colours.

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


Just published, fcp. 8vo., cloth, with Steel engraving, price 4_s._
6_d._

  THE FAIRY GODMOTHERS and other Tales.

  By Mrs. ALFRED GATTY.

  "Her love for Fairy literature has led Mrs. Alfred Gatty to
  compose four pretty little moral stories, in which the fairies are
  gracefully enough used as machinery. They are slight, but well
  written, and the book is altogether very nicely put out of
  hand."--_Guardian._

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


Now ready, Third Series, also New Editions of the First and Second
Series, price 7_s._ 6_d._ each.

  PLAIN SERMONS, addressed to a Country Congregation. By the late
  Rev. EDWARD BLENCOWE, Curate of Teversal, and formerly Fellow of
  Oriel College, Oxford.

  "Their style is simple, the sentences are not artfully
  constructed, and there is an utter absence of all attempt at
  rhetoric. The language is plain Saxon language, from which 'the
  men on the wall' can easily gather what it most concerns them to
  know."

  "Again, the range of thought is not high and difficult, but level,
  and easy for the wayfaring man to follow. It is quite evident that
  the author's mind was able and cultivated, yet, as a teacher to
  men of low estate, he makes no display of eloquence or
  argument."--_Theologian._

  "Plain, short, and affectionate discourses."--_English Review._

  GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, August 16. 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-IV]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 88  | July  5, 1851     |   1- 15 | PG # 37548  |
      | Vol. IV No. 89  | July 12, 1851     |  17- 31 | PG # 37568  |
      | Vol. IV No. 90  | July 19, 1851     |  33- 47 | PG # 37593  |
      | Vol. IV No. 91  | July 26, 1851     |  49- 79 | PG # 37778  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 92  | August  2, 1851   |  81- 94 | PG # 38324  |
      | Vol. IV No. 93  | August  9, 1851   |  97-112 | PG # 38337  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]            | PG # 13536  |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850    | PG # 13571  |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851    | PG # 26770  |
      +-----------------------------------------------+-------------+







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 94,
August 16, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, AUGUST 16, 1851 ***

***** This file should be named 38350.txt or 38350.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/3/5/38350/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
