The Project Gutenberg EBook of Library Bookbinding, by Arthur Low Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Library Bookbinding

Author: Arthur Low Bailey

Release Date: December 22, 2011 [EBook #38387]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIBRARY BOOKBINDING ***




Produced by Hazel Batey and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









LIBRARY BOOKBINDING




    Library Bookbinding


    by Arthur L. Bailey
    _Librarian Wilmington_ (_Delaware_) _Institute Free Library_

    Illustration

    THE H. W. WILSON COMPANY
    White Plains, N. Y., and New York City
    1916




    Published May, 1916


    Copyright, 1916
    By The H. W. Wilson Company




PREFACE


It has been the purpose of the writer in these chapters on library
bookbinding to set forth as clearly as possible the best information
relating to processes, materials, routine and various other lesser
matters pertaining to bookbinding which must be taken into consideration
by librarians, or by assistants in charge of binding departments.
Although much of this information exists elsewhere in printed form, it
is scattered through various books and articles. In some respects,
therefore, this book is a gathering together of scattered material. It
is hoped, however, that there is enough new material to make the book of
interest to those who deal daily with binding problems, and that the
book as a whole may help to solve some of the questions relating to
binding in libraries both large and small.

Most books on binding and all books on library binding have devoted some
space to paper, its composition, manufacture, finish and use. As the
subject is so fully dealt with elsewhere it has not been included here.
Those who are interested will find full information in the technical
books on paper, in Mr. Dana's "Notes on book binding for libraries," and
in Messrs. Coutts and Stephen's "Manual of library binding." There is
also an excellent article on wood pulp paper in the Scientific American
of October 4, 1913.

Nor has it seemed desirable to include chapters on commercial binding
nor on historical bindings. Both of these subjects are treated
adequately in Coutts and Stephen's "Manual." The present writer has
limited his discussion to matters dealing directly with the binding of
books for libraries.

In one or two cases the same subject has been treated in two different
chapters because the subject matter belonged in both places, and in
neither case would the discussion be complete without it.

A. L. B.

December 9, 1915.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


    Chapter I. Introduction                                3

            II. Selection of a binder                      9

           III. Processes                                 13

            IV. Materials                                 51

             V. Specifications                            87

            VI. Binding before purchase and reinforcing  103

           VII. Cost                                     115

          VIII. Preparing for the bindery                125

            IX. Binding records and routine              149

             X. Repairing, recasing, recovering etc.     165

            XI. Magazine binders                         199

           XII. Pamphlets                                205

          XIII. Bindery in the library building          209

    Appendix A. Specifications of the U. S. Bureau
                of Standards for book cloths             217

             B. Reading list on binding                  221

             C. List of technical terms                  225

                Index                                    245




LIBRARY BOOKBINDING




LIBRARY BOOKBINDING

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION


An examination of the annual reports of libraries in the United States
shows that from four to eight per cent of the total income is spent for
binding; the amounts ranging from $2,000 to over $40,000 a year for this
one item. It must be admitted that these are large sums and that a
knowledge of binding materials and processes is necessary in order to
spend this money wisely. In many libraries the appropriation for books
includes binding and periodicals. It is evident, therefore, that every
dollar saved on binding can be devoted to the purchase of books. And
what librarian does not desire more money for new books?

In spite of the importance of the subject a great deal of ignorance has
prevailed in years past, and far too many librarians of the present day
fail to realize that here is one place where money can be easily wasted.
Possibly one reason for the ignorance about binding is that, except in a
minor degree, it does not directly affect the public, for librarians
are quick to make changes which will increase the interest of the public
in the library. Another reason is that experiments are necessary; and
since it takes time to draw conclusions from experiments, definite rules
have not been formulated.

In fact, experiments are still being tried. But while in the past they
were along the line of making books stronger, the experiments of the
present are rather along the line of adapting different methods to
different books, according to the paper on which they are printed, or
according to the kind of use they will receive. It is reasonably safe to
say that present methods of the best library binders make a book as
strong as it is possible to make it. Progress no longer lies along the
line of strength.

In order to administer a binding department wisely, the librarian or
assistant in charge of binding must know materials, processes, and
books; and especially must he know how books should be bound to meet the
use they are to receive. For example, fiction that is very popular
should be bound differently from fiction which must be kept on the
shelves, but which is not popular; it is easily apparent that
McCutcheon's "Graustark" should be bound differently from Henry James'
"Golden bowl." Heavy reference books constantly consulted should be
bound differently from reference books used only occasionally, while it
may be wise to bind magazines differently from either. A librarian of a
reference library will adopt methods differing from those which are used
in public libraries. A good working knowledge of materials and processes
can be easily obtained. The saving of expense comes in applying them to
use.

A recent advertisement of a binder stated that his books were rebound
more times than the books of any other binder. This statement is a sad
commentary on the serviceability of his books and calls to mind a
practice of twenty years ago which is too prevalent even at the present
time. At that time it was the recognized custom to bind as cheaply as
possible books which circulated rapidly and wore out quickly. Those who
favor this custom fail to realize that in the case of books which are
constantly used the actual cost of binding does not depend on the
initial cost per volume, but on the ratio of cost to circulation. This
is a point first brought out by Mr. J. C. Dana in his "Notes on
bookbinding for libraries," and one on which it is impossible to lay too
much emphasis. A book which costs 35c. to bind and which circulates 35
times has cost one cent for each time it has been issued after
rebinding; while a book which has cost 50c. to bind and has been issued
100 times (a fair average for a 50c. binding) costs one half cent for
each time it has been issued. Obviously the 50c. binding is much
cheaper. It is probable that the 35c. book must either be rebound at an
additional expense of 35c. or else a new copy must be purchased at a
cost of $1, while the 50c. binding may carry the book to a point where
it can be discarded absolutely. Certainly it should never be rebound
again. It is important, therefore, that the librarian who does not know
what his binding is costing per issue should keep statistics of
circulation for a sufficient length of time to obtain general averages
which will be fairly accurate.

While a very strong binding is necessary for fiction and juvenile books
in public libraries, it is probable that on many books of a serious
character some of the strengthening processes which must be used on
fiction and juveniles may be omitted. It should be noted that while this
is true of public libraries, the reverse would probably be true in
college and reference libraries where a much larger proportion of
serious books should be bound as strongly as possible.

There are three general kinds of binding:

(_a_) Commercial, or edition binding.

(_b_) Artistic binding.

(_c_) Library binding.

Commercial binding is that in which practically all books come from the
publishers. For the most part it is the product of machinery from
beginning to end, and the material used is generally poor. Apparently
the sole object in view of most publishers is to turn out a book that
will attract the eye. Strength is not an element for which they strive.
From their point of view they cannot be severely blamed for making
strength a secondary consideration. By far the largest part of their
product is sold to individuals, and the strength of the binding is
adequate for the amount of use that these books will receive. From the
library point of view, however, publishers' bindings are entirely
inadequate. One cannot expect, of course, that the publisher will put a
popular novel into a binding strong enough to meet the demands of
library use. On the other hand, one cannot blame librarians for being
exasperated when heavy books of travel, history, or biography part from
their covers when they have been in the hands of less than ten readers.

The distinguishing characteristics of commercial binding, and at the
same time its greatest weaknesses, are the machine sewing and the
insecure way in which the book is fastened into the cover. Very little
extra expense either in material, care, or workmanship, would make most
books outside of fiction sufficiently strong to withstand all the wear
that they will receive. Unfortunately the publishers fail to realize
this, and books by the thousands come from the binderies covered on the
back with the coarsest kind of super which does not even extend to the
head or tail of the book. A stouter cloth, carefully applied, running
the entire length of the back would cost very little more per volume,
but would strengthen it materially.

While practically all commercial binding is lacking in strength, this is
due almost wholly to trade conditions, for commercial binding can be
made exceedingly strong. One has only to turn to the 1912 edition of the
Century Dictionary or to the United States Catalog, which are
practically machine bound throughout, to realize this fact. However,
until librarians are united in their demands for stronger bindings, we
can expect to see the present poor work turned out in as large
quantities as ever.

There is another kind of binding which is, if possible, even more
unsuitable for libraries. This is artistic binding which is done
exclusively for individuals, beauty of appearance being the chief object
in view. It differs from commercial binding in being all hand work
instead of machine work. Since hand work is used and the main object in
view is beauty, it follows, of course, that such books are much stronger
than those bound by publishers. But the strength of these books is in
many cases not proof against the wear that they would receive in
libraries. No special methods of sewing or strengthening the first and
last sections are used. Practically all artistic books are bound in
leather and frequently in full leather. Whenever the leather used is
anything other than good morocco, it is an element of weakness rather
than strength. In addition to these objections, artistic bindings are
usually so expensive as to be beyond the reach of any library.

In library binding the main consideration is strength. Not only is
beauty a secondary consideration, it is scarcely taken into
consideration at all. For it must be confessed that library bindings are
seldom attractive. No library can afford to pay for ornamentation of
backs and sides of books. Library binding is all hand work. Although
machine binding can be made exceedingly strong, machines cannot be used
on library binding, because the books vary so much in size and
lettering. The main reason why commercial binding can be done by
machinery is because a large number of books are bound exactly alike. In
library binding it seldom happens that more than two volumes, the same
in size and lettering, are bound at the same time. Library binding also
differs from other bindings in that the use the book is to receive is
made the basis of selection of materials and methods.




CHAPTER II

SELECTION OF A BINDER


Since library binding differs widely from other kinds of binding, it
follows naturally that it is best to have this work done by men who
understand its special requirements. Unfortunately, there are
comparatively few binders who make a specialty of this kind of work.
Librarians of most of the smaller libraries are forced by local
prejudice to give their work to the local binder or to the nearest
outside binder in order to save the expense of transportation. If the
work is sent to the local binder, it must be sent to one who is doing
other kinds of binding and to whom the library work is, in a way, a
minor consideration. He would object if the work were sent out of town,
but the total amount of the library work is small compared with his
other work. Such binders usually have one way for binding all books
(except those which come under the head of blank-book work) and the
library books go through the regular process of being sewed on twine and
put into covers with no special reinforcements. The materials used are
not the best and the workmanship is generally poor. Local binders,
realizing that the funds are usually inadequate for the needs of the
library, frequently do this work at a price which at first sight seems
cheap. When, however, the poor service which the bindings give is taken
into consideration the price is really very high. Many of these binders
have been in business for years; and although they may be good workmen
and do honest work, they are very sure that they know more about binding
than any librarian, and it is with difficulty that they can be prevailed
upon to adopt suggestions.

It is only fair, of course, that a library which is supported either in
whole or in part by public funds should, when possible, have its work
done by residents of the town. For this reason, therefore, the librarian
should learn in just what ways good library binding differs from other
binding. All the good materials and processes, and all the various
methods of strengthening a book should be studied carefully so that the
binder can be told exactly how the work should be done. The binder will
probably rebel, but perhaps he can be converted and the effort is worth
while.

If the binder fails to grasp the ideas of the librarian, or refuses to
carry them out, the work should be sent out of town to a good binder,
for deference to local prejudice does not require that the efficiency of
the library be impaired. When work is sent out of town the librarian is
somewhat at a disadvantage, for no examination of the work can be made
while the books are in process. That the binder chosen should do honest
work goes without saying. The work of a dishonest or incompetent binder
always shows in the poor service which the books give, but inasmuch as
dishonest work is generally covered up, it takes time to discover it.
Therefore, great care must be taken to select a good binder in the first
place. Librarians who are in doubt should consult the librarians of
large libraries, or apply to the Binding committee of the American
Library Association for the names of reliable binders.

While librarians should be able to give suggestions to binders who are
not accustomed to library binding, and failing that should exercise good
judgment in selecting a binder at a distance, they should not expect the
impossible. The writer has seen books sent to binders which were in such
bad condition that no binder could bind them satisfactorily. Some
librarians expect too much of a binder; others do not realize that they
are not demanding all that they should receive.

Having selected a competent binder the librarian should not insist that
unimportant details be done according to his own ideas. If the binder
understands that he may have the work only so long as he follows the
specifications faithfully, one may safely leave the details to him.

It should further be borne in mind that good binding is seldom obtained
at low prices. A library book well bound requires good material, good
workmanship and special reinforcements which take time. Since the
largest part of the cost of a book is due to the labor spent on it, it
follows that low prices can prevail only in those localities where the
cost of labor is below the standard.

Since workmanship has as much to do with good binding as specifications
it is not wise to submit specifications to different binders for bids.
It is better to ask binders to submit samples of their work with
specifications of the way in which the books are bound. If, however, it
seems wise to ask for bids, it is far from wise to choose the lowest
bidder unless absolutely assured that the workmanship and material will
be satisfactory.




CHAPTER III

PROCESSES


The processes of bookbinding have been so fully covered in the books of
Messrs. Cockerell, Zaehnsdorf, Crane, and others, that the need of
further material of a similar character is not readily apparent. The
only excuse the writer has to offer for discussing the matter of
processes at any length is that there seems to exist nowhere any
description of the processes that are used in the best library
binderies. Mr. Dana in his "Notes on bookbinding for libraries" touches
only certain points of the processes here and there. Mr. Stephen in
Coutts and Stephen's "Manual of library binding" has a chapter on hand
bookbinding, but confines himself closely to the general processes that
have been in vogue for years; the modifications used in library binding
are not touched upon. In other words the works of Cockerell, Zaehnsdorf,
Crane and others are too full, while descriptions in books devoted to
library binding are not full enough.

It is the purpose of this chapter to cover somewhat in detail the main
processes as they are carried out in the best library binderies.
Explanations of the technical terms used will be found in the list of
technical terms at the end of the book.

Without discussing the composition of paper it is necessary to state
that the paper of a book has a very important effect upon its binding.
Its thickness, tensile strength, firmness, toughness, strength after
being sawed or perforated for sewing, and strength after folding, all
have an effect on its durability. Especial emphasis must be laid upon
strength after folding, for it must be remembered that it is through the
fold that the book is sewed. If a crease or a fold in a piece of paper
weakens that piece of paper, it will be impossible to make a strong book
by sewing in the ordinary way. If a fold has very little effect upon the
strength of the paper ordinary sewing may be satisfactory. The folding
of paper in 95 per cent of fiction and juvenile books weakens it at the
fold over 50 per cent. In a good piece of paper the fold weakens it not
over 5 per cent.

The problem of paper is a modern one, due to the use of wood pulp and
other short-fibred materials in paper manufacture. All binders complain
bitterly of the impossibility of binding it properly. The librarian,
however, should know the way in which it can be bound to give the
maximum amount of service and should not allow a binder to blame the
paper for faults which are due to his ignorance or to poor workmanship.

While the customs of library binders vary somewhat according to the
prejudices of the different men, the following description covers the
binding processes carried out at most binderies.

1. TAKING APART

After the books have been checked with the statement of the librarian to
see that the correct number has been received, each one is taken apart
carefully and all old threads, glue, paste, etc., removed from the back.
If the book is in a regular machine sewed publisher's cover it will be
comparatively easy to remove old threads and glue from the back. If in
an old hand sewed one, it may be a little more difficult.

The book is first removed from the cover. The first signature is then
turned back and threads cut with a sharp knife. Generally this will
loosen the signature so that it can be separated easily from the rest of
the volume. If it is still held by glue and there is danger of injuring
the back of the signature, a bone folder is used. If the book had a
tight back and the leather, back-lining paper and glue form a very firm
back not easily separated in the manner described, the glue may be
softened with paste or warm water, with care necessary to prevent the
dampness from penetrating the book.

2. COLLATION

The book should then be collated. The best library binders make
themselves responsible for page collation but they do not bother to see
that all plates, illustrations, maps, etc., which may be called for by
the table of contents, are in proper place. In the case of periodicals
they do not always discover the fact that certain parts, not included in
the main paging, are missing. Their collation is that of main paging
only. Periodicals must, therefore, have title page, table of contents
and index in their proper places. Books with two or more main pagings or
many unpaged illustrations must be collated at the library. (See
Preparing for the bindery, p. 125.)

3. KNOCKING DOWN

(_a_) Backs of signatures are then pounded down so that they may be as
nearly as possible the same thickness as the front of the signatures.
Care must be taken to have a clean hammer and to let it fall evenly on
the paper. If the backs are not properly pounded down there is likely to
be too much swell in the back of the book when it is finally sewed. In
all the first processes of binding the question of undue swelling of the
back must be taken into consideration.

(_b_) If the book must be overcast when it comes to be sewed, the back
is not only pounded down at this stage, but it is also put under the
knife and entirely cut off, leaving single leaves instead of folded
sections. If it is not pounded it cannot be cut properly. The success of
overcasting depends largely on the amount of margin at the back, so that
care must be taken not to cut more than is absolutely necessary.

4. MENDING

Leaves are mended with thin tough paper. The librarian should not,
however, expect binders to mend books which have a large number of torn
leaves without making an extra charge.

5. GLUING

Books which are to be overcast and which have had the backs cut off are
slightly glued to hold the leaves together. A sufficient number can then
be taken off and handled as a section without coming apart.

6. FLY LEAVES GUARDED

Fly-leaves, made of kraft or manila paper running about 60 pounds to the
ream, which have previously been guarded with cloth are added to the
book. In guarding, a strip of cloth is pasted around the back of the
folded fly-leaf covering about one quarter of an inch on each side. When
the book is sewed the needle passes through the cloth as well as the
paper. Different binders use different materials for guarding
fly-leaves, end papers and signatures. It must, however, be a cloth of
close weave, strong, and light in weight. The English cloth called
jaconet, used by some binders, is probably as satisfactory as any.

This is one part of library binding which differs radically from the
custom in ordinary hand work. Old-fashioned binders, unless properly
instructed, will simply fold a piece of paper, and tip it on to the
first and last signatures with paste, thus forming an element of
weakness instead of strength. When the fly-leaves are guarded and
properly sewed they become an integral part of the book and no tipping
is necessary.

7. SECTIONS GUARDED

At this point it is also necessary to guard the first and last
signatures of books which are to be sewed in the regular way. Overcast
books do not need such guards.

Guarding of first and last signatures is another of the distinctive
features of library binding. In the case of books bound in the regular
fashion the sewing invariably first gives way at the first and last
signatures. Guarding with jaconet prevents the threads which lie in the
middle of the signatures from pulling through the paper. This method is
essential if it is supposed that the book will be much used. It is not
essential for books which will be used only occasionally.

8. ILLUSTRATIONS GUARDED

Illustrations are guarded with a thin, tough paper, not with cloth. The
guard folds around an adjoining signature and is sewed through.

9. SAWING

If the book is not to be overcast, it is screwed tightly into the
backing-press and sawed to make the grooves in which the bands or twines
are laid when the book is sewed. Grooves for three bands must be made
for books eight inches high, four for twelve-inch books and five for
fifteen-inch books. For fiction two bands are used. There must also be
two additional grooves, much shallower than the others, about one half
inch from the head and tail of the book for the kettlestitch.

After the grooves for kettlestitch have been sawed the two grooves for
bands will divide the rest of the back into three equal parts. For fine
work it is necessary to measure the book carefully and mark with a
pencil; but in most library work measurement by the eye alone is
sufficient. In sawing, care must be taken not to saw too deeply, since
too deep a cut allows the signature to play back and forth and is
plainly visible inside.

There are some good library binders who overcast books in the modern
way, and yet who sew on bands. Such binders will at this point saw all
books. There are also some good library binders who use no bands when
overcasting and who sew all other books on tapes. These binders omit
sawing.

10. END PAPERS ADDED

At this point it is best to add end papers. These are always guarded on
the outside of the fold and sometimes on the inside. They should be made
of good, strong paper somewhat heavier than that used for fly-leaves.
Some binders have special papers made to order with a design which
serves as a trade mark. End papers, in the same way as fly-leaves, are
prepared with guards in quantity and simply need to be trimmed to the
size of the book. They are not added at the same time as fly-leaves
because they must not be sawed. If this is done the holes show through
after the end paper is pasted down.

11. SEWING

_Regular or Bench Sewing._ When the signatures are ready for sewing,
twines (or "bands" as they are commonly called) are stretched taut on
the sewing bench and adjusted so that they will fit into the saw-cuts in
signatures. (Fig. 1.)

FIGURE 1.--Sewing bench showing bands adjusted.

FIGURE 2.--Sewing on sunken cords. Based on illustration in Report of
the Committee on Bookbinding. Edited for Society of Arts, London, 1905.

The book is placed back of the sewing bench with the fore-edge toward
the sewer and with the first section on top. The first section (i. e.
the end paper) to be sewed is then turned over, opened in the middle by
the left hand, and placed on the sewing bench. The sewer, as she faces
toward the right, with the right hand passes the needle from the outside
through the sawcut for the kettlestitch, where it is taken by the left
hand along the inside of the section and passed out on the near side of
the first band, then in again on the far side of the first band, along
the inside of the section to the second band, where the process is
repeated; and so on, bringing the needle out in the far kettlestitch.
(Fig. 2.) The thread is pulled tight at each stitch and about two inches
of thread is allowed to hang from the first kettlestitch. In some few
cases it may be advisable to bring the needle out on the far side of the
band and in again on the near side, thus entirely encircling the band
with the thread. The next section (i. e. the fly-leaves) is then laid on
and the process repeated, except that the sewing proceeds from the far
end to the near end. When the thread is brought out of the kettle stitch
of the second section the end of the thread left projecting from the
first section is securely tied to it, and the sewer proceeds with the
third section. This will be the first signature of the book. On reaching
the last sawcut at the far end in the third section the needle is put
between the second and first sections carrying the thread down in such a
way as to form a buttonhole stitch. (Fig. 3.)

FIGURE 3.--Kettle stitch.

All other signatures are sewed in the same way, the last section sewed
being securely fastened to the others. It is possible to sew a number of
books one after another without removing them from the sewing-bench. If
the back swells unduly the sections can be pounded down with a piece of
wood, care being taken not to drive them inward. The sewing should be
neither too loose nor too tight. If too loose a firm, compact book
cannot be made; if too tight the threads may break in the process of
backing. Bands are allowed to project about an inch on each side of the
book.

Formerly it was the practice of some binders to sew in a way technically
called "two-on." This simply means that the sewer when reaching the
middle of the signature, passes the needle into the corresponding sawcut
of the signature above and sews through to the other end. This always
leaves an end of a signature unsewed. This way of sewing is permissible
on books which have a large number of thin signatures, in order to
prevent the thread from unduly swelling the back. It is never
permissible on other books.

The foregoing account gives a very brief description of ordinary sewing.
It is easily understood when once seen. Librarians who have charge of
binding should keep the process thoroughly in mind for it is the most
important single process in the making of a book. Such sewing will be
used on a large number of books which have to be rebound, but a still
larger number, practically all fiction and juvenile books, should be
sewed in a different manner; that is, with some kind of an overcast
stitch.

_Overcasting._ The modern overcasting stitch resembles in principle the
old-fashioned whipstitching, but differs radically in actual
performance. It is exceedingly strong, while the old-fashioned
whipstitching is not. It has been objected that modern overcasting takes
away much of the flexibility of a book and that books once sewed in this
way can never be rebound. It is true that an oversewed book is not as
flexible as one sewed through the signatures, yet most of them are more
flexible than one might suppose. It is also true that the book can never
be rebound, but if the overcasting is properly done, the sewing will
last until the book is discarded. It is for this reason that it is used
on practically all fiction and juvenile books.

According to the old-fashioned method of whipstitching it was the custom
to cut off the backs of signatures, glue them slightly, take a few
leaves and sew them over and over making five or six stitches to a
section, as shown in Figure 4. The next section was then sewed in the
same way, but it was not joined in any way to the section beneath
except by the kettlestitch and occasionally by a little paste. When
sewed in this way the leaves inside of each arbitrary section would open
only as far back as the threads of the stitches, while between the
sections the book would open to the back of the section. If paste had
been used the strain of opening tended to pull the leaves apart. If the
book was subjected to hard wear the thread cut into the paper.

FIGURE 4.--Old-fashioned whipstitching. Each section is sewed
separately.

Today every progressive library binder has a special method of
overcasting and each claims that his method is the best. Librarians,
however, can see many points of resemblance between them, and few points
of difference. In actual wearing qualities the sewing of one seems as
good as that of another. When properly done the sewing prescribed by all
of the methods is still in good condition when the books have to be
withdrawn from circulation.

In overcasting, as in old-fashioned whipstitching, the sewer selects a
certain number of sheets for sewing. Bands are placed on the
sewing-bench as in regular sewing, though some binders claim that it is
not necessary to sew either on bands or tapes. The sections are first
perforated by a machine to facilitate the work of the sewer and to
insure that all stitches shall be equidistant from the back of the book.
So far as is known no machine for this purpose is on the market. It is
certain, however, that the best binders have machines for this purpose.
They have either designed their own machines or have adapted those made
for other purposes. If the book is printed on thick, spongy paper it
will increase flexibility if the paper is creased along the line of
perforation.

FIGURE 5.--One kind of modern overcast stitch. There are others equally
good. Note that each stitch extends through two sections.

It is difficult to give a description of modern overcasting which can be
easily understood by one unfamiliar with sewing processes. The reader
will be helped by looking closely at Figure 5 while reading the
following description, but one can understand it best by seeing it done
or by tearing a book apart and examining the sewing.

The first section of the book is sewed over and over in the same way as
in the old-fashioned method of whipstitching, except that a great many
more stitches are taken. The second section, when placed on the first,
is also sewed over and over but a certain number of stitches are also
made which connect the second section with the first. In the same way
the third section is sewed to the second and so on through the book, so
that when the book is finally sewed it is tight and compact; its
weakness lies in the paper itself, not in the sewing. Some binders add
three kettlestitches at the end of the book instead of one, believing
that when all kettlestitches are placed in one sawcut the swell at the
head and tail of the book is too great.

FIGURE 6.--From "About Public Library Books and Their Binding" by Cedric
Chivers.

FIGURE 7.--Sewing on tapes. Sawcuts made only for kettle stitches. Based
on illustration in Report of the Committee on Leather for Bookbinding.
Edited for Society of Arts, London, 1905.

Overcasting is the most expensive way of sewing a book, so that it is
advantageous to binders to place as large a number of leaves as
possible in a section. The more careful binders, however, regulate the
number of leaves in a section according to the kind of paper in the
book. A larger number of leaves can be taken in books printed on thin
paper than in those printed on thick, spongy or heavy papers.

FIGURE 8.--Stitching.

In deciding how a book ought to be sewed one must consider: (_a_) The
use the book is to receive. If it will not receive hard usage sew
through the signatures; otherwise overcast. (_b_) Paper on which the
book is printed. Poor paper should be oversewed. (Fig. 6.)

_Tapes._ When it does not seem necessary to overcast it may be
advantageous to sew on tapes instead of bands. This method eliminates
saw-cuts since the narrow tapes are simply laid against the back of the
book and the needle passed around them, as indicated in Figure 7. Sewing
on tapes makes a book much more flexible than it can be made any other
way except by sewing on raised bands. Music should always be sewed in
this way. Until recently it was supposed that tapes added strength, but
it is certain that they do not if the book is properly bound in other
respects. If used at all, tapes should be narrow. Wide ones take up a
great deal of surface and when glue is applied this surface remains
untouched, unless the sewer has sewed through them instead of around
them.

_Stitching._ Stitching is the process of sewing loose leaves lengthwise
on a sewing machine, after which the stitched sections are sewed in the
regular way on bands. (Fig. 8.) The objection made to old-fashioned
whipstitching, that between the sections the book opens all the way to
the back while inside the section it opens only as far as the threads,
is equally applicable to a stitched book. Any one who has read a book
sewed in this way will remember how difficult it was to hold in the
hands. Stitching makes a stronger book than the old-fashioned
whipstitching but cannot compare in strength with the modern
overcasting. In some few cases it may be used advantageously on the
first and last signatures of a book, but its use on the entire book
cannot be too strongly condemned.

It may be inferred by what has been said about sewing that it is a
comparatively simple matter to sew books properly. It is right at this
point, however, that the librarian and the binder who does not
understand the requirements of library work will come into conflict. The
binder will insist that all books must be sewed on bands. When the backs
of sections are very badly worn he will agree to whipstitch, but will
use the old method. The librarian will insist not only that nine-tenths
of fiction and juvenile books must be overcast, but that a special kind
of overcasting must be used. The binders who make a specialty of library
work do all this as a matter of course. At least one binder tests the
thickness, tensile strength and other qualities of the paper and sews
each book in the way that experience has shown to be the best.


FORWARDING

After the book is sewed it goes to the forwarder who has charge of the
book during all processes which the book passes through between sewing
and finishing. Forwarding includes trimming, gluing, rounding, backing,
putting on back-lining, making the case (or lacing-in, see page 42),
casing-in, pressing.

12. FLY LEAVES PASTED

The end papers and fly-leaves which lie together are pasted together,
making one thick fly-leaf. When it is remembered that both end papers
and fly-leaves are guarded with cloth, it will be seen that pasting the
two together adds materially to the strength of the book.

13. BANDS FRAYED

The bands which project about an inch and a half on each side of the
book are frayed out at the end and pasted to the end papers. The fraying
is done so that they will paste down flat, and the pasting so that they
will be out of the way during succeeding processes.

14. TRIMMING

The book is squared up by tapping on a flat surface, and trimmed at the
head, fore-edge and tail. As little as possible must be trimmed, but
binders find that if less than an eighth of an inch is cut the cutting
machine does not work well. Trimming makes the edges even and what is
more important in rebound books, removes much dirt.

15. SPRINKLING

At this point edges are sprinkled. This process is not essential either
for strength or beauty, but it helps to keep the book from becoming
soiled, or at least from showing dirt. It cannot be expected on cheap
work. The process was formerly done by hand, using a brush and shaking
the coloring matter on the book. It can now be done with a machine
operated by hand which sprays the coloring matter on the book.
Occasionally the top of the book is burnished with an agate or blood
stone.

Occasionally also it may be desirable to gild the top of a book which is
being rebound. When this occurs it is not a process to which the
librarian need give much attention, except to be sure that good gold is
used.

16. GLUING

The back of the book is then slightly glued. The glue must be very hot
and quite thin, and must be thoroughly worked into the back. By placing
books in a pile a number can be done at a time.

17. ROUNDING

As soon as the glue has stiffened but before it is hard the book is
rounded. This must be done by experts and is a process which must be
seen to be understood. The book is placed on the table with the fore
edge toward the workman who then hammers the part of the back lying
uppermost in such a way as to force the upper part of the book toward
the workman. The book is then turned over and the process repeated.
After a few operations like this the back of the book becomes rounded
and the fore edge concave.

18. BACKING

The book is then placed in a backing press allowing about an eighth of
an inch to project, and screwed very tight. With a backing hammer the
rounding process is continued and the sides of the book forced down
over the edge of the press to form a projection against which the edge
of the board for the side rests, forming the joint. In hammering, the
workman begins at the proper distance from the center of the back so
that he can force the backs of the other signatures over on each side
toward the edge. (Fig. 9.)

FIGURE 9.--A book rounded and backed.

This process is the most important one in forwarding, calling for
skilled labor. If the hammer is not used in exactly the right way the
backs of the signatures may be crushed in, the stitches broken, or the
paper or bands cut. In any case the book is materially weakened. A good
workman will make a sharp joint and round the book perfectly without
injuring its strength in any way.

19. BACK LINING

All books have a lining of one kind or another on the back.
Machine-bound books are generally lined with a coarse "super," as it is
called in this country, or "mull" as it is called in England. Some
library binders use a thin muslin, but the best material is canton
flannel cut in strips wide enough to cover the back of the book and also
to project about one inch on each side. The back of the book is glued,
while the nap or fuzzy side of the canton flannel is pasted and then put
on the back and well rubbed down. It is very important that both the
glue and the paste be used. Experience has proved that when only one is
used the canton flannel will come off, but when both are used, it
becomes an integral part of the book.

The flannel which projects on the sides must be pasted to the end
papers. When the paste and the glue have dried, the canton flannel
shrinks tight to the back and adds materially to the strength of the
book. After drying the flannel is trimmed at the head and tail close to
the back.

If the book is a valuable one that will receive hard usage and therefore
should be as strong as possible, the flesh side of a piece of split goat
skin can be used for back-lining, covering the back from joint to joint.
It will seldom be necessary, however, to employ this method.

Perhaps nothing better shows the difference between old methods of
library binding and new than this one item of back-lining. In the old
methods the binders depended for strength largely upon the bands. In the
new the bands are practically immaterial when the book is fastened into
the cover.

20. REBACKING

At this point some binders reback to make a sharp joint, and to make the
book open more easily. When the canton flannel dries it may pull the
back somewhat out of shape. It is doubtful, however, if rebacking is
always necessary.

21. BOARDS CUT

The book is then measured for boards which are cut to the proper size.
In measuring it must be remembered that the boards must project an
eighth of an inch on all edges (except the back) forming what is called
the "squares." It will also make a difference in measuring if the book
is to have a French joint. (See page 46.)

22. CLOTH CUT

If the book is to be bound in cloth, this is cut the proper size. If
leather backs are to be used the covering material consists of two
pieces of cloth and one of leather, all of which must be cut to the
proper size.

23. LOOSE BACK

If the book is to be made a loose back, a piece of coarse paper is cut
the size of the book from joint to joint and the length of the back.
This is placed in the book.

24. MAKING THE CASE

(_a_) The cloth for a full cloth book is now glued all over on the
inside. The boards are adjusted on the book ("setting the square," as
the binders call it) as they ought to be when the book is finally bound,
and the book is placed on the right-hand side of the glued cloth, with
the back toward the middle of the case, leaving enough cloth projecting
on all sides to turn in. The other side of the case is then drawn up
over the board on top and pressed down firmly enough so that when it is
laid back again, the board which has been uppermost goes with it. The
book itself is laid aside. The paper which is to prevent the glued cloth
from sticking to the back of the book is then placed in the space
between the two boards, and all edges of the cloth turned in on the
boards. This forms the complete cover or case.

(_b_) If the book is to have a leather back, the boards are tipped
lightly with paste to the end papers, allowing for the French joint. The
leather is pasted and the book is then laid on the leather in the right
position so that the rest of the leather can be pulled up over the back
on the top board. The top cover is then laid back, the paper forming a
loose back inserted, the leather turned in, and cloth sides put on and
turned in.

25. MAKING OF A FRENCH JOINT

The book is now set back in the cover just described and the space
between the boards and the back is creased with a bone folder while the
cloth or leather is damp. This forms the French joint.

26. PASTING DOWN END PAPERS

End papers are then pasted down to the boards and the book, so far as
strength is concerned, is finished. It will be remembered that the end
papers were guarded with muslin, or jaconet, that the bands projected
beyond the sides and were pasted to the end papers, and that the canton
flannel also projected beyond the sides and was pasted to the end
papers. Therefore, when the end paper is pasted to the board it carries
with it first the canton flannel, then the bands and lastly the jaconet
guard. This is as true of leather-backed books as of full cloth.

Strictly speaking, this makes what is technically known as a "cased"
book, i. e., the case is made in one whole piece and the book fastened
into it. Because leather bound books have always been considered
stronger than others, and because they have always been laced-in to the
boards (see page 42) before the leather has been put on, a prejudice
against cased books has arisen. If the prejudice be directed against the
usual commercial binding it is justified, but if directed against
library books properly cased it is not justified.

27. PRESSING

At this stage the book is put under heavy pressure in the standing press
until dry. A number of books are placed in the press at one time,
separated by backing boards having metal projections which fit into the
French joints. They should be left twelve hours at least, longer if
necessary. After pressing, the book goes through a general cleaning
process. In applying the glue or paste there are many chances of soiling
the book. The great pressure which is applied also squeezes out glue at
the head and tail. This must all be cleaned off before the book goes to
the finisher.


FINISHING

28. GILDING

The gilding of a library book is a simple matter compared with that of
books bound for individuals. Such books are usually meant to be artistic
and their covers bear elaborate designs in gold, generally limited only
by the size of the owner's pocketbook or by his taste.[1] In library
binding gilding is confined to the furnishing of necessary information.
Tooling of all kinds, with the possible exception of that which divides
the back into panels, is unnecessary. A description of finishing
processes is unnecessary here since they add nothing to the strength of
a book. A description of the method of gilding call numbers will be
found on page 194.

There are three different ways of lettering books bound in light colored
cloths on which gold cannot be used: (_a_) In gold on leather labels
pasted to the back. (_b_) In gold on panels which have been stained
black. (_c_) In black ink directly on the back. The first two methods
make more attractive-looking books but the process adds to the expense,
and in the first case the labels have a tendency to peel off. The last
method is the one generally used.


In this description of processes numerous details have been omitted,
because they would add little, if anything, to the librarian's ability
to criticize properly the work being done by his binder.[2] In some
respects the order here outlined may differ in different binderies, but
the majority follow it closely.

The processes as outlined are those which should be used in library
binding. There are, however, several additional points relating to
binding processes with which it is well to be familiar.

    Footnote 1: Finishing from the artistic point of view with an
    excellent description of tools, materials and processes will be
    found in Cockerell's "Binding and the care of books," Chapter 14.

    Footnote 2: For instructions to the binder about type, space,
    lettering, etc., see under Lettering, page 141.


RAISED BANDS

In looking at many old books bound in the eighteenth or early part of
the nineteenth century, or at books bound within recent years for
individuals, one will find many that have the back divided by ridges.
These are known as "raised bands." They are formed by sewing the book
differently from either of the methods described up to this point.

According to this method the bands are not placed in grooves which sink
them below the surface of the back, but are simply laid against the
back. In sewing the thread may come out at the near side of the band and
in at the far side, thus going around the band on the back of the book;
or it may come out at the far side and in at the near side, thus
entirely encircling the band. In either case the sewing is exceedingly
strong. Since the bands are entirely on the surface, the leaves open all
the way to the back of the signatures and greater flexibility can be
obtained thereby. (Fig. 10.)

FIGURE 10.--Sewing on raised bands. No saw cuts except for kettle
stitches. Based on illustration in Report of the Committee on Leather
for Bookbinding. Edited for Society of Arts, London, 1905.

As it is much more difficult to sew and forward books with raised bands,
they are not used in ordinary library work. It may be advisable,
however, to use them occasionally on a few large reference books such as
dictionaries, where great flexibility combined with strength is
essential. In fact the merits of binding in this way are not recognized
as generally as they should be.

Many books look as if they were sewed on raised bands when in reality
they are sewed in the ordinary way, with false raised bands pasted on
the back. They add nothing to strength and have no place in library
binding.


LACING-IN

Lacing-in is a method of attaching the bands to the book, which is in
general use for all leather books bound by hand. This method requires
that the boards which have been cut to the proper size be laid against
the grooves formed in backing and marks be made about half an inch in
from the back, opposite each band. At these points holes are punched
through the board which is then turned over and other holes are punched
about half an inch from the first ones. It is generally desirable to cut
a groove in the board from the first holes to the edge of the board, for
the bands to lie in, so that there will not be an unsightly
protuberance when the book is bound. The bands which have been frayed
out are then threaded through the first holes from the outside of the
board inward and again through the second holes. They are drawn up
tightly enough so that the board will fit close to the joint, but not
enough to prevent it from lying flat. The ends of the bands are spread
out fan-wise, pasted, and hammered down smooth on the board. Before any
back-lining has been put on, the boards are attached to the book simply
by these bands. (Fig. 11.)

FIGURE 11.--Bands laced in, and ends frayed out. Based on illustration
in Report of the Committee on Leather for Bookbinding. Edited for
Society of Arts, London, 1905.

When bands are laced-in it is not customary to use anything stronger
than paper for back lining; the strength of the book lies in the bands
and the leather which covers the back. As long as the leather remains
strong and the book does not receive hard usage this method is
satisfactory. As soon, however, as the leather begins to disintegrate
more strain is placed upon the bands. When the leather breaks completely
the bands bear the entire burden at the joint, and eventually break.
With the process as outlined in the preceding pages one need never fear
that the book will come out of the cover, or that the sides will break
at the joint. Even if the leather should break the canton flannel will
hold. The best library binders do no lacing-in at the present time.

FIGURE 12.--Split boards. In actual work the back-lining would cover the
entire back.


SPLIT BOARDS

While the old method of lacing-in is not desirable in library binding,
the method of using split boards makes a very strong book. Instead of
making a case of cloth, or cloth and leather, the back lining and the
bands (or tapes) are inserted in boards which have been split, or
between two thin boards glued together with a space left unglued for
this purpose. The covering material is put on after the book is in
boards and the book is made tight backed. This is probably the strongest
method of attaching a book to the boards. In fact it is stronger than is
necessary for any except very heavy books which receive hard wear. (Fig.
12.)


TIGHT AND LOOSE BACKS

For years there has been a certain mild controversy regarding the
relative merits of tight and loose backs for leather bound books. Tight
backs are those in which the material used for covering the book is
pasted or glued to the back. Loose backs are those which, by means of
folded paper or a piece of paper put in as described on page 37, are
prevented from adhering to the back. When the book is opened the back
springs out. (Fig. 13.)

The tight back book always forms a hinge at the place where the book is
opened. Since the place of the hinge is constantly changing the back of
the book after much use becomes concave instead of convex, and the
appearance of the book is seriously marred. Also the constant creasing
of the back tends to erase the gold lettering, so that it becomes
indistinct. If labels are put on they speedily come off. It is
customary to use tight backs on very heavy books, though there are cases
where such books have been put in loose backs.

FIGURE 13.--Tight back and loose back.

The loose-back book always preserves its shape and good appearance, even
when the paper on the inside may be so badly worn that the book should
be withdrawn. The strain, however, always comes at the joint; therefore
if poor leather is used it will quickly wear out at this point.

Each method has its advocates, but so far as the present writer can
learn, there seems to be little to choose from the standpoint of
strength. It might seem that the tight-back book would be the stronger,
but as a matter of fact in actual wear loose-back books seem to hold
their own with the others. In fact when the soft, spongy papers are used
the loose backs are obviously stronger. It seems clear that there is
little choice one way or the other, and the question must be decided by
the personal preference of the librarian.


JOINTS

In library binding French joints are now used in place of regular
joints. Figure 14 shows plainly the difference between the two. In the
regular joint it will be noticed that when the book is opened there is a
sharp crease in one line from head to tail. In the French joint the
strain is distributed over a much greater area. In regular joints the
leather is sometimes pared at the joints to permit of easier opening of
the book. In French joints the full thickness of the leather can be
used. French joints are made by setting the boards away from the back
about one-eighth of an inch. When the cover is put on it is necessary to
crease between the board and the back while the leather is still damp.

An excellent illustration showing the anatomy of a joint may be found on
page 51 of Dana's "Notes on bookbinding for libraries," ed. 2.

Illustration: A Section of an Ordinary Joint with the board open shows
that the creasing of the leather is concentrated on one line.

Illustration: A Section of a "French Joint" shows how this creasing is
distributed over a great surface, and so enables sufficient flexibility
to be obtained with much thicker leather than can be used with an
ordinary joint.

FIGURE 14.--French joint. From Report of the Committee on Leathers for
Bookbinding. Edited for Society of Arts, London, 1905.


CORNERS

Corners on library books should be rounded to prevent the board from
breaking if the book falls and to prevent the cloth from wearing through
at this point. Rounded corners are peculiar to library binding. As a
rule they are not made by cutting off a corner of the board, but by
turning in the cloth diagonally from the corner and then from the side
and end. Sometimes both methods are adopted. If government specification
cloth is used it is probable that "library corners" will not be
necessary.

In some libraries pieces of leather or vellum are put on corners.
Leather is put on in order to raise the bottom of the boards from the
shelf, while vellum is used to make the corners hard and prevent them
from breaking or showing signs of wear. While both serve the purpose for
which they are intended, the process of putting them on adds materially
to the expense, and in most cases this is not warranted by the increased
use of the book.


TRIMMING

Binders should be instructed to trim as little as possible. This is
important for all books, but most of all for periodicals. In fiction and
juvenile books it is important to have wide margins, because the text
will remain legible for a longer period of time if protected by a margin
from the contact of hands. Non-fiction books which are likely to remain
in use for a longer period of years may need to be rebound and trimmed
again. Therefore wide margins are essential to good wear as well as to
good appearance.

It is customary to bind front covers of periodicals. Sometimes it is
desirable to bind advertising pages, and it is necessary to do so when
the publishers follow the pernicious practice of continuing regular
articles on advertising pages. Covers and advertising pages are
generally printed with much narrower margins than the body of the
magazine and unless great care is taken in trimming parts of the printed
matter will be cut off.


HEADBANDS

Cotton headbands can be added during the forwarding but inasmuch as they
are simply pasted on they add nothing to the strength and very little to
the beauty of the book. When silk headbands are carefully sewed on they
add both strength and beauty. An excellent description of the process of
putting on headbands will be found in Cockerell's "Binding and the care
of books," page 147.


HOW TO RECOGNIZE A WELL BOUND BOOK

The ability to recognize a well bound book is necessary when comparing
the work of different binders. A book should be bound in material
suitable for the use which the book is to receive and in such a way as
to give the maximum amount of service. It should also be as attractive
in appearance as is compatible with these two requirements. In deciding
whether a book is suitably bound for library use the following points
should be kept in mind:

1. A volume must show evidence of neat and careful workmanship.

2. If the book is to be used constantly leather is essential; if
occasionally only, leather is an element of weakness.

3. All books that receive hard usage should have end papers and
fly-leaves guarded with cloth. If sewed regularly the first and last
signatures also should be guarded.

4. Saw cuts should not be deep.

5. The book should be flexible and stay flat wherever opened. (This is
not always possible in the case of overcast books or books printed on
stiff, brittle paper.)

6. When the book is lying flat the top should remain flat. When standing
on end the sections should not separate slightly at the back.

7. The book should feel firm and compact to the hand.

8. When opened the volume should not make a crackling noise due to too
much glue on the back.

9. The book should have a well rounded back and the cover should fit
well at the joint. Flat backs are not desirable.

10. Margins should be wide and cut straight. Periodicals should not be
trimmed so that printing on covers or advertisements is cut off.

11. The book should have French joints.

12. The cover should not separate easily from the book when pressure is
applied.

13. Lettering on the back should be legible and put on straight.

14. On opening the book sections at the back should be perfectly smooth,
showing that they have not been crushed in backing.

15. Guards for plates, maps, sections, etc., should be so applied as to
leave the paper unwrinkled.




CHAPTER IV

MATERIALS


In a recent pamphlet issued by the Government Printing Office,
containing a list of materials and articles used in the printing and
binding of public documents, the number of items for binding alone
reaches the surprising total of 171. Many of these are materials used in
marbling, others indicate slight variations of color and weight in
standard leathers and cloths. But exclusive of all these the number of
materials called for is over forty.

It is not the writer's purpose to discuss all of these forty or more
materials, but it seems necessary to mention that many materials other
than those used in covering books (always some kind of cloth or leather)
are used in binding. Furthermore, the strength of the book after it is
bound will depend almost as much upon the materials used in its inner
construction as upon those used in covering it. The inner materials, if
not wisely selected as to quality or in reference to the kind of service
which the book is to receive, may cause an otherwise excellently bound
book to give poor service.

In general, however, a reference to binding materials means those which
are used in covering books. It is the cover which renders a book
attractive or unattractive, and which contributes more than any other
one item, except possibly sewing, to the long life of the book. We
should therefore know the initial cost of different covering materials
and the length of service which each material will give under different
conditions. When they are not imitations we should be able to recognize
the best-known materials, either on or off the books. An unscrupulous
binder can easily take advantage of ignorance of these matters.

So far as the librarian is concerned only two classes of materials need
be considered for the covers of books--leathers and book cloths. This
does not indicate a restriction of choice, for when we consider that
leather comes from a large number of animals, that there are a great
many different kinds of cloth, that cloths and leathers can be obtained
in a great variety of colors, there seems to be an embarrassment of
riches. As a matter of fact most librarians confine themselves to four
kinds of leather and four or five kinds of cloth, each in three or four
different shades.


LEATHER

The most expensive materials used in covering books and those which
vary most in quality are leathers, the skins of animals which have been
tanned and made flexible. The best bookbinding leathers are those which
are flexible both in the skin and on books, and the surface of which is
not easily damaged by friction. Owing to the many kinds of leathers and
their variation in quality, it is difficult to learn to know them well.

The skins of all sorts of animals have been used for covering books.
Certain ones, not suitable for library binding, are still used for the
purpose in various parts of the country, so that librarians need to
become expert in their knowledge of which leathers may be employed and
which ought to be rejected.

Variations in the same kinds of leathers are caused by:

(_a_) _Age._ Skins of animals which have not reached full growth should
not be used for binding library books. Since they are immature, the
fibres have not become tough, and they have not reached their maximum
thickness. If the skins which the binder is using are exceptionally
small, it is probable that the animals from which they were obtained
were too young. On the other hand, the skins of very old animals should
not be used, since the fibres of the skins have lost something of their
flexibility and strength. They cannot be readily detected, but they are
sure to give poor service. As an illustration of the effect which age
has upon leather it will be sufficient to note the well-known fact that
calf skin is useless for library purposes, while cowhide within certain
well-defined limits is exceedingly useful.

(_b_) _The sex of the animal._ It has been proved beyond question that
the skin from the female of some animals, notably goats, does not wear
as well as that from the male.

(_c_) _Country from which they come._ It is an interesting fact that the
skin of a sheep which comes from Persia is not the same kind of a skin
as that of a sheep which is raised in the United States. In general, it
may be said that skins from animals inhabiting warm countries are more
likely to be serviceable than those from the same kind of animals
inhabiting cold countries. In the cold countries more of the strength
goes into the fur or hair which protects it, while in warm countries a
greater amount of strength goes into the skin itself.

In addition to variations due to these causes there is likely to be a
certain amount of variation in different parts of the same skin. That
part of the skin which comes from the back of the animal is tougher than
that which comes from the abdomen. The difference is very noticeable in
the skins of some animals, less so in others.

_Decay of Leather._ Of late years there has been much dissatisfaction
expressed over the decay of modern leathers. In many cases leathers 100
years old or more are in a fair state of preservation, while many
leathers--perhaps we should say most leathers--30, 20 or even 10 years
old, show signs of decay, and some have rotted away almost entirely. In
no way is the decay of modern leathers shown more conclusively than in
a long file of the sheep-bound set of the United States Public
Documents. The earlier volumes, covering the 15th Congress up to the
36th, will in general be found to be in a good state of preservation.
About the year 1860, however, marked deterioration appears. In some
cases it seems as if the backs had entirely disintegrated. While a
sheep-bound set is the best example of the decay of modern leathers,
many libraries have been greatly annoyed by the decay of other leathers
which are supposed to be much stronger than sheepskin.

So great was the dissatisfaction with modern leathers that in the year
1900 the Society of Arts in London appointed a committee to investigate
modern leathers and to ascertain the best methods for preparing leathers
for binding. The report of this committee was published in 1905, and a
general knowledge of its contents is necessary for those who wish to
know why leathers decay and how they may be preserved. Another valuable
work which should be carefully studied is entitled "Leathers for
libraries," published by the Sound Leather Committee of the Library
Association in England. In a chapter of this book J. Gordon Parker, Ph.
D., Director of the London Leather Industries Research Laboratories,
tells us that the chief causes of decay are as follows:

    1. The introduction of tanning materials other than oak and sumac,
    stronger in tannin, and more rapid in their action. Many of these
    tanning materials are unstable, and the leather produced
    disintegrates on exposure to light and air.

Tanning is the process of changing hides, which are animal matter
subject to decay, into material which is strong and flexible and which
is not subject to decay. There are two groups of tanning materials. The
one called the pyrogallol group, which includes sumac, gall nuts and oak
bark, is commended by the Committee of the Society of Arts. The other is
called the catechol group and is strongly condemned. Among the materials
belonging to the catechol group are hemlock bark and larch, used chiefly
in this country, and turwar bark used largely in tanning East Indian
goat and sheep skins.

The United States Government Printing Office proposals call for leathers
tanned with a pyrogallol tannin, since it has been proved that such
leathers prove most resistant to the evil effects of light, heat and
gas. If a skin has been tanned with sumac, or sumac in combination with
oak bark, it has received the best possible preparation for its life as
a bookbinding leather.

It is not possible, neither is it necessary, to have all leathers tanned
with sumac. Those leathers which are intended to remain on the shelves
for many decades, should be in this tannage. Those which will be
discarded in a few years may be tanned in a less expensive manner. Even
some of the quick, modern materials, which accomplish in a few hours
what once would have taken weeks, are not too poor for leathers which
are not to be kept indefinitely.

Even the expert cannot detect skins which have not been tanned and dyed
properly, but leathers which last a short time may be suspected either
of being improperly tanned or of having some kind of injurious acid in
their composition.

    2. The use of dried and cured skins of variable soundness imported
    from abroad. Goat, calf and sheep skins are imported into this
    country (England) from all over the world; some are simply dried in
    the sun, some salted, whilst others are cured with various
    ingredients.

    3. The use of infusions of acids and other bleaching agents to
    produce bright and even shades of colour.

Skins tanned with sumac are light-colored and can be dyed any desired
color. Most other tanning materials, however, make darker-colored skins,
which can be dyed only with dark colors. It has been found possible to
scour and bleach skins with sulphuric acid and to re-tan with sumac.

    4. The use of sulphuric or other mineral acids for the purpose of
    developing the depth of colour during the process of dyeing.

Sulphuric acid is the cause of decay of over 90% of modern bookbinding
leathers. Having once been used, it cannot be wholly removed without the
use of other chemicals.

    5. The shaving and splitting of skins for producing an even
    substance.

In splitting and shaving, the long, strongest fibres of the skin are
torn or cut off, and the part which remains for binding purposes is the
weakest part of the skin.

    6. Printing and embossing grains upon leather, together with other
    methods of finishing now in common use.

There are various ways of bringing out the natural grain of leathers
which are perfectly legitimate and which do no harm. The danger in
graining comes when the grain is embossed by means of a plate, which is
heated and pressed on the skin. No good leather should ever be embossed.

    7. The stripping, scouring, souring and re-tanning of East India
    leathers (Persians).

Some imported skins are only partially tanned, and it is necessary to
wash out the tannin with some kind of alkali, which also takes out much
of the natural grease of the skin. They are then treated with sulphuric
acid and re-tanned. They are always poor and are seldom sold as
re-tanned skins.

    8. The removal of the natural grease or nourishment of the skin.

The foregoing eight causes of decay are beyond our direct control. The
leathers are manufactured and put on the market, and the binder has to
use such as he is able to obtain. No matter how much the librarian may
insist upon leathers free-from-acid, he is helpless if the binder cannot
obtain them. All that he can do is to insist that leathers without acid
must be used, if obtainable.

Although these causes of decay are beyond the librarian's control, there
are several causes of decay quite within his power to avoid. They are
the following, due to improper methods used in binding, or to physical
conditions after the book is on the shelf:

1. Direct sunlight.

2. Gas fumes. This evil is hard to guard against if there are gas pipes
in the building. There is sure to be more or less leakage, and even a
small amount of gas in the air has a bad effect upon leather.

3. Tobacco smoke. This is not likely to be very detrimental in
libraries, since the rules generally forbid smoking.

4. Excessive dampness, which encourages mildew.

5. Extreme dry heat. A temperature much in excess of 70 deg. Fahrenheit is
likely to dry up the oil which gives flexibility to leather.

6. Undue wetting or stretching the leather in covering. Some binders
soak the leathers and stretch them in placing them on the books. When
the leathers dry they shrink, the fibres are strained and the life of
the leather shortened.

7. Use of poor paste in binding. This frequently sets up a fermentation
that is very harmful to leathers.

8. Dust, especially in conjunction with dampness, is very injurious to
leather.

Doubtless there are other things which have a deleterious effect upon
leathers in libraries; but if a library is well ventilated, if
leather-covered books are not kept in cellars or basements that are very
damp, or where direct sunlight can fall upon them, and if the binder
uses good paste and proper care in covering the books, we may reasonably
place the responsibility of undue decay of leathers upon the
manufacturers.

The various reports quoted so far have dealt with qualities of leathers
due to tanning, manufacture, method of binding and time in use. Natural
or mechanical qualities of leathers have not been touched upon. Those
who are interested in this phase of the question should read the report
of Mr. Cedric Chivers on "The relative value of leathers and other
binding materials," made at the meeting of the American Library
Association at Pasadena in 1911. Mr. Chivers employed Mr. Alfred Seymour
Jones, in England, to make tests which would show the tearing and
breaking strain of various leathers. These natural qualities of leathers
are obviously important, but too much stress must not be laid upon them.
It is possible that a leather naturally strong and tough when new would
rapidly deteriorate with age. The records as presented in Mr. Chivers'
report must be taken in conjunction with facts determined by the
investigation of the Society of Arts. In the main, however, it will be
found that leathers which best stood the tests of the Society of Arts
also showed the greatest resistance to the tearing and breaking strains
made by Mr. Chivers.

_Preservation of Leather._ Various attempts have been made both by
librarians and others to discover some substance which would preserve
leather effectually after the book is bound. Some of these attempts have
been temporarily successful, but time alone will tell whether leathers
are permanently preserved by the treatments used, or whether
applications of the preservative must be frequently made. Owing to the
fact that in law libraries practically all the books published previous
to 1900 were bound in sheepskin, the lasting qualities of leathers is a
question that affects law libraries more than any other. Dr. Wire, of
the Worcester (Mass.) County Law Library, who has made a careful study
of the problem, advises the use of vaseline or some other similar
by-product of petroleum well rubbed into the leather with the bare hand
and allowed to dry in the air until the leather has absorbed it. Better
results were obtained by allowing the volumes to dry in the summer by
natural heat instead of artificial heat in the winter. For some books
Dr. Wire makes use of a bookbinder's varnish after the softening product
has thoroughly penetrated the leather. A full description of the
processes may be obtained from Dr. Wire's pamphlet, "Leather
preservation," published in 1911.

Some of the disadvantages of Dr. Wire's method are:

1. The necessity of rubbing in the preservative from three to five
times, according to the condition of the leather at the time of first
treatment.

2. The care necessary to prevent the material used from smearing tables,
trucks, floor, shelves and clothing at time of application; also when
books are back on the shelves the care required to keep from rubbing
against them and the necessity of wiping them off when they are handed
to readers.

3. The tendency of books to swell at the back when first treated in this
way, demanding extra care lest, in an effort to pull out one book, a
whole shelf-full fall to the floor.

4. The repetition of the process after ten years.

It is possible that these drawbacks will be sufficient to dissuade all
except the most stout-hearted from using this method of preserving
leather. Rebinding in cloth seems to be much more simple and, on the
whole, not much more expensive.

The question of a preservative is discussed in the Report of the Society
of Arts, from which the following quotation is taken:

  Enquiries have frequently been made as to the use of
  preservative pastes upon old bindings. It has been mentioned
  that the seasonings of white of egg or blood albumen usually
  employed in finishing leather have some preservative effect,
  and no harm can arise from the application of very thin
  coatings of white of egg. The use of ammonia to thin or
  preserve the solution must be avoided, but the whites, after
  thorough beating, may be rendered antiseptic by the addition
  of a small quantity of camphor, thymol, or some essential oil.
  Vaseline has been employed as a dressing, and, if otherwise
  suitable, will no doubt have a preservative effect upon the
  leather. A very moderate use of the wax, soap, and turpentine
  preparations made as shoe pastes, is also likely to be
  beneficial, and no doubt a special preparation might be made
  on these lines which would be still more suitable. Paraffin wax
  dissolved in benzine is also harmless, and the surface to
  which it has been applied takes a good polish with a flannel
  after drying. Professor Proctor has experimented with a
  finish introduced by the Berlin Aniline Company some years
  ago for coloured leathers, with apparently satisfactory results.
  The preparation is practically a very hard stearine soap with
  excess of stearic acid, and is made by boiling 8 parts of
  stearic acid with 1 part of caustic soda and 50 parts of water
  until thoroughly dissolved, and then adding 150 parts of cold
  water and stirring till the material sets to a jelly. It is
  applied very thinly with a sponge or rag, and after thorough
  drying is polished with a soft brush or flannel. The alkali
  present in the soap is useful in neutralising any mineral acids
  contained in the leather. In very acid leathers it has been
  noticed that the sodium sulphate so formed will sometimes
  appear upon the surface as a white film, but this is easily
  removed with a damp cloth, and the surface, after drying,
  repolished with flannel.

Old books which it is desirable to preserve as long as possible in their
original bindings and books which will be used very little may be
treated with some form of preservative. If the book is to be much used,
it would better be rebound. Dr. Wire's experiments have been carried on
exclusively with law books. Whether the same processes could be used on
books bound in morocco or pigskin is something that has not yet been
determined. Most leather-bound books break first at the joint. The sheep
bindings in a law library would show signs of disintegration long before
the leather reached the breaking point, whereas the librarian would
first notice that morocco was decaying when the leather actually
cracked. Once cracked, no amount of preservative would do any good.


KINDS OF LEATHER[3]

The leathers that have been used in binding books have come from all
sorts of animals, but so far as the librarian is concerned the skins of
four animals only need be taken into consideration--the sheep, the cow,
the pig and the goat. In England some experiments have been made with
sealskin, but it has not been used long enough to give any definite idea
of its resistance to the encroachments of time.

    Footnote 3: The prices of leathers given in the text are those
    which prevailed during the summer of 1915.

SHEEPSKIN

Sheepskin is a soft, flexible leather with weak fibres, and with a
surface easily abraded. It has been used for bindings practically ever
since books were put into leathers; and, under the old methods of
tanning and manufacturing, proved satisfactory. In many libraries it is
possible to see leather books bound in sheep in the 17th century which
are in a good state of preservation. Even the sheep of the beginning of
the 19th century is frequently well preserved. Since 1860, however, the
quality of sheep has greatly deteriorated. This is bad enough, but
unfortunately sheep likes to masquerade under the name of morocco and
other leathers of a better grade, so that its use is much more extensive
than appears at first sight. In the process of imitation the grain of
the leather imitated is stamped on the skin. When this is done it
generally takes an expert to detect the fact that the leather is not
what it pretends to be, and even experts are sometimes deceived after
the leather is on a book.

The strongest sheepskins are made when tanned with oak bark. Sumac,
which is such a valuable tanning material with other leathers, is here
inferior to oak.

There are two kinds of sheepskin, the wool sheep which is known to all,
and the hair sheep which is not found in the United States, and which in
reality is a cross between a sheep and a goat. The hair sheep comes
from India, China, South America and Africa, generally from mountainous
districts. It has a much tougher fibre and is a better wearing skin than
that of the wool sheep. Unfortunately most of these skins, which are all
imported, are made into shoe leather. When properly tanned they are very
suitable for library binding, and their use for that purpose is
increasing.

The wool sheepskin in its natural color has been used for many years for
binding law books. It is seldom used for anything except government
documents and law books, and for this reason is known as "law-sheep."

_Roan._ Roans, the term used for sheepskins after they are dyed, can be
used advantageously on books which will be handled a great deal, and
which in any event will not stay on the shelves indefinitely. Properly
tanned and dyed, they make a satisfactory leather for a time, but their
life under the best of conditions seldom exceeds ten or twelve years.
While this is true of good roans, it unfortunately remains true that in
the United States, at least, it is difficult to get roans that are
properly tanned and dyed. Therefore, unless one is sure that the quality
of the skin is the best, he should use no sheep under any conditions.

_Skiver._ Skiver is the outside of a sheepskin which has been split, the
inner side being known as the flesher. It is a leather much used for
commercial binding, but since the splitting process takes away a great
part of the strength of the skin, leaving it not much stronger than
strong paper, skiver is wholly unfitted for library use.

COWHIDE

Cowhide, sometimes known as American russia, is a leather which has
increased enormously in use in the last twenty-five years. It is a
thick, coarse leather, rather unattractive in appearance, strong when
new, but with age rapidly deteriorating in quality, even when no
deleterious substance has been used in tanning or dyeing. It is a harder
leather to work than roan, but the quality is much more uniform and it
can be used advantageously for binding fiction and other books which
will be much used. In its natural state (undyed) it can be used in place
of law-sheep for law books, but has a tendency to become dark. It can be
obtained in many colors. Since it is too thick a leather to be used in
full thickness, practically all skins are split, and the amount of flesh
left with the grain determines the weight of the leather. A greater or
less amount is taken off according to the purpose for which the leather
is intended. Bookbinding cowhide costing 20c to 25c. a square foot is
the lightest weight leather that has the right to be called cow.[4] The
life of cowhide is from five to twelve years.

_Buffing._ Buffing is practically only the grain of cowskin from which
almost all the flesh has been split. It is not suitable for library
books, since it is very thin and begins to disintegrate in less than
five years. After it is on the volume it is hard to detect, so that some
library binders have been tempted to use it instead of cow. But as
buffing is never sold as cow, the library binder has no excuse for
keeping it in stock.

    Footnote 4: This is the normal price of cow. The European war has
    had the disastrous effect of raising the price and lowering the
    quality. Until conditions become normal again all cowhide should be
    shunned.

PIGSKIN

Pigskin is one of the strongest leathers, having a hard, resisting
surface and a good, tough fibre. In the grain, the holes which were left
when bristles were removed are plainly visible, giving the leather a
distinctive appearance, which can be imitated successfully, but which is
much less often imitated than the grain of morocco. If there be doubt of
the genuineness of pig, soak a piece of the leather until it has
absorbed a quantity of water, and then stretch it. If the grain pulls
out, it is imitation; if genuine, the bristle holes still show plainly.
Oak bark tanning is the best for this leather, and, since it is more
nearly gristle (less fibrous) than other leathers, dyes and chemicals
should not be used which will interfere with its quality of resisting
friction. It should be used in its natural color whenever possible.

Pigskin frequently comes in skins which are too thick for the binder to
work easily, or which are very uneven in thickness. In such cases the
paring down of the skin is likely to injure its strength. Because of its
thickness pig is generally supposed to be more suitable for large than
for small books, but inasmuch as several binders have used it
successfully for years on small books, it may be taken for granted that
it can be used with good results on all books, large or small, which are
to receive hard usage. It needs constant handling, and the absorption of
a certain amount of oil from the hands to keep it pliable. Otherwise it
dries rapidly and cracks along the joint. This, however, is true of all
leathers to a greater or less extent. Pig costs from 40c. to 45c. a
square foot.

GOAT

The leather which makes the strongest and most attractive binding comes
from the skins of goats and is called morocco, because it originally
came from that country. In the course of time goat skins from other
countries were tanned with sumac (originally a distinguishing
characteristic of a genuine morocco), but the same name was applied so
that we now have the paradoxical terms, Turkey morocco, Levant morocco,
etc. Moroccos have a beautiful grain, are flexible, soft and pliable to
the hand, and resist hard wear; qualities which contribute to their
great popularity.

Morocco varies greatly in quality as well as in appearance.
Unfortunately the skins which are best in quality, considering the
length of time they will wear, are not always those best in appearance.
The skins of goats with long hair from the colder countries make
beautiful bindings; but the skins of goats from the hot countries, such
as the interior of Africa, having short hair, while not so attractive in
appearance, are tougher and wear longer. In addition to the many grades
of genuine morocco there are as many more imitations of it made from
sheepskin, cowhide, etc. Only the expert can detect some of them in the
skin, and even he may be deceived when the leather is on the back of the
book.

In general it should be said that genuine morocco is the most expensive
leather that a library can use, and that it can be used to the greatest
advantage only occasionally. It makes an excellent binding for large
reference books which are constantly handled, for art books which must
be attractively bound, and for some periodicals which are much used in
reference work. It is not used nearly so much in libraries to-day as it
was ten or fifteen years ago, and it is quite safe to say that it will
be used less ten years from to-day than it is now.

_Levant morocco_, made from the skins of Angora goats, is the most
expensive and most beautiful leather used in binding. It has a large,
prominent grain, but is far too expensive for any library to use,
especially when it must be conceded that in its wearing quality it does
not equal that of some less expensive moroccos. Mr. Chivers' test showed
that so far as tensile strength goes, this leather is very much weaker
than many leathers much less expensive. When the skin has been subjected
to pressure until the surface is smooth it is known as "crushed levant."

_Turkey morocco_, made of skins of goats from Turkey, is a very strong,
durable leather which all libraries will find occasion to use from time
to time. It is very easily imitated. Under exposure to atmospheric
conditions existing in many libraries its life may not extend beyond
thirty years. In one library at least, where conditions of light and
heat were poor, the best Turkey morocco that the market afforded showed
signs of disintegration within twelve years. Good Turkey morocco can be
obtained for 35c. a square foot.

_Persian morocco_, which comes from the skin of a Persian sheep (not
goat), is not particularly attractive in appearance and is very poor in
quality. It is used extensively for commercial work, but is absolutely
valueless for library binding.

_Niger morocco_ is a goat skin which comes from the interior of Africa,
generally by way of Tripoli, and is by no means a recent discovery,
though we knew little about it five years ago. It is tanned by natives
according to some method of vegetable tanning not completely known at
this time. While in appearance it is not so attractive as some other
moroccos, because of blemishes due to carelessness in handling and to
the imperfect removal of some of the hairs, it has been proved by the
tests made under the direction of Mr. Chivers to be stronger than all
other moroccos; the inference is that it is more durable. Until recently
it has been very hard to obtain in the United States.

_Bock morocco_ is not a morocco but a split Persian sheep so poor in
quality that it is mentioned only to be condemned.

CALFSKIN

Calfskin in all its various characters, such as divinity, kip, marbled,
mottled, smooth, tree, or just plain calf is a very beautiful leather
much used in the past for binding books for individuals. For this
purpose it has, of late years, been crowded out by Levant morocco. It
has a soft, smooth surface which disintegrates rapidly under the action
of heat and gas and has little strength even for temporary use. For the
library it is useless.

RUSSIA LEATHER

This is a brownish-red leather made from the skins of different animals,
tanned with willow bark and filled with a preparation of birch oil which
gives it its peculiar odor. Neither in its genuine form nor in imitation
is it a useful leather for libraries.

SEALSKIN

Although experiments have been made with it in some English libraries
sealskin has never been much used in the United States for library
binding. It is made from the skins of the hair seal, the supply coming
from all parts of the North Atlantic Ocean. According to Mr. Douglas
Cockerell and other binding experts in England, the skin is peculiarly
suited for library use. It is reported to be a hard-wearing leather,
tough and pliable, even in quality so that no part of the skin must be
discarded because too thin or too weak, and possessing a beautiful
grain. The price ranges from a point somewhat higher than that of the
poorer moroccos to one somewhat lower than the higher prices.
Unfortunately it can be easily imitated.

VELLUM

Probably no discussion of leather is complete without mentioning vellum,
a binding material which does not resemble leather, but which
nevertheless is made from calfskin or sometimes from goat skin. It is
prepared by the use of lime, and as far as the actual wear on flat
surface is concerned, is perhaps better than any leather. It is,
however, very susceptible to moisture, which makes it warp; and to
light, which makes it hard and brittle. Since it is very hard, does not
bend easily and is hard to work, its chief use is on the corners of
books to protect them and make them less likely to break or rub. Large
libraries have used it somewhat for this purpose, but the use is dying
out.

In making a study of leathers it is well to obtain samples of all kinds,
including those which are unsuitable for library use, and to examine
them carefully, noting the appearance of the grain, thickness of skin,
flexibility, and softness of surface. Perhaps more money can be wasted
through ignorance of the comparative values of different kinds of
leather which it is permissible to use in library binding, than in
mismanagement of any other part of binding.


CLOTH

Cloth is fully as important as leather in the economy of binding.
Several years ago it was the custom to bind periodicals and other books
which were used comparatively seldom in leather, while fiction,
juvenile and other books which wore out quickly were bound in cloth.
Recently the opposite course has been more favored. Books which receive
unusually hard usage and are in the hands of readers constantly are
bound in leather; while those which are used seldom, including
periodicals, are bound in some kind of cloth. Without doubt the change
is a wise one. Even the best of leather disintegrates in time under the
action of heat, gas, light, etc., and to-day many a volume bound in
leather ten or fifteen years ago has parted from its sides,
necessitating rebinding or recovering. Had it been bound in a good
quality of cloth it would to-day be in good condition, and probably
would remain in good condition for a hundred years. It requires
considerable courage to change the binding of a good set of a standard
periodical, such as the Atlantic or Harper's, from an attractive half
morocco binding to an unattractive buckram. Unquestionably, if economy
is an object, the change should be made, except possibly in the case of
a library which uses these periodicals daily. Every librarian must
decide each case for himself strictly according to the use the set is to
receive, always bearing in mind the fact that leather disintegrates with
time, whereas cloth does not unless exposed to excessive moisture.

No cloth which is suitable for library use is perfectly satisfactory
because it has not the strength of good leather, cannot be used
advantageously on very heavy books, soils easily and with use grows soft
and flabby, especially along the joints. But on the other hand even
those not suitable for libraries which are used by the publisher on
cheap books are much better than poor grades of leathers, such as
skiver, bock, buffing, etc.

The requisite qualities of a good cloth are:

(_a_) Endurance when folded back and forth in the same place, so that it
may withstand the wear at the joint caused by opening the book.

(_b_) Smoothness, so that there will be a comparatively small amount of
friction when withdrawing a book from between two others on the shelf.

(_c_) Ability to withstand constant rubbing back and forth on tables.

(_d_) Color that is fast when exposed to light; if possible it should be
fast to water also, though this is less important.

(_e_) Color should be dyed in the piece, not pressed in by machinery.

Many cloths have some of these qualities but few have all of them. So
far as is known to the writer only the grade of cloth described on page
77 has the last qualification.

Practically all cloth used in the United States is made of cotton. The
best cloths are manufactured by The Holliston Mills, Norwood, Mass.; The
Interlaken Mills, New York City; The Joseph Bancroft & Sons Company,
Wilmington, Del., and by the Winterbottom Company and the Manchester
Book Cloth Company in England. Since a number of grades are made in
several different patterns and a great number of shades for each grade
and each pattern, a variety of choice is permitted. As a matter of
fact, however, most librarians select a good grade with a regular weave
and confine themselves to a few standard shades, such as dark green,
brown, red, dark blue, and tan.

Since the strength of the warp is much greater than that of the weft, it
is advisable when possible to cover books with the warp running across
the cover. This, however, may entail some hardship on the binder for it
may frequently happen that in order to cut his cover economically he
must make the warp run lengthwise of the book. If a strong cloth is used
the advantage is not great enough to be insisted upon.

Each of the American firms mentioned makes three distinct grades, all of
which libraries may use. Each firm uses a different name for each grade.
In other words, there are no general names which can be used for the
corresponding grade in all makes. Therefore for the purposes of this
chapter these cloths will be considered under the heads of Grades 1, 2
and 3, but it must be remembered that this is an arbitrary designation
not known to the trade. Under each grade will be given the specific
names used by the three manufacturers.

GRADE 1

Grade one of cloth, the cheapest that a librarian may use, is not made
of the best quality of cotton thread and should never be used under any
circumstances for full binding. It may be used on the sides of books
bound in leather; if this be done the corners should be covered with
vellum, for this cloth does not withstand hard usage and is likely to
fray at the corners. It is a cloth commonly used by publishers, but
should be used sparingly by the librarian. "Art vellum" made by the
Interlaken Mills, "Aldine vellum" made by the Holliston Mills, and
"Linen finish" made by the Joseph Bancroft & Sons Company, come within
this grade.

GRADE 2

(_a_) Grade two is made of a better grade of cotton and with a closer
weave than the preceding, but is not sufficiently strong to be used for
full binding. It can be used more satisfactorily than the preceding on
the sides of books bound in leather or duck. In common with all cloths,
except the buckram made according to the government specifications
(which will be discussed later), the different colors are not made, as
one might suppose, by dyeing the cloth after it is woven, but by mixing
the color with the sizing or starch which is used in finishing the
cloth, and pressing it into the cloth by machinery. As a natural result
the color rubs off with wear and the natural gray of the original cloth
as first woven appears. "Art canvas" made by the Interlaken Mills,
"Classic buckram" made by the Holliston Mills, and "Polished buckram,"
by the Joseph Bancroft & Sons Company come within this grade.

(_b_) _Buckram._ Under the name of buckram various grades of cloth are
manufactured which resemble to a greater or less degree those mentioned
under Grade 2 (_a_). Generally it is a coarsely woven cloth stiffened
with glue or sizing, and the term originally indicated that the cloth
was made of linen. At the present time linen buckram made in England can
be obtained, but all that is manufactured in the United States is made
of cotton. Linen buckram costs much more than cotton and it is doubtful
if it is any more serviceable. All of the three manufacturers mentioned
make buckrams.

GRADE 3

Prior to 1907 the Congressional set of government documents distributed
to the depository libraries had been bound in sheepskin and the leather
on the volumes had disintegrated so much as to make the set a hard one
to care for. In 1907 the Congressional Printing Investigation Commission
asked librarians of depository libraries to suggest, without considering
cost, suitable binding materials for Government Documents. The number of
replies received was 124, embodying suggestions as follows: full sheep,
11; half-russia, 78; cloth, 25; buckram, 70; linen duck, 20; canvas, 19.
Some librarians expressed more than one preference, so that the total
number of preferences was greater than the total of those replying. Most
of those who favored sheep did so because of their desire for
uniformity. Those who favored half-russia undoubtedly desired half
American russia, or cowhide. 134 expressed preference for some form of
cloth.

After receiving the replies from librarians the Printing Investigation
Commission obtained samples of cloth from various cloth manufacturers in
the United States and the Bureau of Standards made a series of chemical
and physical tests to determine the durability of these cloths. Chemical
tests were made to discover whether the colors were fast when exposed to
light. It is to be regretted perhaps that no tests were made to
determine whether the cloths were fast to water and that this
qualification was not included in the final specifications. Admitting,
however, that a cloth which is fast to sun and water both is a valuable
cloth for bookbinding, it is evident that the quality of fastness to
water is not a vitally important one for cloth used in the United
States. The total number of books injured by water is so small as to
make insistence upon this quality entirely unnecessary. If books become
so soiled that they need to be washed they should be bound in waterproof
cloth.

Because many volumes of Government Documents are sent to Porto Rico and
the Philippines where insects eat almost anything of an animal or
vegetable character, the desirability of the cloth as an article of diet
for insects, was also tested.

The physical tests indicated:

_a._ Number of threads per inch of warp and weft.

_b._ Absorption of moisture.

_c._ Weight per yard.

_d._ Tensile strength.

_e._ Amount of stretch.

_f._ Amount of friction developed by rubbing two pieces of cloth
together.

This test was made because the friction developed in taking a book from
between two others is an important matter when a shelf is full of books.
If the friction is great the wear on the back of the book is
correspondingly excessive.

_g._ Endurance when folded back and forth in the same place.

_h._ Endurance under extraordinary conditions of rubbing.

Some of these qualities, such as tensile strength, amount of stretch,
etc., were comparatively unimportant, but the tests for all were severe
and contributed much to our knowledge of the qualities which should
enter into the composition of durable book cloths.

After a very careful consideration of the results of the tests and a
thorough examination of the samples submitted, a committee of librarians
and government officials unanimously chose three samples as the best of
all those submitted by the manufacturers. Of these three samples the
cloth numbered 666 was considered the most satisfactory.

Although these three samples were excellent, they all had one
defect--the color was pressed in by machinery, not dyed in the piece.
After various experiments had been made by the manufacturers this defect
was remedied. The Government Printing Office then advertised for bids on
cloths which would meet the Specifications drawn up by the Bureau of
Standards (See Appendix A). Since that time all the Government documents
which continue the old sheep-bound set have been sent to depository
libraries bound in cloth made according to these specifications.

This cloth is known sometimes as Government Specification Cloth, but is
manufactured under the specific name of "Library buckram" by the
Holliston Mills, "Art buckram" by the Interlaken Mills, and "Legal
buckram" by the Joseph Bancroft & Sons Company. The first two are made
in pieces about 40 yards long and 38 inches wide, the Bancroft cloth in
pieces 43 yards long and 43 inches wide. It must be admitted that this
cloth is not quite so attractive in appearance as some of the old cloths
which are not so durable. Some binders claim that it is hard to use. On
the whole, however, it supplies a long felt want and is the strongest
cloth made that is at all attractive in appearance.

DUCK

Duck or canvas, a rough, heavy cloth much the same in quality as sail
cloth, is the strongest cloth used in binding, but has some very decided
drawbacks which militate against its use, except when the question of
strength overshadows all others. It always makes an unattractive-looking
volume--some of the more fastidious librarians rebel against its use;
and it readily absorbs dirt and moisture, making it disagreeable to
handle if the book has been much used. Duck having a double twisted
thread in the weft is much more compact and absorbs dirt and moisture
much less rapidly than other kinds. It should be used on the backs
(never for full binding) of newspapers and such periodicals as are too
heavy to put in library or legal buckram.

IMPERIAL MOROCCO CLOTH

Imperial morocco cloth, manufactured by the Winterbottom Book Cloth
Company in England, is made of linen thread and finished with a grain to
resemble leather. The kind most used in the United States resembles a
straight-grained morocco. It is an excellent cloth in appearance, as
well as in durability, but its cost is 50% greater than that of the
Government Specification Cloth. It may be used on semi-popular books
which will not receive a great amount of use, but which should be as
attractive in appearance as possible.

WATER-PROOF CLOTHS

There are several cloths which are waterproof and therefore easily
cleaned when the covers become soiled. The best of these are durabline,
used exclusively by Cedric Chivers; rexine and pluviusin, used almost
exclusively in England; keratol, made in Newark, New Jersey; and
fabrikoid, made by the du Pont Powder Company, Wilmington, Delaware. All
of these cloths are said to be acid, alkali and germ proof, do not
absorb grease and can be washed with soap and water. They are strong,
durable cloths, but they have at first a disagreeable odor, are hard to
work and hard to letter in gold. In the application of paste to most
waterproof cloths, either in the process of binding or in attaching
labels to the back, it is first necessary to break down the surface of
the cloth or the paste will not hold. This disadvantage no longer exists
in the case of fabrikoid. Keratol and fabrikoid are made to imitate
leather and are frankly sold as such. Probably the use of these cloths
in libraries will always be comparatively small. Because they can be
easily cleaned they may be used on the sides of juvenile books, and in
rare cases for full binding.


GLUE

No very definite rules can be laid down as to what kind of glue should
be used. The matter must be left largely in the hands of the binder, who
must see that it is strong, yet flexible; not too poor in quality nor
yet the most expensive kind which is generally used on furniture. This
is too brittle for bookbinding use.

The best glue for bookbinding is made from skins and shows a dark wine
color in the cake. Light colored glues are made chiefly from bones and
are not usually so good. To prepare glue for use, soak small pieces in
water over night and in the morning melt in the glue pot. It should
never be boiled. A careful binder will see that utensils are kept clean
and that glue is used in the proper thickness.

Flexible glue, which does not become too hard either before or after
use, is made by mixing glycerine with good glue. It has no special
advantages for use by binders, but can be used in the library itself for
some of the repairs which assistants may have to make.


PASTE

(For paste used in mending, see p. 167).

The best paste is that made in the ordinary way with flour and water.
The paste should be fresh, for if it is not a certain fermentation takes
place which is injurious to the book, especially to leather.


BOARDS

Not the least important part of the make-up of a finished book are the
boards forming the sides. There are practically four grades of boards
which are known as strawboards; binders, cloth or millboards; semi-tar,
and tar boards. The cheapest grade is the strawboard, for which there is
no place in library work.

Mill or cloth boards, used for practically all library work, are
generally made from waste papers of all kinds, though some may have an
admixture of rags. Clay is also mixed with the waste paper pulp and the
whole subjected to heavy pressure in the final stages of manufacture.
They are made in two sizes, 20 x 30 and 23 x 29 inches, and are put up
in 50-pound bundles, the number of sheets in the bundle indicating the
thickness of the board. The thickest is a No. 12 which has 12 sheets in
a 50-pound bundle. They may have as many as 70 sheets in a bundle, which
makes a very thin board. A 20 or 25 board should be used for fiction and
juvenile books and a 16 or 18 for heavier books such as magazines.
Prices of good cloth boards run from $40 to $50 a ton.

Semi-tar boards, made from better grade stock than mill board, should
have in their composition a certain amount of rags and hemp or naval
cordage. They come in the same sizes and weights, costing about $70 a
ton.

Tar boards are the best boards obtainable. Made of naval cordage, they
are very tough and hard to work. Many of them are allowed to season, in
much the same way as lumber seasons, in order to prevent warping. They
are much too expensive for library use, sometimes costing as much as
$110 a ton.

The matter of boards is not one about which the librarian need exercise
great watchfulness. Binders generally use a very good quality, though
they sometimes use too thin a board on a heavy book, such as a newspaper
or large folio. In such cases a board of suitable thickness can be made
by pasting or gluing two or more together.


THREAD

At one time there was no question but that the best thread to be used in
binding was linen. In the light of present knowledge it may be doubted
if this is true under all circumstances. All commercially bound books,
without exception, are sewed with cotton thread. Even such large books
as the Century Dictionary, Webster's Dictionary and the United States
Catalog of 1912 are sewed with cotton thread. Since it was
unquestionably the aim of the publishers of all these books to issue
them in the strongest possible bindings, it is reasonable to suppose
that linen would have been used if it were really the best for the
purpose. The main reason linen thread has been advised for so long is
because its tensile strength is much greater than that of cotton. On the
other hand, it is just as true that what we may call the fraying
resistance of a cotton thread is greater than that of linen. Take two
threads of the same size, one cotton and the other linen, make a loop of
each thread with one inside the other, saw back and forth, and the
cotton will always cut the linen thread. Furthermore, linen thread
deteriorates in quality unless very carefully stored. The publishers
soon discovered these facts, and since tensile strength is not an
important attribute in a thread that is being used in a book
sewing-machine, they use a cotton thread with thoroughly satisfactory
results.

In the case of library binding, however, the books are always sewed by
hand and the sewer, as she draws the thread tight, is obliged to use
some strength; for this reason tensile strength is an important
attribute. Hayes' Irish linen thread is generally specified. The Barbour
thread is referred to by Mr. Dana and by others, but the writer is not
familiar with its use.

Other materials used in binding are gold leaf, paper for end papers,
tape, headbands, cord and various concoctions used in finishing the
books. Gold leaf should be 18 to 22 karat, and neither aluminum nor
silver leaf should be used. Paper for end papers will vary somewhat with
the size of the book, but should never be lighter in weight than a
60-pound manila. Large libraries may find it desirable to have an end
paper specially made for their own use. Tapes should be linen and not
over three-eighths of an inch wide. Cord for use in sewing in the
regular way (not overcasting) is a soft twine which can be obtained from
all dealers in bookbinding supplies. For all books less than twelve
inches in height use four-ply cord; for larger books, five-ply.




CHAPTER V

SPECIFICATIONS


After the librarian has definitely decided upon the binder whom he
wishes to employ he must, especially in dealing with binders who are not
accustomed to library work, draw up specifications as to ways in which
he wishes different classes of books bound. If he has employed a binder
who thoroughly understands library binding, he may make use of the
binder's knowledge in drawing up the specifications. Under certain
circumstances it may be wise to enter into a contract with the binder,
but ordinarily in the United States such a course will not be necessary.
After the specifications have been prepared and a schedule of prices
agreed upon, the librarian always has the right to refuse to pay for
books not bound according to specifications. Therefore, a definite legal
contract is not necessary. The librarian, except in the case of a few
libraries which according to law must give their work to state
officials, is always at liberty to take his custom from one binder and
give it to another. Thus sufficient pressure is brought to bear on the
binder.

Although the present chapter gives definite specifications for the
binding of various classes of books, it is always wise to show a certain
latitude in the use of specifications. Local conditions, the papers used
in bookmaking which seem to become poorer and poorer with each
succeeding year, and the kind of a library which is to use the
specifications--all these must be taken into consideration when
specifications are drawn up. Moreover, the best specifications will
accomplish little if they are not followed by the binder in a
workmanlike manner, while good workmanship will sometimes make up for
omission of important details in the specifications.

In the main, it will be found that the following specifications may be
used as a guide, except possibly in the case of some reference and
college libraries which do not issue books for home use. It has seemed
best to place first general specifications which apply to all books,
followed by additional specifications for each kind of books treated.
The way in which these specifications are carried out is described in
the chapter on Processes.


GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS

1. The binder is responsible for all books consigned to his care and
must replace or pay for all books lost or injured. When one considers
the large number of volumes passing through a bindery, coming from many
different libraries, the number of books for which the binder is unable
to account is surprisingly small.

2. The librarian is the judge of whether the book is bound according to
the specifications. Since he has submitted the specifications and the
binder has agreed to them he should be the sole judge of the result.

3. The binder will be allowed to depart from any specification if it is
desirable in the interests of good binding. He must, however, prove that
he is justified in so doing.

4. Books must be paid for according to a schedule of prices agreed upon
by the binder and librarian.

5. The size should be determined by measuring at the back of the volume
after it is bound. It might be wiser, perhaps, to measure the book
before the boards are put on, so that binders would be sure to trim the
book as little as possible. It is the universal custom, however, to pay
according to the measure of the book with the boards on. This may
possibly tempt the binder to increase the square of the book just enough
to group it with the next larger size so that he can charge more for it.

6. All items not covered in the schedule of prices may be charged for at
the regular rates of the binder for such work.

7. All books not oversewed are to be sewed all-along with Hayes' Irish
linen thread, suiting the size of the thread to the requirements of the
book; No. 25 for light, No. 20 for medium and No. 16 for heavy sections.


8. Cloth must be used for sides of all books bound in half-leather or
half-duck. Never use marbled paper except occasionally on newspapers.

9. Unless otherwise specified, cloth which conforms to the
specifications of the Bureau of Standards, or Imperial morocco cloth,
must be used for full binding. For sides of leather bound books a
somewhat cheaper grade may be used.

10. Duck should have a twisted, double thread in the weft.

11. Moroccos or pigskins must be guaranteed by the manufacturer to be
free-from-acid.

12. Glue must be best quality of binders' or flexible glue, and must be
used sparingly.

13. Poor materials of any kind must not be used.

14. In taking books apart, all old glue, paste, back-lining, paper,
etc., should be carefully removed.

15. The binder should expect to do a certain amount of mending of torn
pages and guarding of weak signatures, but should be allowed to charge
extra when the amount is excessive.

16. The text of all books must be collated by binder and imperfect books
returned to the library. (See under Processes, Collation, p. 15).

17. All illustrations of whatever character printed on single leaves
must be guarded with thin, tough paper and the guard folded around the
adjoining sections.

Some librarians and binders advocate the use of cloth guards but this
seems hardly necessary. The cloth guards tend to swell the back of the
book, especially if there be many plates, while the thin, tough paper is
strong enough for ordinary books. Folded plates should never be sewed
through the middle of the fold, but should be mounted on guards so that
the plates will open out nearly flat when the book is opened. Folded
maps, or other folded plates which may be consulted often should, unless
otherwise specified, be guarded with cloth which is as wide as the book,
so that they may be thrown entirely outside the book and lie flat on a
table.

18. Illustrations which are folded more than once, such as maps, should
be carefully cut and mounted on thin cloth in such a way as to allow for
the folding to come on the cloth alone, not on the paper.

19. Stitching (that is, sewing signatures lengthwise with a
sewing-machine) or old-fashioned whipstitching, is not permitted for any
books; with the possible exception of newspapers.

20. In sewing three bands or tapes must be used for eight-inch books,
four for twelve-inch, etc.

21. Tapes, or bands, and back-lining must project at least an inch and a
quarter on each side of the book.

22. All books should be lined on the back with canton flannel as
described in the chapter on Processes, except in a few cases where it
may be advisable to use duck or a flesher. This eliminates lacing-on of
boards.

23. Adjoining leaves of fly leaves and end papers must always be pasted
together.

24. Books must be trimmed as little as possible.

25. All books should have rounded corners.

26. All books must have French joints.

27. All books, unless otherwise specified, will be fastened finally into
the covers by pasting down end papers. Tight-back books will in addition
have the back glued to the book.

28. Books should be loose-back unless otherwise specified.

29. Edges should be sprinkled unless the library specifies gilding on
top. The color used may be varied to harmonize with the color of the
book.

30. Books must be pressed until thoroughly dry.

31. Binders must keep a record of each book, whether periodical or not,
which has a volume number.

This record, commonly known as a "rub" or "rub-off," shows the size of
the book, kind of binding and exact lettering. Whenever other volumes of
the same work or same periodical are received they will be bound
according to this record, unless the librarian has specified a different
material, or different lettering. In such a case the matter must be
referred to the librarian before the book is bound. If a binder receives
a book with a volume number and has no record of previous volumes, he
should ask the librarian for a sample volume, unless it is obviously a
book for which there could be no sample, such as the first volume of a
periodical giving contemporary dates.

32. The binder is expected to paste in book-pockets and book-plates
when furnished by the library but may charge extra for the work.

33. The best gold leaf must be used in lettering unless cover is light
enough in color to take ink. Leather labels should never be used.


FICTION AND JUVENILE BOOKS

It seems to be fairly well proven that all fiction and juvenile books
should be bound in some kind of leather, preferably cowhide.[5]
Objections to this are heard from time to time, but the objections come
chiefly from the large steel towns where the sulphur in the air has a
bad effect on leathers. In most communities leather will outwear cloth
and in any event cloth becomes shabby, even when perfectly strong, much
more quickly than leather. When the French joint is used the leather
need not be pared and ordinarily will outwear the paper of the book.

Follow general specifications as outlined above, supplemented by the
following:

1. Books should be bound in one-half cowhide (American russia). Roan may
be used if the librarian is sure that it is good.

2. Fly-leaves should be made of white book paper, 70 pounds to the ream
and guarded with jaconet.

It is apparent that when fly-leaves are guarded with cloth they are
sewed as a separate section and not tipped on as is done in ordinary
binding. Since practically all fiction and juvenile books are
oversewed, it will not be necessary to carry the guard around to the
inner side of the fold.

3. End papers may be made of paper specially made for the binder, but it
should be equal in strength to an 80-pound manila paper and should be
guarded with jaconet on the outside of the fold in the same way as
fly-leaves.

4. If book is not oversewed the first and last sections must be guarded
with jaconet.

5. Nearly all books should be sewed with some modern method of
overcasting.

It is probable that in every lot of books sent to the binder there will
be some fiction and juvenile books which could be sewed in the regular
way through the signatures either on bands or on tapes, but the number
is so small that the binder finds it easier to sew all the books alike.
In any event only those which have the backs of the sections unbroken
the entire length and which, in addition, are seldom used, should be
sewed in the regular way.

    Footnote 5: See footnote, page 66.


NON-FICTION

1. Books should be bound in full cloth.

2. Books in which the backs of sections are not injured, or which cannot
be easily mended may be sewed regularly. The rest must be oversewed.

3. In all other respects the preceding specifications should be
followed.


PERIODICALS

There is no place in a small library where good judgment will do more to
make the library efficient at a minimum cost than in the binding of
periodicals. The use of libraries for reference purposes is increasing
and the use of periodicals is made easy by means of the periodical
indexes. The enthusiastic librarian who wishes to answer all questions
will be tempted to bind more periodicals than are really needed, thus
impairing the efficiency of the book fund. On the other hand, to some
the cost of binding may seem so great that some useful periodicals will
remain unbound. But it is not necessary to throw away unbound
periodicals. If they are to be used only now and then in reference work,
it is a good plan to wrap them in stout manila paper with stiff boards
on the outside, letter carefully on the back and file away on the
shelves in their regular places among other periodicals.

Supplement the general specifications by the following:

1. Fly-leaves should be made of white book paper, 80 pounds to the ream,
guarded with jaconet on both sides.

2. End papers may be made of special papers used by the binder, but it
is wise to have a 100-pound manila guarded with jaconet on the outside
and also on the inside of the fold.

3. First and last sections must be guarded with jaconet.

4. Books 10 inches in height should be sewed regularly on four bands or
on tapes one-quarter of an inch wide; larger volumes on five bands or
tapes. Sew all-along, passing needle through center of tapes.

5. A millboard as heavy as the weight of the book will allow must be
used.

6. (_a_) Books should be bound in full cloth made according to the
specifications of the Bureau of Standards. As light colors, which may be
lettered in ink, show dirt very readily it seems better to use a dark
color and letter in gold.

(_b_) In large reference or college libraries there are certain
periodicals that receive constant use. It would be a mistake to bind
such volumes in cloth, because no cloth will endure the wear that they
receive. They should be bound in leather, preferably Turkey or Niger
morocco. On no account should American russia be used.

7. If leather is used the sides should be covered with Bureau of
Standards cloth.


NEWSPAPERS

Because newspapers are printed on wretched paper which it is freely
admitted will disintegrate in a comparatively short time, the question
when to bind and when to throw away is a hard one to decide. For the
small library it is surely unwise to bind any except the local paper,
which will be used from time to time for local history. In many cases it
may be wiser simply to wrap the volumes to protect them from the light
and file them chronologically. The librarian of the large library,
however, no matter how disgusted he may be with the poor quality of
paper used finds it necessary to bind a number of newspapers. When
bound they will last twenty-five years or more, during which time they
are sure to be used sufficiently to warrant binding.

Newspapers must be kept away from light, heat and moisture. If possible,
keep in a dark closet until ready for binding. Publishers of local
papers ought to give a copy for binding.

1. Newspapers must be bound in one-half duck, best quality.

It is never under any circumstances wise to bind newspapers in leather.
Duck, to be sure, gathers dirt easily, but it seems to be the only
material sufficiently strong and long-lived for binding newspapers.

2. Fly-leaves and end papers should be made of extra heavy paper well
guarded inside and outside the fold.

3. It is permissible to stitch sections lengthwise before sewing
regularly on bands, but oversewing is preferable.

4. Boards of double thickness must be used. It is best, perhaps, to make
the boards by gluing or pasting two boards of ordinary thickness
together.

5. Corners should be covered with vellum tips.

6. Tight backs must be used.

7. Sides must be covered with paper.

This facilitates the handling of the volumes. If cloth sides are used on
newspapers it increases enormously the labor in shelving them and even
of using them on ordinary library tables. In libraries that can afford
to shelve newspapers on patent shelving with rollers, cloth sides are
preferable.

8. Libraries that can afford it should use a fibre-filling preservative
on the edges. (See page 116 of the Bulletin of the American Library
Association for 1912.)


REFERENCE BOOKS

Reference books should be bound in the same way as fiction or juvenile
books, except that morocco, instead of cowhide, should be used for books
constantly handled. Books used only occasionally should be covered with
cloth made according to the Specifications of the Bureau of Standards.
Very heavy, thick volumes, such as dictionaries, should have all the
strengthening devices and especially should have the bands and canton
flannel on the back placed in split boards or between two boards glued
together. It is impossible to bind such books too strongly. In rare
cases it may be well to sew heavy books constantly used on raised bands,
to have leather corners, and a strip of leather along the bottom of each
board.


LAW BOOKS

Some of the professions have conventional ways of binding professional
books. In the law, for example, it was formerly customary to bind all
law books in full sheep of the natural color. When sheep fell into
disrepute, the law publishers began to substitute cloth similar in shade
to the sheep generally used--a decided gain for law libraries.

Supplement the general specifications by the following:

1. End papers and fly-leaves must be guarded with jaconet, as described
in specifications for fiction and juvenile books, page 93.

2. First and last sections must be guarded with jaconet.

3. All maps and charts must be backed with muslin and not folded unless
necessary.

4. (_a_) Bancroft Legal buckram (the lightest shade made), or Holliston
Mills Library buckram No. 32, should be used for covering.

(_b_) Books used constantly should be bound in half Turkey morocco or
Niger morocco.


MUSIC

1. The most essential quality of a well-bound book of music is its
ability to lie flat wherever opened. It is unwise therefore to use any
kind of an overcast stitch in sewing. Regular sewing on tapes, instead
of bands, must be used.

2. The square at the bottom of the book should be greater than at the
top so that leaves will not catch on the music-rack when turned over.

3. Imperial morocco cloth should be used for covering. If hard usage is
expected half cowhide, with sides of some kind of washable cloth, is
preferable.

4. Part music for various instruments or solos with accompaniment must
have one strong binding for the part which takes the most space, with
pocket on the inside of the back cover to hold the other parts. If these
are bulky compensating guards should be inserted in the back of the
book.


BOOKS OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Every library finds it necessary to bind a few books, such as Racinet's
"Le costume historique," which have very little text and a great number
of illustrations. It is evident that the illustrations in such books are
most useful if kept in unbound form in portfolios, but when kept in such
a way they are likely to be lost, torn, mutilated or misplaced.

1. Each plate should be guarded with thin, tough paper and the guards
overcast.

This insures a good strong sewing; in addition the guard forms a hinge
where it meets the plate and the plate will lie flat and can easily be
examined when the book is opened.

2. Because of the artistic nature of such books, they should be bound in
one-half morocco, taking extra care to see that acid-free leather is
used.

3. Canton flannel and bands, or tapes, should be inserted between split
boards. If the book is very heavy, it would be wise to line the back
with duck or a flesher rather than with canton flannel.


COMMERCIAL BINDING FOR REFERENCE BOOKS

While they are not a part of library binding, it may not be amiss to
include specifications for commercial binding of heavy reference books,
such as dictionaries, cyclopedias, etc. It is done with the hope that
librarians will exert pressure upon the publishers to induce them to
adopt these or other specifications which will produce equally good
results.

1. Four tapes should be used in sewing; the tapes must extend on each
side of the book at least two inches. The book should contain as many
stitches as possible, using the best four-strand cotton thread. The
thickness of the thread will depend somewhat upon the number of pages in
a signature. Books should be sewed "all along" with no splitting of
signatures at head or tail.

2. First and last signatures should be reinforced inside and outside of
the fold with a strip of strong, thin muslin which passes around the
outside of the end papers. The English cloth called jaconet is the best
for this purpose.

3. The second signature and the next to the last should be reinforced
with muslin on the inside of the fold.

4. The end papers should also be lined on the inside.

5. Illustrations should be guarded with muslin which is folded around
the next signature.

6. Books should be lined with a medium grade of canton flannel, with the
fuzzy side to the back and extending from one-half inch from the head to
within one-half inch of the tail of the book, lapping over at least two
inches on the side.

7. The flannel, together with the tapes, should be inserted between
split boards.

8. Over the canton flannel, but not extending over to the sides, there
should be pasted a good quality of linen, rope or manila paper of
sufficient thickness to make the book firm. In putting on this lining
paper paste instead of glue must be used.

9. Volumes should have French joints.

10. The best quality millboard of suitable thickness with rounded
corners should be used.

11. Leather should be made, if possible, according to the specifications
of the London Society of Arts. Niger morocco is probably the best.
Volumes should have leather corners as well as backs.

12. For cloth sides, Winterbottom's Imperial morocco cloth, Bancroft's
Legal buckram, or Holliston's Library buckram should be used.




CHAPTER VI

BINDING BEFORE PURCHASE AND REINFORCING


One way of economizing in libraries is to buy books that have been bound
in strong binding before they come to the library. It is not, however, a
universal panacea which will reduce binding bills to a minimum. On the
contrary, if not used with caution, this plan will result in the
expenditure of large sums of money for which the library will never
receive a return in actual wear of the books. Library binders who adopt
this scheme buy books in the sheets from the publishers, put them into a
strong binding and sell them directly to the library. Mr. Cedric Chivers
of Bath, England, was the first to adopt this plan. Later he started a
bindery in this country, and since then other binders have followed his
practice. For the librarian there are several advantages in this method
of buying books.

1. Books can be bound according to the library's special needs before
they have received any wear, while the paper is fresh and clean. Books
printed on very thick, spongy paper must be sewed very strongly and
receive special reinforcements that are not necessary on paper which is
more suitable for binding. If a good library binder buys the sheets from
the publishers, he can test the paper to see what kind of treatment it
should receive, and he can then bind it suitably for library wear. If
the book is used in the original publishers' binding it deteriorates
much more rapidly than when properly bound at the beginning.

2. The book can remain in circulation at the time when it is most
needed. Formerly one of the greatest trials in public libraries was the
necessity of withdrawing from the shelves practically all the copies of
a popular novel in order to send them to the bindery where they remained
from four to six weeks, the public meanwhile hurling anathemas at the
librarian for not providing sufficient copies of the book. Not only were
the books out of circulation when most needed, but much time was used in
preparing them for the bindery, checking them up on return, putting on
the library marks of ownership, making cards, marking pockets, etc., all
of which added to the expense. Today, in the case of new novels which
are sure to be popular, such troubles are unnecessary. Instead of buying
the original publishers' binding, the wise librarian buys a sufficient
number of copies bound from the sheets; if the binding is properly done,
he need pay no more attention to them until they are worn out. He has
done what he could to prevent the public from becoming dissatisfied,
and he has saved the cost of the work required to send them to the
bindery.

3. Not only has he served his public better and saved the time of
assistants, but in most cases he has actually saved money on his binding
bills. Let us suppose that he pays $1.50 for a book bound from the
sheets; and suppose that he also buys a copy of the same book in the
publisher's cover at a cost of $1.22, which, after it has been issued
twenty times, has to be bound at a cost of 50 cents, making a total cost
of $1.72. If they are issued the same number of times there is a clear
saving of 22 cents in favor of the book bound from the sheets. As a
matter of fact, however, statistics kept by the Wilmington Institute
Free Library indicate that the first book will be issued 125 times
before it is discarded, and the second 100 times--twenty before binding
and eighty afterward. If this be true, it is clear that there is a
further saving, provided that both have to be replaced when finally worn
out.

While these advantages are well worth considering, the librarian should
not necessarily get all his books in this form. It is a plan which is
peculiarly advantageous in the case of fiction and those few other books
which are in constant use. In the case of juvenile books one must be
cautious. Juvenile books, particularly books for boys, become soiled so
much more quickly than the adult books that they frequently have to be
discarded because they are dirty rather than because they are worn out.
If the books were bound before purchase the library may have lost
money, because one can frequently buy a publisher's book and rebind it
more cheaply than he can purchase the book bound from the sheets.

Most books in the classes should be purchased in the regular publisher's
binding unless they are constantly used. In other words, the use a book
is to receive is the test of whether it should be bound from the sheets
before purchase. Having decided that the use of a book warrants binding
from the sheets, it is well to consider other facts.

1. It may not always be wise to bind from the sheets all the copies of a
new book by a well-known author whose works are always popular and
likely to continue so for years. If ten copies are approximately
sufficient for use during the first year, it is safe to say that in most
cases they will be too many for the needs of the library during the
second and third years. If they are bound in leather before purchase
they will not wear out and during the third and succeeding years a
number of them may be deadwood on the shelves. It is therefore wiser to
buy a few copies in leather binding and the others either in a regular
publishers' binding, or in some publisher's cover reinforced. When these
volumes have come to the point where they need binding the period of
greatest popularity may have passed and they may be withdrawn, thus
saving the library the expense of binding.

2. When the book is finally worn out and must be withdrawn from
circulation, the question always arises, must it be replaced with a new
copy? The majority of fiction and juvenile books so replaced are books
of wide popularity. Occasionally a book, such as Henry James' "Princess
Casamassima," or W. D. Howells' "Modern instance," is replaced because
the library must have it on the shelves, not because it is popular. But
ordinarily the popularity of a book is the determining factor in
replacing worn-out copies. The decision to replace carries with it the
decision to keep a book on the shelves indefinitely. Since the book has
proved its worth and is to receive hard wear, the reasons which
prevailed against buying it in a strong binding when it was new no
longer exist. The strongest binding that can be obtained suited to the
strength of the paper is none too strong.

Perhaps the most vehement objection to books bound from the sheets comes
from those librarians who have a strong sense of aesthetic values and
who claim that these books are not so attractive to the eyes as the
regular books in their bright and gay publishers' covers. The objection
is valid. It must be admitted that the leather-covered books have the
appearance of strength and serviceability, but not of beauty. If a
reader knows that he wishes a particular book, he will not be prevented
from taking it because of its appearance, but if it is bound in leather
and he knows nothing about it, he will very likely pass it over and
select some book which has a bright, attractive cover. This is true even
of adults, while of children it is doubly true. A large part of the
popularity of that well-known book, "Fighting a fire," is due to the
attractive cover which almost always excites the interest of boys who
happen to see it.

Although the first cost of books bound from the sheets is always greater
than that of books in the regular publishers' covers, it is hoped that
the economy of buying them under certain conditions has been made clear.
There is, however, a cheaper way of buying some books which one would
otherwise obtain in this form. Every year many copies of popular fiction
and juvenile books find their way to the shelves of second-hand book
dealers. Some of these copies show signs of wear, while some of them are
in excellent condition. In any event it is always wise to submit a list
of replacements to some large dealer in second-hand books; to buy such
books as may be obtained from him (generally at considerably less than
one-half the published price); and to send them at once to a good
library binder for rebinding before placing upon the shelves of the
library. In this way one should get from 25 per cent to 33-1/3 per cent
of fiction replacements in a substantial binding at a cost much less
than the cost of a book in the original publishers' binding.


REINFORCED BOOKS

For those who wish strong bindings, but who wish them attractive also,
reinforced bindings can be recommended. Reinforced books are those which
have been strengthened either by the publishers in the regular course of
manufacture, or by some binder who takes the book as it comes from the
publisher, removes the cover, strengthens the book and puts it back
into the same cover. A reinforced book generally appears in the
attractive publisher's cover, and it always appears in some form of
cloth, never in leather.

Owing to the small number of times which books in the original
publishers' binding were issued, the committee on binding of the
American Library Association made an effort in 1906 to induce the
publishers to issue a special edition for library use. As it was
recognized that the publishers would not take kindly to elaborate
specifications for stronger bindings, the improvements asked for were
made as few in number as possible. They were the following:

1. Sewed on three tapes (very small books sewed on two tapes).

2. First and last signatures reinforced with muslin.

3. Cloth strip in joints pasted on fly leaf and sewed through.

4. Thin strong muslin over backs.

An attempt to demand hand-sewed books was abandoned when it was
discovered that this stipulation added greatly to the cost of the
binding without noticeably increasing its strength. The main strength of
a book bound according to these specifications lay in the guarding of
the first and last signatures.

The honor of issuing the first reinforced book for library use belongs
to Charles Scribner's Sons Co., who in the summer of 1906 bound 1500
copies of F. Hopkinson Smith's "Tides of Barnegat." Their
specifications, based on those submitted by the A. L. A. committee on
binding, required that:

1. Signatures contain not more than sixteen pages;

2. First and last signatures be guarded with muslin before sewing;

3. First and last signatures be oversewed (actually they were run
through a sewing machine);

4. Lining papers be guarded with strong drill and sewed through;

5. The book be sewed on two tapes;

6. Highest grade super be used for back-lining;

7. Books be glued to the back of the cover; making a tight back book;

8. Buckram be used for the covers instead of the regular publisher's
cover.

The extra cost of the book was ten cents, and it was an excellent piece
of work. In actual wear the books far exceeded the hopes of those who
favored the plan, for they all went through the period of greatest
popularity without being withdrawn from circulation. When they came to
the point where they could no longer be circulated, most of them were
discarded instead of being sent to the bindery.

The initial success of the plan induced other publishers to try the
experiment. In 1908 one hundred and twenty different books could be
obtained in reinforced bindings from seventeen publishers. Among these
publishers were the firms of Century Company, Harper, Houghton, Little
Brown & Company, McClurg, Putnam, Scribner's, Stokes, and Warne. Some of
these books were well-bound, the publishers evidently making a
conscientious effort to meet the demands of the committee; others were
makeshifts not worth one-half the extra cost.

The success of "Tides of Barnegat" encouraged Charles Scribner's Sons to
give the experiment further trial, and from time to time during a period
of several months this firm issued books bound in this way. In no case,
however, was the initial success repeated. After the experiments had
been tried by the different publishers for several months the obstacles
to the plan, several of which had been foreseen, grew greater rather
than less, and in the end the publishers gave up the plan of providing
special editions of new fiction and juvenile books for library use.

The main obstacle to the successful culmination of the plan lay in the
inability of librarians to order books before publication, and in the
inability of publishers to make special editions after the book had been
published. The success of "Tides of Barnegat" was due largely to the
fact that the author and book were well known in advance of publication.
Librarians knew at once that they wanted the book and the orders were
filed promptly. In the case of nearly every other book which Scribner
published in this way librarians could not decide until they had
actually seen the book, or at least had seen reviews of it. Quite
naturally they sent in few orders for the books. On the other hand
Scribner did not care to bind a large number of books in special binding
unless they had some assurance that the books would be sold; and they
could not at any time afford to manufacture a very small number. It
seemed impossible to bridge this gap which existed between the
publisher and the librarian.

Other reasons which worked against the success of the plan were:

(_a_) The apathy of the library world in general. In spite of efforts
made both by publishers and by those librarians specially interested; in
spite of the proved success and economy of the best reinforced bindings,
librarians in general paid little attention to them.

(_b_) The opposition of booksellers. This opposition was not violent at
any time; but a special edition for one class of buyers inevitably
entailed more labor upon jobbers and booksellers with no financial
return, since there was no discount on the 10c. extra cost. It followed
that orders from librarians for the special library editions were filled
by some jobbers with regular editions; and the time required to exchange
the copy of a regular edition for one of a special edition was generally
sufficient to prevent the librarian from returning the books. Had it
been possible to have one central bureau to bunch orders and to
distribute them, greater success might have resulted.

While the effort to induce publishers to issue special library editions
and to keep them in stock was a failure, there were nevertheless good
results from the venture. While most of the commercial bindings are no
better to-day than they were ten years ago, yet the publishers know that
something better is needed for library use. Small books which are used
by children and receive hard usage are as a rule much stronger bound
than formerly, and will last as long as they are needed. As one direct
result of the agitation, the well-known Everyman's set can now be
obtained in a library binding. Certain large reference books, such as
Webster's and the Century dictionaries, U. S. Catalog, etc., have been
put into the strongest possible binding. In these cases the publishers
have tried to meet the demands of librarians.

When the publishers ceased to make special editions for libraries
several library binders undertook to supply books in this form. Their
method was to buy the books from the publishers, remove the covers,
resew the books in the most approved library style and replace the books
in the publisher's covers. When this cover wears out the sewing is so
good that it is only necessary to recover either with a regular
leather-back binder's cover, or with a home-made cloth cover. By this
method the librarian is assured of a book in the same cover as the
regular edition, the necessity of sending orders in advance of
publication is obviated, and the publishers, jobbers and booksellers do
not have to keep a stock of a special edition. In practice the plan
works well.

Librarians for years have been annoyed because certain books, such as
the Brownie books, have given such poor service no matter how they were
bound. In the original boards they went to pieces very quickly and the
paper was of such a character that they were hard to rebind. The strong
leather bindings bound from the sheets were too strong because the paper
wore out long before the binding. In 1912 books of this character,
through the initiative of Mr. H. R. Huntting in Springfield,
Massachusetts, were sewed by the Samson-back method, a strong machine
sewing; they were then covered with cloth and the paper covers, so
attractive to children, pasted on the outside. The cost of the books
was much less than that of the leather-back binding and they were much
more attractive. The Samson-back method of reinforcement therefore
practically solved the problem of binding large thin books with wide
margins at the back, precisely the books that had given librarians the
most trouble.




CHAPTER VII

COST


Binding is a work of repair, not one of expansion, and consequently the
amount spent for this purpose adds little to the resources of the
library. The modern librarian does not begrudge money for salaries;
heat, light and the general up-keep are items that cannot be reduced
materially in most libraries. But money spent on binding reduces the
funds available for new books. Therefore, a study of the many ways in
which binding bills can be made smaller is well worth while.

Two elements, material and labor, enter into the cost of binding, labor
of course forming the larger part. Since the cost of labor varies in
different parts of the United States, it is impossible to give figures
of cost applicable to all places. Furthermore, as the cost of both
material and labor is increasing constantly any statement made at the
present time might be wrong a year from now.

So far as figures of cost are concerned, it therefore seems best to
discuss maximum and minimum figures. On this basis it is fair to assume
that it will not be necessary at any time in the near future to pay more
than fifty cents a book for fiction and juvenile books eight inches or
less in height, bound in cowhide, government cloth, or the more
expensive imperial morocco cloth. For this amount the librarian should
get the best binding obtainable. As high a price as this is actually
charged by a few binders only, some of whom are justified in so doing
because they give full value for the money, or because the cost of their
labor is high.

If less than thirty-five cents is paid for fiction and juvenile books
eight inches high, it is probable that the binding is not serviceable
and therefore not economical; but in rare cases bindings costing thirty
cents a volume will give excellent service. When low prices are charged
the librarian should be sure that, taking the ratio of cost to
circulation into consideration, he is getting full value. In general, it
may be said that he who gets fiction and juvenile books well bound for
less than forty cents a volume is to be congratulated. Naturally, this
statement does not apply to the large libraries which bind a large
number of books every month, and can therefore obtain better rates than
the smaller libraries.

For books bound in cowhide or cloth, the cost increases at the rate of
from fifteen to twenty cents a volume for every two inches in height.

The price of the smallest volumes bound in morocco is considerably
greater than of those bound in other materials, and the increase
according to size is also somewhat greater. One dollar is the highest
price paid within the knowledge of the writer for an eight-inch morocco
book, and sixty cents the lowest price. The difference in the value of
the work about corresponds to the difference in price.

Periodicals bound in government cloth, or duck, may cost from fifty-five
cents to eighty cents a volume ten inches or less in height, increasing
fifteen cents to twenty cents a volume for every two inches in height.

Newspapers well bound should not cost less than $2.00 a volume, nor over
$4.00. More variations will be found in the prices for newspapers than
in any other kind of binding.

Most binders are paid a certain amount for books eight inches high or
less, the prices differing according to the material used. The price in
a few cases increases with each inch or fraction thereof in height to
ten inches; in most cases the increase is for each two inches or
fraction. For example, a book which measures eight and one quarter
inches in height is charged for at the ten inch rate. One which measures
ten and one quarter inches at the twelve inch rate. Sometimes an extra
charge for books which are much thicker than usual is justified.

The following schedule covers practically all the different sizes and
materials which the librarian must take into consideration. The prices
given are those actually charged by a good library binder.


REBINDING

Adult and Juvenile and Miscellaneous Books Not Exceeding 2 Inches in
Thickness

                                  8 in.  9 in.  10 in.  12 in.
    Half Pigskin or Cowhide        45     55      65      85
    Full Cloth (Library Buckram)   40     50      60      80
    Full Imperial Morocco Cloth    45     55      65      85

                                                  Extra sizes
                                  14 in.  16 in.   per inch
    Half Pigskin or Cowhide        1.10    1.30    20 cents
    Full Cloth (Library Buckram)   1.00    1.20    15 cents
    Full Imperial Morocco Cloth    1.10    1.30    20 cents

    Books over 2 inches thick charged at rate of size above.

Magazines, Periodicals, Sheet and Folio Music Not Exceeding 4 Inches in
Thickness

                                       8 in.  9 in.  10 in.  12 in.
    Full Cloth (Lib. Buck.) or Full Duck    45     55      65      85
    Full Imperial Morocco Cloth             50     60      70      95
    Half Cowhide                            50     65      85    1.10
    Half Pigskin (English)                  55     70      90    1.15
    Half Pigskin (American)                 50     65      85    1.10
    Half Morocco                            65     80    1.00    1.25
    Half Duck (Waterproof sides)            45     55      65      85

                                                         Extra sizes
                                         14 in.  16 in.   per inch
    Full Cloth Lib. Buck. or Full Duck    1.10    1.35    15 cents
    Full Imperial Morocco Cloth           1.20    1.45    20 cents
    Half Cowhide                          1.30    1.60    20 cents
    Half Pigskin (English)                1.35    1.65    20 cents
    Half Pigskin (American)               1.30    1.60    20 cents
    Half Morocco                          1.50    1.85    25 cents
    Half Duck (Waterproof sides)          1.10    1.35    15 cents

Above prices include all lettering on books.

Books over 4 inches thick charged at rate of size larger.

Newspapers not over 30 inches, in half library buckram or half duck
$2.25, or in full duck, $2.40.

Special prices for dictionaries, cyclopedias and other sizes not in
above schedules.


SUGGESTIONS FOR REDUCING COST

Following is a statement of plans for cutting down the cost of binding,
a few of them being obviously makeshifts for the benefit of poor or very
small libraries.

BOOKS BOUND BEFORE PURCHASE

Under this head will be found (in Chapter 6) a full statement of reasons
for buying books bound from the sheets.

REPRINTS BOUND BEFORE PURCHASE

The cheap reprints of popular novels which cost less than one-half as
much as the original edition, although attractive in appearance, are
very poorly bound and if bought in original covers must be rebound
within a short time after they are first placed on the shelves. Some
librarians find that it pays to send orders for books which can be
obtained in cheap reprints directly to their binders, who buy the books
and rebind them in the regular half-leather binding which the library
uses for its rebound fiction and juvenile. He bills the books to the
library at the cost of the volume plus the cost of binding, the total in
any event being considerably less than one dollar. Not over ninety cents
should be paid and eighty-five cents is the general price for such
books. In this way the library gets a book in a good, strong library
binding for less than the cost of the original edition in publisher's
cover. Furthermore all labor involved in sending the book to the bindery
and receiving it again--no inconsiderable item--is eliminated.

SECOND-HAND BOOKS

Akin to the foregoing plan is the practice which some libraries have of
sending lists of replacements to dealers in second-hand books and having
all books obtained in this way rebound at once before putting them into
circulation. Moreover this arrangement eliminates the time and labor
necessary to send a book to the bindery. Binderies in large cities can
undertake to supply second-hand books, with advantages both to
themselves and to the libraries employing them. The library is relieved
from the necessity of searching for second-hand volumes, while the
binder can well afford to do this service for a stated price per volume
which will be reasonable from the library point of view, but which will
allow the binder profit on all books which he can find at very cheap
prices. When such a plan is adopted the binder should understand that
the library wants neither the cheap books printed on wretched paper and
having very small print, nor the very fine editions with colored
illustrations.

REINFORCEMENTS

A reinforced book is one which has been removed from the original
publisher's cover, strengthened in various ways and put back into the
same cover. (See chapter on this subject, page 108.) In its best form it
means the complete resewing of the book with an overcast stitch. It is
advisable to buy such books frequently, since they preserve the
attractive publisher's cover and since they can also be recovered by the
library itself without resewing. Statistics kept by the Wilmington
Institute Free Library show that such books when properly recovered give
as good relative service as those which have been bound before purchase.
The main advantage lies in the elimination of the time necessary to send
them to the bindery and the greater length of service which they give at
the height of their popularity.

RECOVERING AT THE LIBRARY

Many books which come to the binding department require rebinding in
order to put them into the best condition, but the books will be used so
little that rebinding would not pay. In the numerous cases in which the
sewing is in good condition it will be possible to recover them at the
library and letter them by hand. In cases where the sewing is poor it
will be possible to resew and recover. Such books are neither so strong
nor so attractive as books which have been wholly rebound, but they can
be recovered at an expenditure of less than fifteen cents a volume, as
against forty to fifty cents a volume for binding, and are in
sufficiently good condition to wear a long time, perhaps as long as the
library needs them. (For description of the process of recovering see
page 185.)

DISCARDING VALUELESS BOOKS

In the preceding case it has been taken for granted that the books in
question add something to the resources of the library and that they
must be kept. Books that have outlived their usefulness because they
have been superseded by later editions, or by other books more
authoritative, in all except the largest libraries should be discarded.
(For arguments in favor of this see Chapter 8, p. 131.)

LEATHER VS. CLOTH

Notwithstanding that he is repeating himself, the writer wishes to
emphasize one point. It may almost be made a general rule, though like
other rules, it will not work well at all times. Never bind a seldom
used book in leather, or a much used one in cloth.

CHEAP EDITIONS

Money may be saved by replacing books which need rebinding with good
editions cheaper than the cost of binding. (See (_f_), page 129.)

PROPER CARE

The life of the book in the library may be prolonged in several ways.

1. In opening the leaves of uncut books at the top the paper knife
should be carried to the back of the book, using a dull knife that is
thin, long and tapering.

2. Many books should be carefully opened before being placed on the
shelves. This is done by resting the book on its back and dropping the
covers on the table. Taking a few leaves at a time first at the front
and then at the back, press them down carefully until the middle of the
book is reached. If this be done there is little chance that the back of
the book will be broken if the book is suddenly opened.

3. Books should not be pressed tightly together on the shelves.

4. They should not be piled on other books resting on their fore-edge.

5. They should not be pulled from the shelves by the head bands.

6. They should be dusted frequently.

7. They should be kept upright on the shelves instead of half-fallen
over.

8. In every way they should be handled as if they were books, not
bricks.




CHAPTER VIII

PREPARING FOR THE BINDERY


To decide properly what books should be rebound and how they should be
rebound is not a simple matter nor one which should be left to an
inexperienced or uneducated assistant. In addition to a good working
knowledge of materials and processes the assistant in charge of this
work should have a general knowledge of books--paper, editions, prices,
literary value, timeliness, etc.--and good judgment in deciding whether
a book should be bound or whether it should be mended, recased, wrapped
in paper, recovered, or thrown away. The binding, therefore, should be
in the hands of an assistant who understands the demands of this
department of library service, and for economy's sake as well as for the
sake of efficiency it should not be shifted from one person to another.

Mr. Dana has shown in his "Notes on bookbinding for libraries" how
essential it is that binding assistants should know books. Credit for
much of what here appears in support of that viewpoint is due him and is
herewith acknowledged.

In considering the binding of fiction and juvenile books the following
are some of the questions which the binding assistant must ask and
decide before determining whether a book is to go to the shelves in a
new dress, or to the junk-man as waste paper:

(_a_) Is the book in such poor condition that it cannot be rebound or
recased? If so, it must be discarded. While this decision is generally
easy to make, it is sometimes made difficult by books which are in too
good condition to throw away and in too poor condition to rebind. In
such cases the decision must depend on the popularity of the book. If
very popular, it may be wise to rebind it, for it must be remembered
that good library binders can accomplish wonders with books that are in
poor condition.

Sometimes the question arises whether the book is in poor enough
condition to need rebinding. Perhaps it will survive a few more issues
just as it stands. If the book is a trifle shaky in its covers, the
decision should be to rebind. The binder can do a better job at this
time than he can when the book becomes more worn, and the life of the
book will be prolonged by prompt binding. If the assistant decides not
to rebind it, the book will be issued only a few more times before it
will have to be withdrawn from circulation and sent to the repair room
again. The result is a greater loss of time with no actual gain in wear.

(_b_) Is the book much read? If it is an old one that is evidently
popular, it is reasonable to suppose that it is the policy of the
library to supply the demand for this book, and the book will be
rebound as a matter of course. A decision about new books which are
popular is harder to make because it is fair to ask:

(_c_) Is the demand falling off? It is here that the assistant must show
good judgment. It may be that the book can be rebound easily with
profit, if there is a sufficient demand to keep all the copies in
circulation. It may be that the book is waning in popularity and that
other copies in the library are ample to supply present demands. If they
are, the copy in hand should be canceled, since the cost of binding will
then be saved. But the assistant should ascertain the condition of the
remaining copies. Let us take the case of a novel which has been
withdrawn from circulation because it needs rebinding. The assistant
looks at the record of circulation on the book card or pocket and
discovers that last year the book was issued four times a month, while
now it is issued only twice a month. He finds also that there are four
other copies. These four copies should be sufficient to meet present
demands, and the book in hand may be withdrawn. But suppose that further
investigation shows that two of the four copies are in very poor
condition and cannot be rebound. If he withdraws the one in hand, only
two good copies will remain, and perhaps these are not sufficient to
supply the demand. On the other hand, it is possible that they are
sufficient to supply the demand. In any event, the situation is one
which requires a knowledge of the book itself, its popularity with the
public, and general good judgment. The question may be summed up in
this way:

1. It is cheaper to rebind a book than it is to discard it and later be
obliged to buy a new copy.

2. It is cheaper to discard a book when it seems assured that the book's
popularity is over, than to bind it and have it remain for years unused.

(_d_) If the book is much used, is it a book that the library wishes to
circulate? Every library has certain books on its shelves of which those
in authority somewhat disapprove, but which are very popular and not
poor enough to be done away with altogether. It is sometimes the policy
to supply only partially the demand for such books; sometimes to discard
them entirely when worn out. The good binding assistant will remember
the titles of these books and use good judgment in dealing with them
when they come into his hands.

(_e_) If the book is not much read, is it a standard work? For example,
in the case of a work of Anthony Trollope the assistant discovers that
it was issued only once during the last year and that it is the only
copy in the library. If he does not "know books," he will be led to
believe that the book has no value and will cancel it. In a large
library an action of this sort would be unwise; in a small library the
decision would depend upon the particular title. Most libraries keep a
book of this particular class in order to supply the occasional demand
for it. There are many books not written by men with the reputation of
Anthony Trollope which, nevertheless, have intrinsic worth and have a
small circle of admirers. They may not have great merit, but on no
account should the library be without them. As examples of books of this
kind we may take Mrs. Brush's "Colonel's opera cloak" and Theodore
Winthrop's "John Brent."

(_f_) Can the book be replaced with a good reprint which will wear as
long as a new binding and cost less? While there are not many cases in
which this can be done, the assistant should watch for them. The most
noteworthy reprints which will meet these requirements are the volumes
in Everyman's Library. In the original Everyman's edition these were
entirely unsuited for library use, but in 1910 they were all put into a
strong library binding. In the cloth edition they sell for thirty-five
cents a volume and can easily be issued from forty to fifty times before
being discarded. This makes the cost for each issue as small as can be
obtained by binding higher-priced editions.

The following case, which actually happened, illustrates the point,
although the books are not fiction. Grote's "History of Greece," in
twelve volumes, was in bad condition; several of the cloth backs were
torn and the sewing of all the volumes was loose. It was decided to send
the books to be rebound at a cost of $5.40. Before doing so, the list of
Everyman's Library was consulted and it was found that the work could be
obtained in that form in twelve volumes at a cost of $4.20, a clear
saving of $1.20, or over 20 per cent. The work was seldom used, yet it
was necessary to have the set on the shelves; the Everyman's edition
answered every purpose, and will undoubtedly last as long as the
rebound set would have done. Unfortunately, owing to copyright
provisions, comparatively few of the books which are constantly wearing
out can be obtained in this edition.

(_g_) Is it an old edition, with poor paper and poor type? A book of
this sort should never be rebound but should be discarded and a new copy
purchased even if the cost of a new copy be much greater than that of
rebinding.

(_h_) If the book is the only copy in the library and is read not
oftener than once in ten years, should it be kept because it is
important historically? Good examples of this class of unused books are
the works of Charles Brockden Brown. They are not interesting at the
present time, but when first published were much read. Every student of
American literature should read them, and they should be on the shelves
of all except the small libraries. Here again good judgment is called
for on the part of the assistant.

(_i_) Is the book used so seldom that it can be recased or recovered by
the library? The process of recasing (described on page 184) can be used
in the case of small-sized books which have covers showing little
evidence of wear, and which do not receive hard usage. The process of
recovering (described on page 185) can be used on leather-bound books
which have cracked at the joints. In either case the sewing must be
perfectly sound.

(_j_) Finally, let us suppose that we have asked all the foregoing
questions and are still undecided what to do. There will be very few
cases of the kind. Perhaps the best solution is to wrap the book in
paper, letter it with author, title and call number, and transfer it
from the fiction shelves to the regular literature shelves. It may stay
there for years unused and yet be at hand when finally called for.

With books other than fiction and juvenile many of the same questions
must be asked. In addition, however, it is sometimes necessary to ask
the following:

(_a_) Are there later editions which are more valuable? This question
will arise with frequency especially in the case of scientific,
technical and reference books, and careful judgment must be exercised in
making decisions. It often happens that a later edition of a technical
book has little more value than the one which precedes it; frequently it
entirely supersedes the earlier edition. In the one case the book can be
rebound with profit, in the other it is best to discard it and buy the
latest edition. Some libraries keep all the editions of a book for
historical purposes; but most libraries, especially the smaller ones,
will do better to discard older editions when they are superseded by
later ones. Sometimes a book has no later edition, but its place has
been entirely taken by the work of other authors. In such cases it
should be remembered that an out-of-date technical book in the hands of
an inexperienced person frequently causes more harm than good. It may
cost more to buy a new book than to rebind an old one; yet this is
exactly what should be done in every such case if the funds of the
library permit.

(_b_) May not the library be better off without either the book or a
substitute? In the past librarians have hesitated to discard any book
which has once been placed on the shelves. They have believed that all
printed matter has value and that a book which belongs to the library is
sacred and must on no account be destroyed. It is difficult to defend
such an attitude. If we admit for the time being that the librarian
never makes mistakes in acquiring books, still it is sure to happen that
many books will outlive their usefulness, except as a part of the
history or bibliography of the subject. Why should they be kept on the
shelves when they are not used and ought not to be used? It cannot, of
course, be admitted that the librarian makes no mistakes in acquiring
books; every library in the country will show examples of poor
selection. Why, after a mistake has been made, refuse to admit it? If
the original purchase (or acceptance of a gift) was a mistake, to keep
the book on the shelves simply perpetuates the mistake and adds to the
expense of maintenance. It is no crime to discard a book. On the
contrary, in many cases, it is the only sensible thing to do. In
doubtful cases, however, the book should be kept.


ARRANGEMENT

If the final decision is to bind the book the next step is to arrange
the book in the way in which it should be bound. The question of
collation is one on which there has been a difference of opinion. Some
librarians have claimed that it is best to collate books at the library
in order to prevent imperfect books being bound, since it is always
disappointing to discover, after a book has been bound, that it is
incomplete. In the great majority of cases, however, collation is a
waste of time, since good binders refuse to bind imperfect volumes. In
the case of very valuable books, especially those with many plates, and
even in the case of less valuable books which have many illustrations
not paged-in, it may be best to collate at the library since it is
obviously unfair to the binder to expect him to be responsible for
anything except the main paging. Fiction or juvenile books may sometimes
be bound when one or two pages are missing. Juvenile books, especially,
often go to the bindery with missing pages. Many times these missing
pages are not especially important and in these cases it seems more
economical to bind the book than to buy a new copy. If the number of
missing pages is not too great they may be typewritten from other
copies. Books other than fiction or juvenile should seldom be bound in
an imperfect condition.

Another exception to the rule of sending books uncollated is in the case
of popular periodicals, such as Scribner's, Harper's, Century, etc.,
where the library has only one copy which it binds. Since periodicals
frequently become torn and mutilated and must be replaced it will save
delay in having the volumes bound, if the collation is done at the
library.

But while collation is generally unnecessary, arrangement in proper
order is essential. In dealing with periodicals this is not always an
easy task. They should first be examined to see that all the numbers are
in hand, and that there is a title-page and an index. It would seem as
if there were little chance to go astray in doing this, yet the vagaries
of periodicals are innumerable and nothing must be taken for granted. If
only five monthly numbers are found when there should be six to complete
the volume, it is not best to conclude hastily that it is incomplete.
Sometimes the cover indicates that two numbers are published in one. If
it is not so indicated one must look at the paging. If the paging is
consecutive, and there is a title-page and index, it is safe to assume
that the volume is complete, even if a number is apparently missing.

The general rule for arranging periodicals is: Place title page at the
beginning, followed by table of contents, text, and index at the end.
Periodicals in English are generally easy to arrange, though even in
this case one must know whether the periodical in hand is in the habit
of publishing supplements which are paged separately, but which are
called for by the table of contents. If such supplements are omitted the
volume is incomplete. An example of a periodical of this class was the
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, before
it changed to its method of issuing each number as a separate volume.
Many volumes of English periodicals such as All the Year Round,
Household Words, etc., have been bound without the Christmas
supplements, which those periodicals always issued. A few periodicals
in English have two or more sets of pagings either in each number, or in
some of the numbers and not in others. When the numbers are taken apart
and the proper pagings grouped together, the table of contents will
generally indicate how these should be arranged. But if not, it is
usually readily apparent which is the main paging and which the minor
paging or pagings.

Though rarely found in periodicals printed in English, this exasperating
condition of affairs frequently exists in foreign periodicals. The
Germans are especially fond of printing several different parts in the
same number. Frequently a long monograph will begin in the first number
of a volume and extend through two or more volumes. When completed it
may or may not have a special title-page and index of its own. Perhaps
the table of contents of the last volume in which part of it has
appeared will call for it as a supplement to that volume. Perhaps it
does not. In any event the paging must be removed from the first and
succeeding volumes until the monograph is finally complete. If it is not
called for by any regular title-page or table of contents, it may be
bound separately. Sometimes a periodical will appear in two or more
parts each month, each part covering some phase of the larger subject
indicated by the general title of the periodical. These parts will be
paged separately and numbered differently but will have the same kind of
cover, and care must be used to keep the proper parts together.
Peculiarities and irregularities of this sort make periodicals veritable
puzzles, some of which it may take months to solve.

In arranging periodicals, front covers having a different color from the
text must be kept to facilitate use.

Advertisements as a rule should not be bound. Since they are a part of
the history of the times, it is desirable for a few of the largest
libraries to bind the advertising pages of one or two numbers a year in
each periodical. Other libraries should throw them away. It is not
necessary to remove them entirely before sending the volumes to the
bindery; tearing down two or three inches on pages which are to be
discarded is sufficient indication to the binder that they are not to be
bound.

Several magazines, such as McClure's and Everybody's, have, for several
years, made a practice of leaving articles unfinished in the main paging
and continuing them on advertising pages. This is an annoying practice
since great care must be taken to see that all text matter is complete,
even if it becomes necessary to bind all advertising pages.

Many periodicals, especially those of a scientific character, contain
plates which are not paged-in. If these are scattered through the text
they may be allowed to stay there, but if they are grouped together at
the end of each number they should be placed together in proper order at
the end of the complete volume.

The vagaries of periodical publishers are shown as much in the way in
which they issue (or do not issue) title-pages and indexes as in any
other way. The proper way, which is seldom done, is to issue both
title-page and index in the last number of each volume. Some publishers
issue them in the first number of the next volume; some at various times
during the publication of the succeeding volume. Some publish a
title-page at the beginning of the first number of a volume and an index
when the spirit moves. Some publish a title-page but no index or table
of contents. Others publish a title-page and table of contents but do
not send them unless requested to do so. Many publish neither title-page
nor index, and perfectly reputable periodicals which have published
these essential parts of a periodical for twenty years or more will
suddenly cease publishing them. It is evident that title-pages and
indexes are nuisances in preparing periodicals for the bindery.

The assistant in charge should keep a record showing (_a_) which
publishers must be asked to send title-pages and indexes, and this
should be done as soon as possible after the volumes are complete; (_b_)
in which number of a periodical title-pages and indexes may be looked
for if they come regularly; (_c_) which periodicals do not publish
title-pages and indexes.

If lack of funds makes it impossible to bind periodicals and they must
be wrapped in paper it is highly important that title-pages and indexes
be included, since it may be impossible to obtain them when funds permit
binding.

Changes in the size of periodicals are a cause of annoyance. The
annoyance is not great when the change is from a large quarto to an
octavo, for the cost of binding an octavo is considerably less than that
of a quarto. Unfortunately, the present tendency is almost wholly the
other way. Many periodicals, for years published in a comfortable octavo
size have been changed to a much larger size. This in itself is
exasperating, but in addition the publishers apparently make no effort
to change the size with the beginning of a new volume, so that part of a
volume will be of one size and part of another. In such cases the
troubles of the binding assistant may be readily imagined.

While it is highly important to bind only complete volumes of
periodicals, it is occasionally permissible to bind volumes with guards
for missing numbers which may be inserted later if they are obtained.
This method makes it possible to put a volume into permanent form better
suited for use than unbound numbers, and prevents further loss of
numbers already in hand. It can be done only when the numbers are very
thin, particularly in the case of newspapers.

Quite a number of periodicals have so few pages in each number that a
complete volume makes a very thin book. In such cases it is best to bind
two volumes in one at the cost of one.

Among other material which passes through the hands of a binding
assistant are the annual reports of various organizations--religious,
charitable, fraternal, governmental, etc. In large libraries these must
be bound for permanent preservation. In small libraries the annual
reports of all local organizations should be bound if funds permit,
others wrapped in paper and lettered on the wrapper. Whether they are to
be bound or wrapped in paper, they should be grouped by regular periods,
preferably five or ten reports in a volume, according to size, following
the decades or half decades.


INSTRUCTIONS TO THE BINDER

Having decided that the volume must be bound and having arranged it in
its proper order, the next step is to indicate to the binder how it is
to be bound and lettered. Various methods have been used to indicate
style and lettering. Some libraries have an elaborate binding slip,
giving on one side the different materials, colors, etc., and having the
other divided into panels for lettering. A slip is made for each book
and the binder follows it carefully. Some libraries arrange an arbitrary
system with the binder making one letter or figure indicate much that
otherwise would have to be written in full. For example, "C" under such
an arrangement might mean "Bind in one-half red cowhide with green cloth
sides." Some librarians give a general blanket order to bind all fiction
in one way and all juvenile books in another.

For most books in English, except periodicals, lettering need not be
indicated on a binding slip. All that is necessary is to underscore
lightly on the title page the first letter of words which must be used.
The call number may be put on a binding slip enclosed in the book, or in
the case of fiction and juvenile books, it may be penciled lightly on
the title page, thus doing away altogether with the binding slip. If
there is a chance for misunderstanding on the part of the finisher, or
if an author's real name must be used instead of a pseudonym which
appears on the title page, a binding slip must be filled out giving
exact lettering.

While exact lettering on a binding slip is not essential for ordinary
books, it is necessary for periodicals, each set of which should be
bound and lettered uniformly. This may be assured by making out a
binding slip giving in full the title, dates covered, volume number and
call number, if one is used. The slip goes to the bindery with the book,
and when the volume is returned is filed so that when the next volume is
to be bound the slip can be consulted and a new one written with the
necessary changes in volume number and dates. The chief value of the
slip is to show exactly how the previous volume has been bound, so that
the following volumes can be made uniform if possible.

A carbon copy of binding slips for periodicals should be made, to be
kept at the library for charging purposes.

When binding volumes which are a part of a set, other than a periodical,
a slip must be made to be kept on file so that when another volume of
the set comes to hand it will not be necessary to visit the shelves to
see whether other volumes have been bound and how they have been bound.

In finishing periodicals the position of lettering and the size of type
used may be kept uniform if the binder takes what is called a "rub" or
"rub-off" of the book after it is lettered and keeps it on file at the
bindery. This can easily be made by laying a sheet of thin, but tough,
paper over the back and rubbing it with shoemaker's heel-ball which will
show white lettering on a black background. When the next volume comes
to the bindery the "rub-off" shows exact height of boards, exact
position of lettering and size of type.

A few libraries have had a dummy back made for each periodical showing
color and kind of material in addition to other details. But the cost of
a dummy is not slight and a new one must be made whenever any change in
title or size occurs. Large college or reference libraries may need
dummy backs for their numerous sets of foreign periodicals having
various marks, such as umlauts, etc., over or under letters. When a
library operates its own bindery it is possible to send the last bound
volume as a sample. While this adds much to the routine, its main
advantage is that it eliminates the possibility of mistakes due to
defective dummy or indistinct "rub-off."


LETTERING

It is necessary that binders understand exactly how books are to be
lettered, what kind of type to use and the position on the back of the
book which each item of information must have. There are differences of
opinion as to the best ways of lettering, but it is essential that every
librarian have uniformity in his own library, even if he disagrees with
his fellow workers. In all lettering a bold, clear type should be used,
and all figures should be in Arabic, since it is plainer than Roman.

In most leather bindings the back is divided into five or six panels,
making it possible to obtain uniformity by setting aside each panel for
a definite purpose. If desired, another narrow panel may be made in
which to stamp a mark of ownership. Paneling is a useful device in the
case of books which are eight inches or more in height, but in the case
of juvenile books and fiction it may be omitted entirely. As most of
these books require simply author, title and call number, if one be
used, the device of paneling adds to the labor in binding and serves no
useful purpose in the library. It should be used on most other books
bound in leather and on all periodicals bound in cloth or duck.

Which shall go at the top of the book, author or title? In favor of the
title it can be claimed that all publishers letter the title first with
the author second; and since in non-fiction the books in publishers'
covers on the shelves will outnumber the rebound books, it is advisable
to put the title first in order to have uniformity. On the other hand,
it can be claimed that the arrangement under the class is by author,
that most library assistants look for the author rather than the title,
and that it is therefore advisable to put the most important item of
information at the top in the position of greatest prominence. In the
opinion of the writer this advantage outweighs any other.

It may be assumed, therefore, that the best arrangement is author,
title, volume number if necessary, and call number. In the case of
fiction, juvenile books and all other books from which it seems
desirable to omit panels, these items will be put on with sufficient
space between to make them independent of each other. The bottom of the
call number should be 1-1/4 or 1-1/2 inches from the tail of the book on
all books in the library, except oversized books, which should have the
call number at the top (Fig. 16). If panels are used, the author's name
should be near the bottom of the first panel, the title in the second,
volume number in the fourth and call number in the fifth (Fig. 15).

If two books are bound together, letter, author and title of the second
book in the third panel (Fig. 17).

When a work is in more than one volume with separate titles for each
volume, place the author's name in the first panel, general title in the
second, volume in the third and the title of the particular volume in
the fourth (Fig. 18).

If six panels are used, each item is dropped one panel.

In most cases the author's last name is sufficient, but occasionally it
may be necessary to use initials to distinguish between authors having
the same name. Use both surnames of joint authors (Fig. 19). For
pseudonyms use the form adopted by the cataloging department. For
example, if the catalog entry is under Clemens instead of Twain, letter
Clemens on the book. Both real name and pseudonym may be put on the
back, but it does not seem necessary. In the case of the classics add
the name of translator or editor in the panel under the title (Fig. 20).

  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |   914.5    |  |            |  |            |
  |  Beecher   |  |   qJ 23    |  |   Patton   |  |  Bancroft  |
  |            |  |   James    |  |            |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |   Home     |  |            |
  |  Sermons   |  |  Italian   |  | And School |  |   Works    |
  |            |  |   Hours    |  |  Sewing    |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |  Rarer     |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  | Hot Weather|  |    30      |
  |            |  |            |  |  Dishes    |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |     1      |  |            |  |            |  |  Oregon    |
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |     2      |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |    252     |  |            |  |    641     |  |    979.5   |
  |   B 398    |  |            |  |   R 694    |  |    B 22    |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

     Fig. 15          Fig. 16         Fig. 17        Fig. 18


  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |  Kipling   |  |            |  |  National  |  |            |
  | Balestier  |  |   Plato    |  | Conference |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  |  on City   |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  |  Planning  |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  | Nineteenth |
  | Naulahka   |  | Dialogues  |  |Proceedings |  | Century    |
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |            |  |  Jowett    |  |     1      |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |            |  |    1       |  |  Chicago   |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  | Jan.-June  |
  |            |  |    888     |  |   352      |  |   1894     |
  |   K 575    |  |    P 69    |  |   N 23     |  |    35      |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

     Fig. 19         Fig. 20         Fig. 21         Fig. 22

  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |  Nature    |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|
  |            |  |  National  |  |  Littel's  |  |            |
  |            |  | Municipal  |  |  Living    |  |Independent |
  |            |  |  Review    |  |    Age     |  |            |
  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|
  | Nov. 1895  |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  | Apr. 1896  |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |    53      |  |            |  |            |  |------------|
  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|  | Apr.-June  |
  |            |  |            |  | July-Sep.  |  |   1903     |
  |            |  |   1913     |  |   1888     |  |    55      |
  |            |  |     2      |  |   178      |  |  Part 2    |
  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  | Series 5   |  |            |
  |            |  |            |  |   63       |  |            |
  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|  |------------|
  |            |  |            |  |            |  |            |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

     Fig. 23         Fig. 24         Fig. 25         Fig. 26


  +------------+      +------+    +------------+  +------------+
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |            |
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |            |
  |            |      |Griggs|    |            |  |            |
  |------------|      |      |    |------------|  |------------|
  |            |      | Use  |    | Harper's   |  |            |
  |   Punch    |      |  of  |    | Magazine   |  |  Monist    |
  |            |      | the  |    |            |  |            |
  |------------|      |Margin|    |------------|  |------------|
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |            |
  |            |      |170-G |    |            |  |            |
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |            |
  |------------|      |  87  |    |------------|  |------------|
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |            |
  |   1882     |      |      |    |   Index    |  |   1908     |
  |   82-83    |      |      |    |    1-40    |  |    18      |
  |------------|      |      |    |------------|  |------------|
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |            |
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |   Index    |
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |   1-17     |
  |------------|      |      |    |------------|  |------------|
  |            |      |      |    |            |  |            |
  +------------+      +------+    +------------+  +------------+

     Fig. 27           Fig. 28       Fig. 29         Fig. 30

When the names of foreign cities or countries must be placed in the
author panel, use the English form. Names of government departments,
bureaus, etc., should be inverted if necessary to bring the distinctive
word first. For example, use Health bureau, not Bureau of health.

In lettering titles it is seldom desirable to omit the first part of the
title in order to use words which are more distinctive, in other words,
to use a binder's title. If it is necessary it should be done with care
and discrimination. Ordinarily, give first words, omitting articles.
Very long titles must be condensed, sometimes at the expense of
clearness.

Proceedings of organizations which meet in different cities should have
the name of the place of the meeting lettered in the third panel (Fig.
21).

On periodicals, the author panel is left vacant and the title of the
periodical given in full in the second panel. Here it is never
permissible to omit first words, except articles. Letter "American
review of reviews," not "Review of reviews." In case of foreign
periodicals it may be necessary to place a sub-title in the third panel
when a periodical is issued in two or more parts and each part bound
separately with a distinct title page. With this exception, leave the
third panel vacant and letter date and volume number in the fourth
panel. Place first the months covered by the volume, followed by the
year (Figs. 22 and 23.) Use the first three letters of each month,
except June and July, which should be given in full. On foreign
periodicals use the English abbreviations for months. If the volume
covers the calendar year the months may be omitted (Fig. 24). In the
same panel place the volume number beneath the year.

If the periodical has more than one series give dates and total volume
number, placing underneath the series number and volume of series (Fig
25).

If the unbound volume of a periodical is too large to be bound in one
book, bind it in two volumes and letter the exact months in each part,
placing "Part 1" and "Part 2" underneath the volume number (Fig. 26).

If two volumes are bound in one give the inclusive volume numbers (Fig.
27).

In the case of periodicals having more than one series and which are
indexed in Poole's index or the Readers' guide, the volume number given
first should correspond with the one given in the indexes.

Thin volumes must be lettered lengthwise in the same order as outlined
above. Always letter from head to tail. This facilitates reading on the
shelves, since shelves are naturally read from left to right. In
lettering lengthwise place the book number below the class number, if
there is room, if not, after the class number with a hyphen between
(Fig. 28).

Oversized books which must be shelved on their sides should also be
lettered from head to tail.

If the book is an index complete in itself letter the word "Index" in
the fourth panel, followed by the inclusive volume numbers covered by
the index (Fig. 29).

If a periodical index covering several volumes is included at the end of
one of the volumes, place the word Index and the inclusive volume
numbers underneath the dates and regular volume number (Fig. 30).

Other questions are sure to arise, but they can be solved satisfactorily
if it be remembered that the essentials are definiteness and clearness.




CHAPTER IX

BINDING RECORDS AND ROUTINE


Binding records must be as simple as possible, but they should

1. Instruct the binder.

2. Show what books are in the bindery and when they were sent.

3. Show how previous volumes of a set have been bound.

4. Act as a check on books when returned.

5. Show the cost of binding.

Some librarians keep a record of all books bound, called a "binding
book." To the writer the need of a permanent register of books bound is
not apparent. It is much easier to keep in other ways a record of books
actually in the bindery and after the books have been bound and returned
to the library the value of having the fact recorded in any other place
than on the accession book is negligible. In the case of popular books
easily replaced we may even question the necessity of recording in the
accession book the fact that a book has been bound. Any other permanent
record seems useless.

1. When books are sent to the bindery the binder must be told:

_a._ In what material each book is to be bound.

_b._ How each book is to be lettered.

The best way to indicate lettering, etc., has been shown in the chapter
"Preparing for the bindery." The designation of material and color can
frequently be done by giving a blanket order if the books are of the
same character. For example, if all the books are fiction it is
perfectly feasible to send a written order, stating that they are all to
be bound in half brown cowhide with red cloth sides, French joints, etc.
If the shipment is a miscellaneous one of periodicals, reference books,
fiction and juvenile books it may be necessary to state on the binding
slips how each book is to be bound.

2. For public libraries the question of keeping a record of books that
are in the bindery is a simple one. The use of book cards for charging
purposes is practically universal. All that is necessary is to remove
the book card from the book, stamp the name or first initial of the
binder's name and the date after the last charging date (Z25Ap14), and
file the cards just as they are filed at the loan desk. If a book cannot
be found on the shelves or in circulation, it takes but a few seconds to
discover whether or not it is in the bindery. When the book is returned
the card is replaced in the book. This is the easiest way of keeping
this record and shows at once how many times a book circulated in the
publisher's covers before it needed to be bound.

For books which have no book cards, such as reference books and
periodicals, it will be necessary to write a slip which can be filed as
a record with the book cards. If a binding slip must be sent to the
bindery, by using carbon paper both slips can be made at the same time.
The binder should be notified if books have not been returned; if unable
to find them he must pay for them.

It is possible that some may think this method of keeping records unduly
lax; that without a permanent record in book form many errors will creep
in and that books will be lost. The answer to such a criticism is that
in the Wilmington Institute Free Library it has worked for a period of
ten years. During that time more than 25,000 volumes have been bound by
five different binders, and the writer does not recall that a single
volume has gone astray or that there have been any errors which would
have been avoided if a record had been kept which required a careful
invoicing of each volume sent to the bindery. When the books are shipped
a statement is sent to the binder that so many volumes are in the
shipment and it is his business to keep the books in this shipment
together and return all at the same time. It is his responsibility, not
that of the librarian.

3. Records showing how previous volumes of a set are bound should be
kept as outlined under "Preparing for the bindery," page 140. The
binding slip for the last volume of the periodical will show how it is
bound. As an alternative to the carbon slip for periodicals it may be
possible to keep a record of volumes in the bindery on the periodical
checklist, if that be kept on sheets. A similar record should be kept
for all books with volume numbers. For example, if volume 10 of Smith's
works comes to the binding assistant a binding slip should be made out
which records the material and color in which the book is to be bound,
together with exact lettering used. When returned from the bindery this
slip should be filed and referred to when another volume of the same
work needs to be bound. Unless this is done it will be necessary to go
to the shelves to see whether other volumes have been bound. If only one
volume has been bound and that is in the hands of a reader it will be
necessary to wait until it is returned, all of which means loss of time.
No book with a volume number should be sent to the bindery without
consulting the file of binding slips. If there is no record that a
previous volume has been bound it may be advisable for the assistant to
go to the shelves to see if there are other volumes of the same set
which need binding. It is little more work to send five volumes than to
send one.

4. From what has been said it can readily be seen what sort of a check
is placed upon the binder. Books sent to him are charged to him as if
delivered to a borrower. If he does not return them he must pay for
them. Let the method be elaborate or simple, this is all that it amounts
to. It behooves the librarian, therefore, to make his charging as simple
as is compatible with safety.

5. Records of cost may be kept in various ways, but the essential facts
which it is best to record are:

_a._ Number of volumes rebound;

_b._ Number newly bound;

_c._ Number resewed or recased;

_d._ Number repaired at the library;

_e._ Total cost.

If desired, the cost of each of the foregoing items may be kept. A large
library will also need to keep a record of the binding for each branch,
and possibly for each department in the main library.

In most cases it is not necessary for the binder to send a bill itemized
by author and title.

It will be sufficient if he bill the books in some such way as this:

    52 vols. Cowhide                 8 in. @ .45 $23.40
    16 vols. Buckram                10 in. @ .65  10.40
    6 vols. Imperial morocco cloth   8 in. @ .50   3.00
    2 vols. Morocco                  8 in. @ .70   1.40
                                                 ------
                                                 $38.20

Books may more easily be checked with such a bill than with an itemized
one. The information may then be drawn off on a sheet, allowing a column
for each material and size, monthly and yearly statistics being easily
compiled from these sheets. If it is the policy of the library to send
an itemized invoice of books to be bound the binder should return the
invoice with prices for each volume added.

In large libraries, such as the large college and reference libraries
and public libraries with many branches, more elaborate binding records
than those just outlined are necessary. College libraries, which do not
as a rule have book cards, will find it necessary to make out a slip of
one kind or another for charging purposes. In large library systems
books should be sent directly from the branch to the binder and returned
to the branch. A record should be sent to the head of the binding
department at the main library, showing the number of volumes sent with
the date, also the date when the books were returned to the branch. Each
branch should, of course, keep records in much the same way as a single
small library, but the needs of statistics require further records at
the main library.

It is probable that each large library will have to work out forms
suitable for its own needs, but the following are suggested as feasible.

    +--------------------------------------------+
    |             |                              |
    | Volumes     |                              |
    |             |                              |
    | 1/2 Mor.    |------------------------------|
    |             |                              |
    | Lib. Buck.  |                              |
    |             |                              |
    | Cloth       |------------------------------|
    |             |                              |
    | 1/2 Duck    |                              |
    |             |                              |
    | 1/2 Pig     |------------------------------|
    |             |                              |
    | Light Brown |                              |
    |             |                              |
    | Dark Brown  |------------------------------|
    |             |                              |
    | Black       |                              |
    |             |                              |
    | Dark Blue   |------------------------------|
    |             |                              |
    | Dark Green  |                              |
    |             |                              |
    | Red         |==============================|
    |             |                              |
    +--------------------------------------------+

            Binding slip. Size 6x4 in.

Material and color are indicated on the left by underlining. Author,
title, volume number, etc., are written in proper panels.

    +-----------------------------------------------+
    |         Blankton Public Library               |
    |                                               |
    |    Branch                  Date               |
    |                                               |
    |  Following books are ready for binding:       |
    |                                               |
    | ...... vols. to be bound in 1/2 morocco.      |
    | ...... vols. to be bound in library buckram.  |
    | ...... vols. to be bound in 1/2 duck.         |
    | ...... vols. as samples.                      |
    | ...... vols. to be repaired.                  |
    | ...... vols. for corrections.                 |
    |                                               |
    |         ............................          |
    |                             Branch Librarian. |
    +-----------------------------------------------+

                   Size 5 x 3 in.

This slip is filled out by the branch librarian and sent to supervisor
of binding, who decides who shall bind the books and sends the order to
the binder.

    +-----------------------------------------------------+
    |          Blankton Public Library                    |
    |                                                     |
    |  Order No. 1002.             ...........191         |
    |                                                     |
    |  Messrs. ..........................                 |
    |                                                     |
    |    Please send to ..................... Branch      |
    |  for the following books:                           |
    |                                                     |
    |  ...... vols. to be rebound.                        |
    |  ...... vols. samples.                              |
    |  ...... vols. to be repaired.                       |
    |  ...... vols. for corrections.                      |
    |                                                     |
    |    Bind according to specifications, following      |
    |instructions for style on binder's slip in each book.|
    |                                                     |
    |  Please return books with bill to the Branch.       |
    |                                                     |
    |               ...............................       |
    |                                   Supervisor.       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+

                      Size 5 x 3 in.

When books are returned to the branch they are checked up with the bill.
If there are no discrepancies the bill is sent to the binding
supervisor.

    +---------------------------------------------+
    |  Order No. 1002.     Sent........... 191    |
    |                                             |
    |  from ..................... Branch          |
    |                                             |
    |  to ..................................      |
    |                                             |
    |  ...... vols. to be rebound.                |
    |  ...... vols. samples.                      |
    |  ...... vols. to be repaired.               |
    |  ...... vols. for corrections.              |
    |                                             |
    |    Returned ........... 191  Amt. $........ |
    |                                             |
    |                    Blankton Public Library. |
    +---------------------------------------------+

                      Size 5 x 3 in.

This slip, made out at the central library upon advice from branch
librarian that books have been shipped, is filed numerically. When bill
is received, the information is drawn off on a monthly sheet. A similar
slip can be used to keep records for each branch separately.

The weekly or monthly statistics sheets ought to give in vertical
columns the number of volumes and cost of each kind of binding and
repair work used by the library. They will include one-half cowhide,
one-half morocco, library buckram, one-half duck, reinforcing, recasing,
lettering, etc. The first column at the left will have the names of
different departments and branches. The last column on the right will
give the total expenditure for each department and branch, and the
footings of columns will give the cost of each kind of work. If
necessary this sheet can also indicate number of volumes rebound and the
number of volumes newly bound.


BINDING ROUTINE

In preparing books for the bindery and keeping binding records a regular
routine should be adopted which should be followed as closely as
possible in order to avoid errors. Each library should adopt a routine
suited to its needs, modifying when necessary the following suggestions.

Binding Routine for Small Library

1. Examine book, noticing condition, completeness, title pages, indexes,
etc., and decide how book is to be bound.

2. Underline on title page the first letter of words which must be
lettered on back. Pencil call number on reverse of title page.

3. If volume is a periodical or a volume in a set make out binding slip
giving volume number and dates.

4. File book cards at loan desk.

5. Send books to bindery.

6. When books are returned check bill with books to see that no mistake
has been made in charges.

7. Replace book cards in books.

8. File slips for periodicals.

Binding Routine for Medium-Sized Library

1. Examine books for binding noticing condition, completeness, plates,
title pages, indexes, number and condition of copies, editions and
various other points noted under "Preparing for the Bindery."

2. If the book is a periodical find title page and index. A special
record ought to show when these are due and which periodicals do not
publish them. Arrange exactly as the book is to be bound.

3. If the book is a periodical consult file showing how previous volumes
have been bound and make out a binding slip with carbon copy, making
such changes as are required by changes in title, date and volume
number. The binding slip should be laid in the front of the book.

4. If the book is one of a set see if other volumes have been bound.

5. For books, not periodicals, indicate lettering by underlining on the
title page the first letter of each word that is to go on the back.

6. Indicate color, material, volume number, call number, etc., on a
binding slip which should be laid in front of the book. If the shipment
is all fiction and no call number is used it will not be necessary to
make out any slip of instruction. A blanket order may be made saying
that all books are to be bound in a certain way.

7. When ready to send to the bindery, remove book card or carbon copy of
binding slip. Leave slips containing information for the binder in the
book.

8. Pack books and send to the binder, notifying him of the date of
shipment and the number of volumes sent as follows:

     96 vols. to be rebound.
     25 vols. of periodicals.
      3 vols. to be recased.
      4 vols. of corrections.
      2 vols. of samples.
    ---
    130

(It sometimes happens that a volume of a set is going to a binder who
did not bind the previous volumes. In such a case the second binder has
no "rubbing" and a sample volume or a "rubbing" must be sent.)

9. Stamp carbon slips, and book cards after the last charging date, with
the name or initial of the binder and the date sent.

10. File book cards and carbon slips alphabetically by author, or first
word of title in the case of periodicals.

11. When books are returned from the bindery see that bill is correct.

12. See that books are lettered correctly, returning such as are
incorrect.

13. Remove book cards from the file and place in the books.

14. Letter book pockets or book plates with call number and accession
number, if this is the custom of the library.

15. Send periodicals and other books which have not been properly
recorded to the order or accession department to follow regular routine
for new books. Books that have been rebound may go directly to the
shelves.

16. File binding slips for periodicals and destroy slips for previous
volumes.

17. If it is the custom of the library to enter cost of binding in the
accession book it will be necessary to put the accession number and cost
on the binding slip. These slips may then be arranged numerically by
accession number and the cost entered in the accession book.


Routine for Large College and Reference Libraries

The routine just given is as simple as can be made without endangering
the safety of books. It is not sufficiently accurate for the large
libraries, especially the college libraries which bind a large number of
periodicals belonging to many departments, each department being obliged
to pay for its own binding. This requires complex records in the binding
department. In order to eliminate as many mistakes as possible it will
be necessary to have a binding card for each periodical and for sets.
(See Fig. 31)

This card has a line for the title, a place for the description of the
binding, and is ruled on both sides. On the right-hand side it is ruled
in three columns--price, sent, returned. The lettering may be indicated
by vertical lines in the title, one for change of line in the same
panel, two for change of panel.

Harper's Magazine

                                Color         Style
    ====================================================
            Volumes           | Price |  Sent |  Ret'd
    --------------------------|-------|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    --------------------------|---|---|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    --------------------------|---|---|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    --------------------------|---|---|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    --------------------------|---|---|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    --------------------------|---|---|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    --------------------------|---|---|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    --------------------------|---|---|-------|---------
                              |   |   |       |
    ----------------------------------------------------

              FIGURE 31. Size 5 x 3 in.

When no volume of a set is at the bindery the card is left in a
permanent file of bindery cards. When a volume is sent to the bindery
the card is transferred to a temporary file, showing what periodicals
are at the bindery.

1. Examine volumes for completeness; see that all numbers of periodicals
are included and arranged in proper order. In the case of books examine
quickly for missing signatures. With both books and periodicals leave
page collation to the binder.

2. Make charging slip and send to the loan desk. Books for departments
should be charged in the departments and not at the loan desk.

3. If a periodical, find title-page and index (if one is not published
there should be a note to that effect on the binding card); and if
separate, lay inside the volume.

4. If volume is part of a set examine binding records to see if other
volumes have been bound. If no record is found in binding files look in
catalog and order records to see if other volumes are already in the
library, or have been recently bought and are not yet cataloged. If it
is desirable to match exactly old sets bound elsewhere, make a "rub-off"
for the binder and indicate the material and color. If the volume is one
of a new set make decision in regard to style of binding and order a
sample back.

5. If a periodical, get old card from "binding returned" file. In the
case of new periodicals and books a card must be made, and the binder
instructed to make a sample back for future use. Enter volume on card
(one volume a line, unless several volumes are to be bound together).

6. Fill out binding slip (see page 154), indicating full lettering,
proper spacing, style and material. Also make note on bottom of slip for
such directions as "make sample back," "include all front covers," "no
title page or index published," etc.

7. In the case of separate books it will be necessary to make out a card
similar to the periodical binding card to be used in sending invoice of
shipment to the binder.

8. Place binding slip in front of volume; tie up periodicals and lay
aside with the volumes waiting to be shipped.

9. When shipment is ready to be sent, arrange cards:

_a._ By departments which are responsible for the cost of binding;

_b._ Alphabetically by author or title under departments.

10. Make typewritten list in triplicate (or more if necessary) of
volumes for each department; one copy for filing, one for the binder and
one to go to the order department with an estimate of the cost to serve
as a charge against the proper department. If the departments against
which charges must be made are many it may be simpler to list the books
as they come, even if several departments are on one page, and to draw
off from this the charges for the order department. Where departments
are numerous and the record of each department is kept on a separate
sheet there are a great number of sheets to handle, causing annoyance
both in the binding department and in the bindery. Two lists may be sent
to the binder so that he may add prices to one when the books are
returned. This saves his time and also that of the binding assistant.

11. Stamp date on the binding card in the column marked "sent."

12. Stamp name of binder on binding card if the work is divided among
different binders.

If all the work of the library goes to one binder this will not be
necessary.

13. Ship the books.

14. File one copy of the list made out as noted in No. 10, send one copy
to the binder, and add the estimated cost to the third list which is
sent to the order department.

15. File cards in "binding sent" file.

16. When books are returned itemized bills are sent by the binder made
out to each department.

17. Check books with the bills, arranging books in order of bills.

18. Take cards out of "binding sent" file in order of bills so that
bills, books and cards are in the same order.

19. Compare lettering with slip to see if correct, lay aside such as are
incorrect to be returned to the binder. Destroy slips.

20. See if charge is correct and enter on binding card in column marked
"price." If there is a sample back, enter the cost and letters "S. B."
above the line of the volume for which it is made.

21. Stamp date of bill on card in column marked "returned."

22. Stamp date of bill and cost in book on first recto after title page:
"27 June 1914 Binding 75."

23. Send books to the cataloging department for cataloging,
shelf-listing, etc.

24. Draw off on statistics sheet number of volumes and cost.

25. Send bills to the order department.

26. File cards for periodicals and all books with volume numbers in
permanent file. Destroy cards for single books.




CHAPTER X

REPAIRING, RECASING, RECOVERING, ETC.


Practically all repairs to a book short of rebinding should be made in
the library, since the work requires little space and no machinery, and
the books may speedily be replaced on the shelves for general use. Large
or medium sized libraries can well afford to hire one or more girls as
menders, while the small library must utilize the spare time of regular
assistants.

When books are sent to the binding department they should be sorted into
the following groups:

Books to be (_a_) rebound, (_b_) recased, (_c_) recovered, (_d_) mended,
(_e_) discarded; to have (_f_) new sides, (_g_) new labels, (_h_) new
book cards or pockets.

When menders are employed all except those in the first group may be
cared for in the library.

In sorting the books the question of whether to rebind or repair at the
library must be decided for all books, except those in the discarded
class and those which need new records (tags, pockets, book cards,
etc.). The decision is not always an easy one to make. The kind of
library in question, whether public, college, subscription, etc., will
influence the decision, as well as the actual condition of the book. A
few general rules about mending may help in making decisions.

1. If the book has never been rebound and in all probability must go to
the bindery in a few months' time, send to the bindery at once. Mending
not only adds nothing to the life of this book, but may easily shorten
it.

2. Mend books which have been rebound once but which it would not pay to
rebind again. Judicious mending of such books may keep them in service
for a long time, but there comes a day when the use gained does not pay
for the time put upon them.

3. Mend books which have nearly outlived their usefulness or which are
to be withdrawn absolutely when worn out. The question need be decided
only when the book is fairly clean, for if very soiled it should be
withdrawn at once.

4. Mend books which must be on the library shelves, but which are seldom
used.

5. Mend books printed on heavily loaded papers which will not pay to
rebind. There are, unfortunately, many of them.

6. Mending cannot be done if the sewing is completely broken, though it
is sometimes possible to insert signatures which are loose.

7. Books with broken corners must be rebound.

8. Recase books which have sewing intact and covers in good condition,
if they will be used comparatively seldom.

9. Recover books which have worn covers but firm sewing.


MENDING MATERIALS

ADHESIVES

_Paste._ Home-made pastes are cheapest. While there are various recipes
for paste, either of the following will give satisfaction:

                (1)

    Wheat flour,         8 oz.
    Powdered alum,     1/4 oz.
    Glycerine,       1-1/2 oz.
    Oil wintergreen,   1 dram.
    Water,          1-1/2 pts.

Dissolve the alum in water and mix gradually with the flour into a
smooth, thin paste; cook in a double boiler until smooth and clear; take
from the fire and add the glycerine and oil of wintergreen. This
quantity will make about one quart. If after standing a day a watery
fluid collects, stir it into the paste. Keep this paste covered.

                 (2)

    1/4 pound of flour (1 cup).
    1   teaspoonful of alum, dissolved.
    1   generous fourth teaspoonful of oil of clove.
    4   cups of boiling water.

Mix the flour well with a little cold water, beating until perfectly
smooth. Add the alum dissolved in a little cold water. Pour on two cups
of the boiling water, strain through a wire sieve. Add the remainder of
the boiling water and cook, stirring constantly until partially clear.
Add the oil of clove and put into a clean, covered earthen jar. The
paste thickens as it cools. Take out small quantities for use. The
materials for this paste cost less than 2 cents for a hundred books.

To all pastes it is best to add a spoonful of carbolic acid or
formaldehyde to prevent spoiling. A small quantity of corrosive
sublimate will make paste unattractive to bugs.

Although home-made pastes are cheapest, they are a bother to make and
the saving of expense over commercial pastes is not worth while except
in the very small library. Besides paste in bulk which can be obtained
from the local binder there are many kinds of commercial paste. Some may
be bought in powders; others, designed primarily for mounting
photographs, in glass jars; still others in cans ready to use. The
powders are cheap, keep indefinitely, but when needed must be mixed with
water, and as a rule are not very satisfactory. Higgins' and other
photo-mounting pastes are expensive and dry too quickly, but keep
indefinitely. In the long run the most satisfactory pastes are those in
tin cans with tight lids; these are ready to use, do not dry up and the
preservative which they contain keeps them indefinitely. The Arabol
Manufacturing Company, 100 William Street, New York, makes several
varieties. Their "Sphinx" paste, which gives excellent satisfaction, can
be bought in six one-gallon can lots at 75 cents a gallon, f. o. b., and
in larger quantities at slightly reduced rates. Great care should be
used to avoid having the paste so thin that it makes the paper stretch.

Although paste is a necessity in every library, there is a tendency to
use too much of it, and to use it when it is not necessary. Ordinarily
it will injure the book less than other adhesives, but it should be used
sparingly on books that must be rebound. When applied to the backs of
loose signatures they become brittle; then when the book goes to the
bindery a much larger amount must be cut from the back than would
otherwise be the case.

If paste is to be applied to part of the paper only, the easiest way is
to lay the paper on a board, place another piece of paper over it,
leaving exposed the surface to which paste is to be applied. It can be
spread more evenly with the finger, faster with a soft, long-handled
brush. The larger libraries will find a pasting-machine a great
time-saver. Book labels, book pockets, new end papers to freshen soiled
books--anything which needs to have the entire surface covered--is
pasted on the machine in one-tenth the time required by hand.

_Glue._ For ordinary mending, glue should never be used. (See Materials,
p. 82.) Flexible glue, however, is a necessity for recasing and
recovering books. It keeps indefinitely, can be used easily by those
who acquire the knack of using it, and it sticks everlastingly.

_Mucilage._ Mucilage has no real place in a library. If paste is not the
suitable material to use, substitute flexible glue, never mucilage.

CLOTH

_Cheesecloth._ This well-known cloth is used when pressing down paper or
book labels after they have been pasted and applied, and for quickly
cleaning the hands of superfluous paste or glue. It should be cut in
pieces of convenient size and not used many times before being
discarded.

_Jaconet._ A thin, strong muslin will be needed for guarding sections
and occasionally for forming joints. Jaconet is the best and may be
obtained from a few library binders.

_Canton flannel._ A medium grade of this cloth is used for back-lining.

_Book cloth._ If recovering or re-siding is done the library must have a
supply of book cloths in the shades preferred. For re-siding, any cloth
in grade 1 (see page 75) is sufficiently good. For recovering cloths in
the grade which meets the requirements of the Bureau of Standards are
none too good. If much recovering is done it is best to buy the cloth by
the piece.

_Crepeline._ This very thin cotton cloth, also called mousseline,
through which print is easily read, is sometimes pasted over the entire
surface of pages which receive very hard usage, and which would
otherwise be literally thumbed to pieces long before the rest of the
book.

_Specially prepared cloth._ The Gaylord Bros., of Syracuse, and the
Multum in Parvo Binder Co., of Philadelphia, manufacture hinges made of
cloth. While these are often useful they cannot be used under any and
all conditions, as one might be led to believe from the claims of the
manufacturers.

PAPERS

_Onion skin._ Onion skin is a very thin, tough paper, used for mending
torn pages, illustrations, etc., where print must show through. While it
may be obtained gummed on one side, very little is gained, for it is
nearly as easy to paste the ungummed onion skin as to moisten the
gummed. For tears which do not run into the text; a thin, strong bond
paper will be satisfactory.

_Kraft or manila paper._ A 30x40 60-pound kraft paper makes good end
papers in recasing and recovering. A 70-pound manila paper may be used
instead of kraft, if desired.

_Red rope manila._ This is a very strong, tough fibred cardboard which
may sometimes be used as covers for books that it will scarcely pay to
put into stouter covers. It may be obtained in several weights, the
lighter weights being sufficiently strong for library use.

THREAD

Even if no resewing is done, thread is necessary for making various
repairs. The best are Hayes' linen thread No. 25, and Barbour's No. 40.

AMMONIA

This is necessary for breaking down surfaces of highly glazed cloths so
that labels will stick.

SHELLAC

After labels or the backs of books have been lettered in white or black
ink they should have a covering of shellac. A supply of the best white
shellac may be obtained from the local paint dealer.

Occasional use is found for various other materials, such as powdered
pumice stone, sponge rubber, India rubber erasers and art gum.


TOOLS

FOLDERS

Several binder's bone folders, costing fifteen cents each, should be
kept in the binding department.

KNIVES

A long knife, broad at the point, thin-bladed but dull, is needed for
cutting paper after it is folded and for various other uses. A sharp,
pointed knife is needed for removing books from the covers, or old
labels from the back.

SCISSORS

Long, thin-bladed, best quality.

NEEDLES

Regular book-sewing needles.

HAMMER

A broad-faced hammer may be required for beating down the backs of
sections, or the entire book when it is difficult to replace it in its
old cover.

PRESS

Books wet with paste or glue must be pressed. An old-fashioned
letter-press which screws down by hand will answer all purposes in a
small library. As they are now out-of-date, second-hand ones can be
purchased for a small sum. There are one or two inexpensive small
presses which are not so heavy as the letter-press, but which hold a
larger number of books and are fairly satisfactory. The most
satisfactory press is a stationary one which holds a number of books and
which will exert great pressure. On account of lack of space and the
cost it is inadvisable to use this in a mending room, and makeshifts are
generally necessary.

PRESS-BOARD

A few press-boards with projections which will fit into the joints of
books may be necessary. They may be obtained from any dealer in binders'
supplies.

SEWING BENCH

If any resewing is done a sewing bench is a necessity. Ordinarily books
needing resewing should be sent to the bindery.

GLUE-POT

A double-boiler glue-pot is a necessity if recovering or recasing is to
be done. It should be kept clean.

BRUSHES

A long-handled, small-sized brush with soft bristles will be used for
pasting, while glue will require a large, round brush such as is
commonly used in binderies.

PASTING MACHINE

A good pasting machine will cost about ten dollars, but it is a great
time saver. There are several on the market. In the Wilmington Library
the "Universal" is used and gives satisfaction in all cases when a
machine can be used.

CUTTING-BOARD

A small-sized cutting-board, such as is used by photographers, is useful
in the mending room as well as in other parts of the library.


CLEANING

A part of the duty of the mending department is to remove such dirt or
stains as can readily be removed without injury to the books.

PAGES

Various materials may be used for cleaning books which show soiled pages
here and there, but which are in the main fairly clean. A red rubber or
a sponge rubber is much better than an India rubber eraser. The latter
should never be used unless the paper is excellent in quality. Bread
crumbs rolled in a ball or powdered pumice stone put on with a dry cloth
will often give good results. If the book is much soiled, or has mud
stains, it may be advisable to use ivory soap and water with a few drops
of ammonia, applied with a piece of cheesecloth well wrung out.

If the paper is of good quality it may be washed with Javelle water, a
preparation used in French laundries. This may be made by the following
recipe:

To one pound of chloride of lime add four and a half pints of water, and
put in a jar with tight cover. In a separate vessel, dissolve 20 oz. of
ordinary washing soda in four and a half pints of boiling water, and
immediately pour it into the first mixture. When cold add enough water
to make eleven pints in all. Strain through muslin, settle, and pour off
the clear solution. After using it care must be taken to rinse the paper
thoroughly with water, as it tends to rot paper.

In the cleaning of pages care should be taken not to erase any marks
made by the cataloging or accession departments. Rubbing must be done
slowly and the pages held flat to prevent tearing. Rub from the inside
outward. All traces of pumice stone, rubber, etc., should be carefully
removed. If water and soap have been used, it may be necessary to put a
pressing tin under the leaf, placing blotting paper on each side.

Fox marks may be removed by immersing the leaves in a weak solution of
chlorine water and then transferring to a hot bath of very weak
hydrochloric acid.

To remove creases from leaves accidentally folded, place the leaves
between moistened blotters enclosed between dry blotters and press. This
can be repeated until the crease is entirely removed. Sometimes creases
may be ironed out with a hot iron.

Ink stains can be removed by any one of the standard eradicators (oxalic
acid followed by chloride of lime). Stains from pad ink used for dating
stamps can be removed with benzine.

The edges of leaves on very soiled books may be sandpapered. In this
case the book should be held very firm, if possible in a vise.

To Prevent Mildew or Mold

Occasionally books are accidentally soaked with water. In many a fire
more damage is done by water than by fire. In such cases it may be a
waste of time and money to reclaim ordinary books which can easily be
replaced. It is a different matter when it comes to rare books and
especially to manuscripts which cannot be replaced. Mr. J. I. Wyer, Jr.,
director of the New York State Library, in his annual report for 1911
describes as follows the method used in that library after the
disastrous fire of that year.

     The first step was to remove all covers. Each volume was then taken
     apart leaf by leaf, and each sheet was laid between print paper for
     drying. After twenty-four hours every leaf was again handled and
     placed between heavy blotting paper; after twenty-four hours here,
     each leaf was again removed to a second blotting paper. At all of
     these stages pressure was applied to facilitate the drying and keep
     the documents from wrinkling.... When each leaf had thus passed
     through these three drying processes, those belonging to the same
     volume were collected and carefully tied up in boxes or separate
     packages to wait until all the manuscripts were thus treated....
     When all were dried, the manuscripts were arranged in volumes....
     The rarest pieces will in time be mended, nearly all will be
     covered with crepeline, all will be mounted on fresh paper and
     carefully bound into new volumes.

COVERS

Covers may be cleaned by the same materials as those used on pages, but
the best method is to wash them with soap and water. For this reason the
use of a washable cloth for covers, such as keratol, durabline, or
fabrikoid, is an advantage. Miss Margaret Brown, in her pamphlet on
mending, Library handbook No. 6, advises the use of a wash as follows:
"Two parts good vinegar and one part water. Apply with a clean cloth and
rub hard until dirt is removed, then place upright to dry. This should
not be used on leather."

Grease spots may be removed from both leather and cloth by covering with
a blotter and ironing with a hot iron. The same method will partially
remove paint or varnish.

For a great variety of cleansing receipts see Coutts and Stephen's
"Manual of library bookbinding," Chapter X.

Covers that have warped must be dampened and put under pressure.

Shellacking of covers has been advocated by some librarians, but it is
doubtful if it pays. It may be used in the interests of cleanliness on
books bound in light colored cloth and on books in towns where the
atmosphere is very smoky. It is a process which takes some time since
two coats of shellac must be applied, and it does not increase the wear
of the cloth to any great extent. As a regular part of preparing the
book for use it takes more time and material than it is worth.

Sometimes a book becomes wonderfully rejuvenated simply by having its
cover and edges cleaned and a new pocket pasted in the back.


MENDING

It is very desirable that mending should not be done by inexperienced
assistants, for an uninstructed beginner may do as much harm as good.

TORN PAGES

Torn pages may be mended in any one of the following ways:

1. If the tear does not affect the printing, cut a strip of thin, tough
bond paper one-half inch wide, a little longer than the tear to be
covered, put through pasting-machine and cover the tear, trimming the
overhang even with the page.

2. If the page is torn into the text, and the book is not valuable
commercially, use ungummed onion skin about one-half inch wide and apply
as above. If onion skin is not available a very thin, tough bond paper
will do very well. Use a thin coating of paste, first putting a piece of
white paper under the page to absorb extra paste.

3. If torn in the text and it is desirable to make as good a job as
possible, use the following method:

Rub a very little paste on the torn edges, and place them together. Then
take a rather large piece of ordinary tissue paper and rub it gently
along the tear so that the tissue paper will adhere to the torn edges.
Put under the press; when dry the superfluous tissue paper should be
torn off, taking care to pull always toward the tear and from both sides
at the same time. The delicate fibre of the tissue paper acts as an
adhesive in such a way that it is almost impossible to discern how the
mending was done.

4. If the margin of the leaf of a valuable book is torn in several
places, take two sheets of paper the size of the leaf, cut out from the
middle of each a piece a little larger than the letter-press of the
book; trim the torn leaf so that it remains somewhat larger than the
space cut out of the blank leaves; place it between these two leaves and
paste down, thus forming new margins.

Books that have torn leaves mended may be put into the press, but it is
not strictly necessary. When very much of this mending is done pressing
is impossible unless a standing press is at hand.

A few books such as Granger's Index and some of the Poole's Index
volumes should have the first few pages entirely reinforced with cloth.
The best cloth for this purpose is crepeline, through which the text can
be easily read. When applying it put a thin layer of paste on the leaf
and then put on the cloth. The book should then be pressed, first
protecting adjoining pages with paper.

LOOSE LEAVES

Loose leaves may be inserted in several ways:

1. Lay a piece of white paper over the leaf, allowing one-eighth of an
inch of back margin of the leaf to project. Paste this exposed surface
and attach it to the adjoining leaf in the book, pressing down firmly.
This can be done only when adjoining leaves are firm.

2. Sometimes the leaf when inserted will extend beyond the fore edge of
the book. Trimming of either back margin or fore edge is inadvisable. It
is possible to turn over about one-eighth of an inch of back margin,
using some kind of straight edge for this purpose. Apply paste to turned
over part and press the fold well down into the book. This will give
more freedom to the leaf than if one-eighth of an inch has been cut off
and another eighth of an inch pasted.

3. Fold strips of thin bond paper cut with the grain, three-fourths of
an inch in width, through the center. Paste the outside. Attach the
loose leaf to one side and attach the other side to the adjoining leaf
in the book. It will be necessary to work quickly because the paper
strips when wet will cause a wrinkling of the leaf. This method can be
used only if adjoining leaf is firm, but can never be employed with
overcasting.

4. If necessary to use as little paste as possible, apply paste to a
piece of common soft string by drawing it over a board covered with
paste. Then draw the string through the book at the back. The leaf may
then be inserted.

LOOSE SIGNATURES

Ordinarily when one signature becomes loose others speedily follow, and
the book must be sent to the bindery unless it is withdrawn absolutely.
Sometimes, however, one section will become loose when the rest of the
book is firm and solid, sometimes also the use a book will receive does
not warrant binding. In such cases, if the book has a loose back, open
the section in the middle and place it in its proper place in the book.
Thread a darning-needle with Hayes' No. 25 thread (or Barbour No. 40),
pass the needle through the hole at top of the section (the kettlestitch
hole) in such a way as to bring it out at the top of the book between
the book and the loose back. Draw thread through, allowing a few inches
to remain inside the section. Drop needle through the loose back, insert
it from the back through the kettlestitch hole at tail of the book. The
thread can then be tied to the thread projecting at the upper
kettlestitch hole. This is a makeshift, but may answer if the book is
not to receive hard usage. If the back of the signature is badly worn,
mend it by guarding with jaconet on the outside, or by pasting a strip
of bond paper down through the center of the fold.

_Tight Backs_

For tight backs cut a guard of firm, thin cloth, such as cambric or
jaconet, about three-fourths of an inch wide and as long as the book.
Sew the section to the middle of the guard, and paste the guard to the
book, one-half to each of the adjoining leaves. Press this guard well
back into the book. This can be done only when the adjoining pages are
securely held.

LOOSE JOINTS

It frequently happens that a book in the original publisher's cover
becomes loose at the joint, because the super used as back-lining cannot
stand the strain put upon it. Ordinarily, a book defective in this
manner should be bound at once; but if it is deemed best to attempt
mending it, a strip of jaconet should be cut 1-1/4 inches wide and the
length of the book. Paste one-half of this to the cover and the other to
the adjoining fly-leaf, thus transferring the strain from the super to
the fly-leaf. This method can also be used to mend a break in the middle
of a book, but should never be used if the book must eventually be
rebound.

Another method of mending a loose joint is to remove the book entirely
from the cover, sew on new end papers guarded with muslin, and cover the
back of the book with canton flannel which extends three-fourths of an
inch on each side. When dry, paste the entire back of book and sides and
put the book back into the cover, pasting down the new end paper. This
is, in effect, recasing. (See page 184.)

Sometimes books which are loose at the joints and have loose signatures
may be mended by applying paste with a long-handled paste brush to the
backs of the signatures. This must never be done if it is possible that
the book will need to be rebound later.

FLY-LEAVES

To add new fly-leaves, cut paper suitable for this purpose the same
length as the old fly-leaves and one-half inch wider. Fold over this
one-half inch, paste it on the outside and attach it to the old
fly-leaf. If necessary, this may be used as a new end paper and pasted
to the cover over the old end paper. If used as an end paper, the book
should be pressed promptly to prevent it from warping.

REPAIR OF MAPS

All old or mutilated maps or charts must be flattened out by placing the
maps between large millboards with heavy weights over them, before they
can be inserted in books. Repairs may be made with onion skin paper or
any other thin, tough paper, the same as is done with torn leaves in
books. If the map is very old and valuable, it may be advisable to use
paper which resembles in a way the texture and color of the map itself.

It is advisable to mount all maps on some kind of cloth. It is best to
have this done by a regular binder, but it may be done in the library if
there is sufficient room.

If the map is to go on rollers, a piece of cotton cloth is tacked to a
large table, the top of the cloth pasted, and the map placed on top,
back down, all wrinkles having been removed. Millboards or strawboards
are then placed on the map and weights placed on top until it is dry.
This may take some time, after which it may be tacked to the rollers.

If it is a folding map or chart, it may be necessary to cut the map into
sections before mounting. When mounted there will be one-eighth of an
inch space between sections, so that the map itself will not be defaced
through constant folding. The mounting of such maps is a difficult task
and should be done only by an expert.


RECASING BOOKS

1. Remove book from the cover; cut out old super from the back of the
cover; thoroughly clean the back of the book of super and glue without
injuring the backs of the signatures. Lift the lining-paper from the
back and front boards of the cover and remove the old super. Scrape with
a knife the glue which does not come off with the super. If the back of
the book seems to be much thicker than the fore edge, pound down with a
backing-hammer.

2. Cut strips of muslin (or canton flannel) a little shorter than the
height of the book, wide enough to cover the back and to extend over the
boards 1-1/4 inches on each side.

3. Cut enough flexible glue to fill a double-boiler glue pot half full
when dissolved. When the water comes to a boil the glue, which must be
used hot to get good results, will generally be ready to use. If it is
still too thick, add a little hot water to thin it.

4. Turn back the lining paper on front and back covers, spread the glue
on the inside of the back of the cover and on the boards where the
lining has been turned back.

5. Put the strip of muslin in the place just glued; then rub down the
lining paper over the muslin.

6. Even up the book by tapping it on the table so that no leaves will
project at the top, bottom or front.

7. Holding the book firmly in the hand, glue the back.

8. Place the back on the muslin lining previously glued to the back of
the cover, care being taken to see that the book is not put in upside
down.

9. Fold over the cover and, taking the entire book firmly in the left
hand, with the right hand push the book firmly back into the cover. This
will prevent it from becoming concave.

10. Crease the joints with a bone folder and rub down the back.

11. When the book is dry, open it and, if necessary, paste new papers
over the inside covers. This is necessary, because it is frequently
impossible to turn back the lining and remove the old super without
making an unsightly piece of work.


RECOVERING

Rules for recovering can be used only when books do not need to be
resewed.

1. Remove cover from the main part of the book.

2. Remove with a dull knife the cloth from the outside and inside of the
cover until the two boards are clean, being careful not to cut into the
board itself. It is not worth while to remove old paper sides or end
papers.

3. Remove superfluous glue, super, etc., from the back. If the book has
been overcast, and small strips of leather have been placed over the
back, paste the ends of these strips of leather to the end papers. Such
a book will also have end papers guarded which will remain as an
integral part of the book.

4. If the book has not been overcast, it will be necessary to add end
papers. This can be done by using two sheets which when folded once will
be the size of the leaves of the book. One of these should be a 60-pound
and the other an 80-pound manila paper, both guarded entirely around the
fold with jaconet. Whipstitch the 60-pound fly-leaves to the first and
last sections of the book, then whipstitch the 80-pound, being careful
to pass the needle back through the first section. Paste one of the
fly-leaves and one of the end papers together.

If the book has been oversewed, cut the end papers of 80-pound manila or
60-pound kraft paper the size of the book and paste on the entire
surface of the fly leaves which are integral parts of the book. It will
not be necessary to guard these new end papers.

5. Trim the new fly leaves and end papers the exact size of the book.

6. Mark the boards and book with corresponding numbers so as to identify
them.

7. Place boards on the book to within one-eighth of an inch of the back
and mark the distance from the back.

8. Measure exactly the distance across the back between marks just made
on the end papers.

9. Select the proper cloth with which to cover the book. Place the
boards on the cloth, allowing the width necessary for the back as
measured in No. 8.

10. Mark around boards on cloth.

11. Cut cloth, allowing approximately an inch and a quarter all around
outside edge of the boards.

12. Glue the entire surface of the cloth.

13. Place boards on markings previously made, pressing down firmly on
the glued cloth.

14. Put stiff paper, previously cut to the proper size, on the glued
cloth between the boards, to prevent the glue from sticking to the back
of the book. This should not be done if the book must have a tight back.

15. Turn in the corners as follows: Take the exact corner of the cloth
and turn it straight in over the corner of the board. Next turn in the
end and then the side. Rub down well with a bone folder.

16. With bone folder, round the corners, and crease the joints at the
back.

17. Put the case so formed into a press for a few minutes.

18. Cut a strip of thin, tough muslin or canton flannel one-half inch
shorter than the height of the book and wide enough to extend an inch on
each side of the book.

19. Glue the back of the book and put on the muslin or canton flannel.

20. Glue the entire surface of the completed case.

21. With the fore edge in the right hand, lay book in its proper place
on the right-hand cover, draw up the left-hand cover and lay it on top.
Open the book, rub down the end papers well with bone folder, and rub
down the back; also crease the joints.

22. Put book in press over night.

23. Letter by hand either with black or white ink as the case demands.


RE-SIDING

Many books which have been rebound with leather backs come to the
binding department with the cloth sides badly frayed at the corners or
edges. If the sewing is good and the book is clean, it is worth while to
put on new sides.

1. Remove cloth sides and smooth off the inside of the board with a dull
knife.

2. Cut two pieces of cloth a little larger than the sides.

3. Glue the inner surface of the cloth and place on the book, turning in
the corners as described in 15 on page 187.

4. Put book in the press.

5. After book is dry, paste a single end paper over the inside of each
cover.


REINFORCING

In Chapter 6 will be found a discussion of the advisability of
purchasing books bound from the sheets or in reinforced publisher's
covers. While it is advisable on the whole to have reinforcing done by
regular library binders, the work can be done in large libraries that
have proper equipment and labor. The essential principles of reinforcing
are the same in all libraries that practice it, though they may differ
as to minor details. The following method has proved satisfactory.

1. Remove the book from its cover, which is laid aside for future use.
If the call number is to be gilded it will be easier to do it before the
cover is removed than after it is replaced.

2. Make end papers and fly-leaves of 60-pound kraft paper or 80-pound
manila, guarded with jaconet on one side of the sheet. End papers should
be guarded on the inside of the fold.

3. Oversew the fly-leaves to the first and last sections of the book,
being careful that stitches are not over one-eighth of an inch deep.

4. Sew the end papers to the fly-leaves which have just been oversewed,
and paste fly-leaves and end papers together.

5. Apply a thin coating of flexible glue to the back of the book and put
over it a piece of thin canton flannel cut as long as the book and wide
enough to extend an inch on each side. This should be well rubbed down.

6. Paste the canton flannel which projects on the side to the end
papers.

7. Glue one side of the book and place it on the proper side of the
cover. Glue the side remaining uppermost and draw the cover up over it.


8. Rub both sides and back until sure that the glue is well forced into
them.

9. If desired, the book may be given a coat of white shellac and one of
varnish, after which it should be wiped with a paraffine cloth.


MAGAZINE OR PAMPHLET COVERING

1. Cut red rope manila cardboard the exact size of the two covers plus
the width of the back.

2. Remove the cover of magazine or pamphlet, if possible keeping it in
one piece.

3. Fit the red rope cover over the magazine, creasing carefully at the
joints with a folder so that it will lie flat across the back as well as
over the sides.

4. Glue the back of the magazine with flexible glue and press it firmly
into the improvised cover. Rub down the back with a folder.

5. Thread a needle with stout linen thread and, using it double, at the
middle of the book put the needle through from the inside to the
outside. Leave about two inches of thread projecting on the inside.

6. Put the needle through from the outside about an inch from the head
of the book. The needle must come through in the same section where the
thread is projecting.

7. Carry the thread through to about the same distance from the tail of
the book and again put the needle through from the inside to the
outside.

8. Return the needle at the same place where the first stitch was taken
and tie to the thread left projecting in such a way as to hold fast the
long thread through the center.

9. Paste the paper cover previously removed on to the new cover.

This method can be used for all pamphlets one-half inch or more thick;
even for those two inches thick, provided that the use they will receive
is slight. In the case of the thicker unbound books, it is necessary to
sew them in two or three places.


LABELING

Few libraries can afford to have all call numbers gilded. Therefore it
is necessary either to letter directly on the book, or to put call
numbers in ink on a white label which has first been placed on the book.
Much objection exists to these gummed labels, because it is claimed that
they come off very easily and the work soon has to be done over again.
Undoubtedly this is true if the labels are not properly put on; but if
care be taken, there is no reason why the white gummed labels should not
last until it is necessary to rebind a book, when of course the call
number will be gilded.

Two points must be remembered in applying labels.

1. They must be put on at an even distance from the bottom of the book.
Perhaps nothing else will give a library such an unsightly appearance as
uneven labels--some at the top, some in the middle and some at the
bottom. The exact distance from the bottom of the book is not one of
great importance, but the bottom of the label should not be less than
1-1/4 inches from the bottom of the book, nor more than two inches.
Whatever distance is adopted, it will be necessary to have a piece of
cardboard which may be used as a measure when applying the label.

2. Labels must be fastened so securely that they will not come off. This
seems sufficiently obvious, but as a matter of fact many assistants who
do this work do not spend sufficient time to do it right.

The following directions should be followed:

_a._ If the book is new, it will be necessary to break down the glazed
surface of the cloth or leather where the label is to be placed. To do
this, use ammonia diluted somewhat with water. Use a brush about the
width of the label and draw across the back of the book at the proper
place. After having done ten or a dozen books, it is best to wipe off
the ammonia with a piece of cheesecloth which brings with it the glaze.

_b._ Labels are not put on until books are dry. Use labels made of extra
heavy paper, so that they will not turn dark when shellac is applied
later. They may be moistened on a wet sponge or on some one of the
numerous moisteners, or better still, they may be dipped quickly in hot
water with a pair of tweezers. In using some labels it is not
inadvisable to cover the gummed surface with a thin coating of paste. As
soon as the label is pasted on the book straight and in proper
alignment, it should be pressed firmly down with a piece of cheesecloth.
This part of the operation should not be hurried and considerable
pressure should be used until the label has firmly adhered.

_c._ When dry, letter with India ink and cover label with a very thin
coating of white shellac. Later, when the first coating is thoroughly
dry, cover with a thicker coating of shellac. This should be done
quickly and neatly. If the line of shellac is uneven the book has an
unsightly appearance.

_d._ If books are thin, it is best to put labels on lengthwise. If very
thin, put labels on front covers, near the back. If labels project over
the back, trim with scissors.

If books have been used or have already had labels, the process is the
same, except that no ammonia need be used.

Old labels which have been shellaced are hard to remove. The best way is
to apply ammonia and water to the label, allowing it to soak in. When
thoroughly moistened, remove with a dull knife. Removing dry labels by
scraping with a knife injures the back of the book.


LETTERING

BY HAND

It is sometimes feasible to letter with ink on the back of a book
instead of putting on a label which holds the lettering. If the surface
be glazed, it can be broken down with diluted ammonia, or sometimes
merely a damp cloth will be sufficient.

So far as possible, letter with black India ink. Carter's white ink is
the best for lettering dark colored cloths. It is sometimes difficult
for a novice to use white ink, but it can be handled satisfactorily if
one uses a stub pen which is kept perfectly clean and is always wiped
before being dipped in the ink. Shake the bottle often and add water if
ink is too thick. Gold ink should never be used.

When lettering is dry, apply shellac as described under Labeling.

WITH TYPE

Some of the larger libraries have found it economic to have a binder's
printing outfit for lettering call numbers on all books, even when the
library does not bind books. Such an outfit may be used of course for
lettering author and title, but there will be little occasion to do this
except in connection with a regular bindery. Call numbers, however, are
so much more legible and permanent when put on with type that it should
always be done whenever the number of accessions is sufficiently large
to warrant the employment of some person to do the work. It does not,
however, need experienced finishers and, if time permits, may be done by
regular library assistants after some instruction and practice. It will
be discovered, however, that lettering in gold on cloth is more
difficult than on leather. For the benefit of those who wish to try it
the following description is given.

_Tools._ The tools necessary are a pallet to hold the type; four fonts
of brass type (lead, or type other than brass should never be used);
long-bladed knife with straight edge for cutting gold leaf; cutting pad;
gas burner similar to the burners on cook stoves; and a frame with
wooden screws in which to hold the book while it is being stamped.

_Materials._ The materials needed are the best American gold leaf,
cotton batting, sweet oil, some specially prepared rubber for removing
the excess gold leaf, and glaire.

The tools or materials which are used exclusively by binders can be
obtained from any binders' supply house. Glaire is easily made as
follows:

Take whites of three eggs; add three teaspoonfuls of vinegar and beat
until it is a light froth. Let stand a few hours and strain through a
piece of muslin into a bottle. If kept corked glaire will keep for some
time.

_Process._ 1. Place on finishing bench, backs up, books on which call
numbers are to be gilded.

2. With a small sponge, apply the glaire to the part of the back which
is to receive the call number, taking care to draw the sponge evenly
across the back, leaving a straight line. If the application of glaire
makes that part of the book appear radically different from the rest of
the back, the glaire may be applied to the entire back. It should not be
allowed to run over on the sides. Allow the glaire to dry thoroughly.

3. With a long-bladed knife, transfer a sheet of gold leaf to the
cutting pad which must be thoroughly protected by screens from all
draughts. If the gold leaf does not lie unwrinkled on the cutting pad
breathe on it lightly. With the knife, cut the leaf in proper size for
work to be done, being careful to make the cuts clean, not ragged.

4. Arrange type in the pallet, beginning at the right, and put type in
the gas to heat.

5. Screw book, back up, firmly in the frame.

6. With cotton batting, apply sweet oil to the part to be stamped, being
careful to cover thoroughly this surface with the oil. This is done to
make the gold stick.

7. Apply a piece of cotton, slightly oiled, to the gold leaf which will
instantly stick. It can then be transferred to the book, where the sweet
oil will hold it securely.

8. Test the type for heat. A little practice will soon teach the novice
when the type is hot enough. The object of heating the type is to make
the gold combine with the glaire in such a way as to cause the gold to
adhere. It is better to have the type too cold rather than too hot. If
it is too cold, the gold will not stick and the work must be done over
again; if too hot, it burns the leather or cloth and the damage is
irremediable. For cloth work the type can be used hotter than for
leather.

9. Apply type to the book, pressing down firmly. The pressure makes an
indentation. If the materials are of the right quality, the work
carefully done and the type of the right degree of heat, the gold will
be firmly embedded.

10. With the specially prepared rubber remove the waste gold. When the
rubber has absorbed all the gold that it is capable of taking up, it may
be sent to a dealer who will refine it and give credit for the gold
which it contains. About one-third of the original cost of the gold
should be obtained from the sale of the waste.

Whenever books are bound in light colored cloths on which gold does not
readily show use a black ink specially made for this purpose. It is much
easier to use than gold, since the ink is evenly spread on a smooth,
hard surface and the type is used cold. No glaire is necessary.




CHAPTER XI

MAGAZINE BINDERS


One of the vexing questions which properly comes under the head of
binding is that of magazine binders used on current periodicals in
reading rooms. The binding of current numbers for circulation is
described on page 190. It must be admitted that no binder on the market
is perfectly satisfactory. Some hold the periodicals satisfactorily but
are hard to adjust. Others are easy to adjust but the magazines slip out
easily, or can with ease be surreptitiously removed. Some have keys
which become lost or will not work; some are clumsy; and some have
projections which scratch tables. All are hard to hold in the hands. On
an average a new binder is put on the market each year with the
assurance of the maker that all faults have been eliminated. A trial
soon convinces the librarian that it is no better than others and that
the perfect binder does not exist.

For the small library the problem is not an important one, since it is
entirely feasible in such libraries to place current numbers without
covers on reading room tables, or to cover them with tough paper. Mr.
Dana advocates using most magazines without binders even in the reading
room of a large library. Possibly this may be done advantageously in
some libraries, but it will depend upon the atmosphere of the city, the
character of those who use the library and the ease with which
assistants can keep all readers under observation. Librarians for the
most part will continue to believe that a temporary binder of one kind
or another is necessary for current periodicals in the general reading
room.

Binders in the reading room serve two purposes. They protect the
magazine and they help to remind readers that the magazines are public
property. Some magazines--the Scientific American, for example--are very
thin and may be easily folded and put into an inside pocket. A binder
does not prevent theft, but its tendency is to reduce it.

The qualifications of a good binder are:

1. Ease of fastening, together with difficulty in removing magazines by
the uninitiated.

2. Comparative ease of holding in the hand.

3. Durability of surface and of device used for fastening the magazine.

4. Preservation of the magazine without injury.

5. Firmness when finally fastened.

Even the best magazine binders are far from being perfect in any of
these requirements, except in ease with which they are fastened.

There are many kinds of magazine binders. Mr. Dana, in the second
edition of his "Notes on bookbinding for libraries," mentions by name
twelve different makes; and as many more, some of which are equally
good, are known to the writer. But were there twice as many it is
probable that they would fall, as they do now, into five classes.

1. Spring back.

2. Eyelet and tape.

3. Sewed.

4. Rod.

5. Clamp which is screwed up tight.

The well known spring-back variety is, in principle, a semi-circular
steel tube longer than the magazine to be held, to which board sides are
attached. When the cover is closed the jaws of the steel are close
together. In order to insert the magazine the covers are bent back
toward each other. This opens wide the jaws and the magazine is slipped
in. When the covers are released the steel tube is firmly fastened to
the back of the magazine. This kind of binder is probably the easiest of
all to adjust. It is, however, equally easy to remove, is clumsy and is
harder to hold in the hand than others.

In the eyelet and tape class there are holes in the back of the cover.
In fastening the magazine, tape or cord (generally a shoe string) is
passed through the center of the magazine, laced into the eyelet and
tied. The main objections to this kind of a binder are that it takes
some time to fasten them and the magazine is generally loose in the
binder when fastened.

Binders which require sewing have holes in the sides near the back.
Instead, however, of passing the cord through the center of the
magazine, holes corresponding to holes in the binder are punched
directly through the magazine at the back, one near the head, one near
the tail and another in the middle. The binder is then sewed on through
these holes. The chief merit of these binders is that they are
inexpensive; but it takes longer to attach them than other binders and
the magazine is injured by the holes which have been punched.

There are various kinds of binders which use steel rods or bars through
the center of the magazine. Some use one rather heavy rod which is
hinged at one end, and hooked or fastened into a slot at the other end
when the magazine has been inserted. Some have two or more thin steel
rods hinged or pivoted at one end and held by a pin or a lock at the
other end. And one at least has steel bars not permanently attached, the
ends of which are in the form of a semi-circle, which are dropped
between rigid uprights and prevented from slipping off by caps screwed
on the uprights.

The writer knows of only two binders which use a clamp which must be
screwed tightly in order to hold the magazine firmly. The great merit of
these binders is that they hold the magazine firmly, so that it can by
no possibility be removed except by the assistant who has the key. They
are, however, clumsy and unduly large at the back and it takes some time
to fasten them to the magazine.

Taking into consideration all points of excellence it is probable that
some form of rod binder is the best. Rod binders are not hard to apply;
they require some effort to remove them--those which lock cannot be
removed without a key; they are firm when applied; and many of them do
not injure the magazine. Nearly every librarian has his own personal
preference among such binders.

Since binders receive very hard wear it is important that they should be
made of good material. Those which are used for popular magazines should
have cowhide backs and buckram or imitation leather (keratol or
fabrikoid) sides. A full leather binding would help solve the question
of dirt, but it is equally well and less expensively solved by using
imitation leather on the side. In reading rooms frequented only by
educated persons binders with flexible leather covers are desirable and
are greatly enjoyed by readers. The cheaper grades of cloth, such as are
used by the publishers, should never be used, as they soon wear through
at the edges and corners. In many cases it is wise to use pigskin or
morocco on the back, though if this is done, the cloth sides and the
boards themselves may become disreputable before the back is worn. In
nearly all binders the mechanism can be removed from the boards when
they become shabby, and new covers attached. This will save some of the
expense of a new binder. A clever mender can do such work so that it
need not be sent to a regular library binder. The boards should not be
made of mill boards, but of semi-tar or tar boards.




CHAPTER XII

PAMPHLETS


Fortunately it is not necessary to decide here the ever-vexing question
"When is a pamphlet not a pamphlet?" From the binding viewpoint any
printed matter of more than four pages which does not have a stiff cover
is a pamphlet and it is within the province of the binding assistant to
prepare it for the shelves.

Unbound material in libraries is of three kinds: periodicals; serial
publications which are not periodicals such as annual reports, bulletins
of societies or government bureaus, etc.; and separate pamphlets not
numbered, of a monographic character. The binding of periodicals forms
part of the regular routine and is discussed elsewhere in this book.

Annual reports and other publications of a serial character should be
filed in pamphlet boxes on the regular shelves at the end of the bound
set. When a sufficient number of reports have collected they may be
bound in cloth by decades or half-decades, according to the thickness of
the reports. In many libraries most of such publications need not be
bound at all, but will answer every purpose if wrapped in paper and
lettered by hand. Serials other than annual reports generally give some
indication of which numbers should be bound together, if bound at all.
If there be no change of numbering or no completion of volume numbers to
indicate a separation, they should be arbitrarily grouped in volumes of
a convenient size, conforming if possible to one or more calendar years,
and bound or wrapped in paper. If series are not to be kept together
they should be treated as described in the following paragraphs.

Monographic works in unbound form range in size from those of a dozen
pages to those of several hundred. Probably the best arrangement for a
large part of this material is to assign a subject heading or a class
number and keep in a vertical file alphabetically or by class number.
With this the binding department has no concern, but there are always a
number of pamphlets which have permanent value for the library and which
should be treated in the same way as a book with stiff covers.

Undoubtedly the cheapest way to prepare pamphlets not over one-half inch
thick for the shelves is to put them into Gaylord binders. These are
made of board sides connected at the back by a strip of cloth and having
on the inside gummed flaps which can be attached to the back of the
pamphlet. There are thirty different sizes ranging from 5 by 7 inches
to 12-1/2 by 17 inches. They are made in two qualities, the photo-mount
costing from $3.15 to $13.60 per hundred and press board costing from
$4.25 to $17.60 a hundred.[6] If the pamphlet has a cover as well as a
title page, the cover should be taken off and pasted to the outside of
the front cover of the binder. In addition to moistening and attaching
the gummed flaps, it will be found necessary in many cases either to
wire through the back of the pamphlet with some kind of a stapling
machine, or to sew through as described on page 190 for attaching red
rope manila to circulating magazines.

    Footnote 6: Prices increased 10 per cent April 10, 1916.

When the pamphlet is firmly attached in the binder it should be lettered
in white ink along the back. If the pamphlet is very thin it will be
necessary to letter author, title and call number along the back edge of
the front cover, close to the back. If the original cover has not been
pasted on the outside it will also be necessary to letter author and
title across the front cover.

Pamphlets which are too big to go into the binders can be bound in
regular book form if their use will warrant the expense. If the use will
be slight they can be made very serviceable by using the red rope manila
as described on page 190.

Very large libraries keep all pamphlets permanently. Those which are not
sufficiently important to treat as books are generally kept in
classified order in temporary cases. When a sufficient number have been
collected on any subject they may be bound together in volumes of proper
size. So far as possible pamphlets of the same size should be bound
together in cloth, but they may vary a little if they are level on top.
The expense of binding in this way is, of course, much less than if each
pamphlet had been put in a binder. Smaller libraries may perhaps be well
advised to bind in this way pamphlets having a local interest which must
be kept permanently.

It is not necessary to discuss here the various kinds of temporary homes
of pamphlets, such as manila folders, envelopes, wooden or pasteboard
boxes, Ballard klips, etc. They all have their uses, and each librarian
must work out whatever scheme seems best to him.




CHAPTER XIII

BINDERY IN THE LIBRARY BUILDING


How large an amount of binding must a library have before it becomes
economical to establish a bindery in the library building? This question
is frequently asked and is difficult to answer. In the first place,
local conditions must be taken into consideration. Is there in the same
city a library bindery which does satisfactory work at reasonable
prices, or must work be sent a long distance away? Is there ample room
in the building and is it easily adapted to binding purposes? Can a good
foreman be employed? Is the local rate of wages so high as to make the
cost of the binding in the library equal the cost in a good bindery
outside the city? These are some of the questions which must be
considered.

Some of the advantages in having a bindery in the building are as
follows:

1. It is more convenient. When books are much needed they can be found
and generally used, even if incompletely bound.

2. There is less chance of losing books. When books are sent to a binder
who does the work of other libraries also there is always a chance of
loss. The binder, of course, is responsible, but one would always rather
have the book than the cash value.

3. There is no chance of damage to books in transit.

4. Repairs which are too difficult for the ordinary library mender to
make can easily be done in the library bindery at slight cost.

5. The books need not as a rule spend so long a time in the bindery. If
perchance the bindery becomes clogged with extra work the librarian can
rush the books that are needed most. If such books are in another
bindery, especially when that bindery is outside the city, it is
difficult to get the books that are needed first.

6. There is a certain amount of competition which works to advantage if
part of the books have to be bound outside. The outside binder knows
that the librarian who operates a bindery in his own building knows
something about the cost of binding, and he realizes that unless his
prices are reasonable and his work good he need not expect to be
favored.

7. The librarian can at all times inspect materials on hand and see the
books in the process of binding. The bindery outside the building can
sometimes substitute inferior materials without fear of detection for
many months.

8. When the work reaches a certain amount it can be done at reduced
cost in the library, since the ordinary profits of the bindery will
accrue to the library.

9. It is much easier to make experiments with new materials or new
processes. While the outside binder does not care to get a small
quantity of a new material, the library which owns its own bindery can
do so easily.

10. A bindery in the library can do much work, such as the mounting of
maps or photographs, gilding of call numbers and book-mending, which
needs skilled workmen. Such work frequently remains undone, either
because the regular library force has no time to do it or because it
seems unwise to send it outside the library.

Such are some of the benefits, but only the larger libraries which bind
many thousands of volumes can take advantage of them successfully from
the financial standpoint. In order to be administered economically there
must be sufficient work to keep several workmen busy. It probably is not
wise to open a bindery when the annual expenditure for binding is less
than $4,000.

There are two ways in which a library bindery may be administered. Under
the first plan the library buys all material and hires all the workmen,
employing a foreman on salary to take charge. A schedule of prices which
is lower than the prices paid to outside binders should be adopted, and
the total value of binding in a year based on this schedule must equal
the cost of material, wages and depreciation on the value of the plant.
Under this plan the work may be unexcelled in quality, but there is no
incentive to produce it in quantity. So long as the work turned out
balances the outlay the employees, unless they are exceptionally
conscientious, are satisfied. There is also the added difficulty of
finding a competent foreman. Any man who is able to manage a library
bindery successfully is able to manage any bindery successfully and he
will not be willing to work for the salary which the library can afford
to pay. The librarian himself, harassed as he is with many problems,
must of necessity leave such matters as the purchase of material and the
hiring of workmen to the foreman in whom he must have implicit
confidence. The librarian cannot assume the same attitude toward his
bindery foreman that the proprietor of a regular bindery may assume. He
is not skilled in the craft, does not know about materials, especially
leathers, and cannot direct the work.

Under the second plan the library lets the work out by contract to some
binder who agrees to do the work in the building. The contractor is
under no expense for rent, heat and light, and in arranging prices this
is taken into consideration. It is obvious that it is to the interest of
the binder to turn out as large a number of books as possible. Since the
librarian has safeguarded the library in the contract by specifying that
all materials and work must meet with his approval, this plan is more
advantageous to him than the former plan. The contract should allow for
frequent revision of schedule.

Under the first plan the librarian will be obliged to buy all machinery,
tools and materials, and to hire the workmen. Under the second plan he
may have to buy the machinery and tools, but the purchase of materials
and the hiring of labor will be in the hands of the contractor.

A good binding plant will contain the articles in the following list.
Those marked * are necessary, even when the amount of work turned out is
small:

    * 1 sewing frame

    * 1 standing press

    * 4 dozen press-boards (all sizes)

    * 1 glue pot

    * 3 hammers

    * 1 board shears

    * 1 lever paper cutter

      1 perforating machine

      2 extra cutting knives

    * 1 hammering-block with plate

      1 grindstone

    * 1 paring stone

    * 1 oil stone

    * 2 pairs of shears

    * 2 paring knives

    * 8 bone folders

    * 4 brushes

    * 1 monkey wrench

      1 sandstone

    * 2 saws

    * 1 book-backing machine

    * 2 dozen sewing needles

      1 ruler

    * 1 screw driver

      1 lying press

    * 1 finishing press

      1 steel square

    * 1 pair pliers

      2 straight-edges

    * 3 awls

    * 1 iron divider

    * 1 oil can

    * 1 paste bucket

    * 1 complete set of brass type

    * 1 pallet

    * 1 gold cushion

    * 1 gold knife

    * 6 gilding rolls

    * 1 imprint stamp

    * 1 single fillet

      1 two-line fillet

    * 1 finishing gas stove

    * 1 ten-drawer type cabinet

      1 flat agate polisher

      1 flat steel polisher

      1 round agate polisher

      1 gas stove for heating glue

    * 1 forwarder's bench

    * 1 sewing table

    * 1 finisher's bench

      1 small table

      1 band nippers

      1 creaser

The total cost of the plant will vary in various sections of the
country, but it ought not to cost more than $800. If second-hand
cutting machines, benches, etc., can be obtained it is possible that the
cost may be reduced to $650 or less. The St. Louis Public Library
recently equipped a bindery at a cost of $587. During the first year,
with a force of fifteen, it turned out work to the value of $9,609.




APPENDIXES




APPENDIX A

SPECIFICATIONS OF THE U. S. BUREAU OF STANDARDS FOR BOOK CLOTHS


FABRIC

The fabric shall be made from first-quality staple cotton, uniformly
woven and of a grade known as "firsts." The weave shall be two up and
two down in the warp and one up and one down in the weft.

The gray cloth shall consist of from 33 to 36 threads per centimeter (85
to 90 per inch) in the warp, and 12 to 15 threads per centimeter (30 to
38 per inch) in the weft.

The surface shall be finished smooth and hard and show no tendency to
stick when folded upon itself.


THICKNESS, TENSILE STRENGTH AND WEIGHT

The thickness of the finished fabric shall not exceed 0.30 millimeter
(0.012 inch) or be less than 0.20 millimeter (0.008 inch). The tensile
strength of the gray cloth shall be not less than 18 kilograms per
centimeter (100 pounds per inch) of width in the warp, and 9 kilograms
per centimeter (50 pounds per inch) in the weft. The average value for
the warp and weft in the finished fabric must show an increase over the
average value for the warp and weft in the gray cloth of at least 10
per cent of the strength of the gray cloth.

The finished fabric, when dry, shall weigh not more than 250 grams per
square meter (0.5 pound per yard), or less than 200 grams per square
meter (0.4 pound per yard).


ABSORPTION OF MOISTURE

At a normal relative humidity of 65 per cent it shall not absorb more
than 5 per cent of moisture, or expand (an average of both directions)
to exceed 0.45 per cent, and when subjected in a closed case to a
saturated atmosphere for two hours at a temperature of 20 deg. C. (68 deg. F.)
shall not absorb more than 10 per cent of moisture or expand (an average
of both directions) to exceed 2 per cent. All increases to be computed
on the basis of the dry weight and dimensions.


FOLDING ENDURANCE

The folding endurance, as determined by the Schopper folder, shall be
not less than 65,000 double folds for the warp and not less than 10,000
for the weft.


COLOR

Before coating, the fabric must be dyed with a purely mineral or
inorganic color (such as iron salts), so as to imitate the color of the
finished cloth, but somewhat lighter in shade, so as to give the desired
"linen" effect. All coal-tar, aniline, vegetable, or other organic dyes
and lakes must be strictly excluded from both fabric and coating, even
in traces; except where necessary to match color, lake may be used in
red, blue, or brown. The following substances must be also excluded:
Chrome yellow and other chromates, ultramarine, browns containing
bituminous or other organic matter, compounds of lead and arsenic.

The color of the finished fabric should be slightly darker than the
standard sample, which will be furnished on application, and it must not
show the slightest change of color after exposure under prescribed
conditions to direct sunlight, or to the action of ammonia gas,
sulphuretted-hydrogen gas, sulphur-dioxide gas, or illuminating gas.


RESISTANCE TO MOLD AND INSECTS

The finished fabric shall be immune to the growth of mold or the attack
of insects.


TESTS

Physical and chemical tests to verify the properties required by these
specifications will be made according to the "Standard method for
testing book cloths" as used by the Bureau of Standards, copies of which
can be obtained on application.




APPENDIX B

READING LIST ON BINDING


Adam, Paul. Practical bookbinding. 1903. Van Nostrand. $1.25.

    A translation of a German work.

American library association. Committee on bookbinding. Binding for
libraries. 1915. A. L. A. Publishing Board. $.15. (Library handbook No.
5. Second edition, revised.)

    Binding specifications which may be used by large as well as small
    libraries.

Bailey, A. L. Bookbinding. 1911. A. L. A. Publishing Board. $.10.

    Preprint of Manual of library economy, Chapter 26.

Bindery talk. 1912-13. v. 1-2. All published.

    A periodical published by W. E. Reavis, Los Angeles, California,
    covering various phases of library binding.

Bliss, H. E. Better bookbinding for libraries. Library Journal, 1905,
30:849-57.

    Brief article on methods and materials.

Brown, J. D. Bookbinding and repairing. In his Manual of library
economy, pp. 328-48.

    Valuable chiefly for its section on lettering.

Brown, M. W. Mending and repair of books. A. L. A. Publishing Board.
$.15. (Library handbook No. 6.)

Caldwell, M. R. Preparing for the binder. Public Libraries, 1906,
11:302-3.

Chivers, Cedric. Paper and binding of lending library books. American
Library Association. Bulletin. 1909, 3:231-59.

    Also published separately by Mr. Chivers. A record of experiments
    and tests of modern book papers.

Chivers, Cedric. Relative value of leathers and other binding materials.
1911. Published by the author.

    A record of tests of leathers. Practically the same article will be
    found in the Bulletin of the American Library Association for 1911,
    p. 164.

Cockerell, Douglas. Bookbinding and the care of books. 1902. Appleton.
$1.25.

    Best general book on binding processes, but does not cover all
    library requirements.

Coutts, H. T., and Stephen, G. A. Manual of library bookbinding. 1911.
Libraco Limited. 7s. 6d. net.

    A valuable book for all libraries. Gives the English point of view.

Crane, W. J. E. Bookbinding for amateurs. 1903. Scribner. $.65.

Cundall, Joseph, ed. On bookbindings, ancient and modern. 1881. Bell,
Lond. $12.

    Will be used mainly by those interested in the history and artistic
    side of bookbinding.

Dana, J. C. Notes on bookbinding for libraries. Ed. 2. 1910. Library
Bureau. $1.

    The best single book for the librarian.

Drury, F. K. W. On protecting pamphlets. Library Journal, 1910, 35:
118-19.

Field, C. Book repairing. California News Notes, 2: 105-8.

Hasluck, P. N., ed. Bookbinding. 1903. McKay. $.50.

    Practical handbook. Does not cover strong binding for libraries.

Horne, H. P. Binding of books. 1894. Scribner. $2.

    For those interested in the artistic side of binding.

Hulme, E. W., and others. Leather for libraries. 1905. Library Supply
Co., London. 2s. 6d. net.

Lowe, J. A. Permanent book marking. Library Journal. 1910, 35: 15-17.

Macleod, R. D. Preservation of books in libraries. Library World, 11:
256, 331, 368, 417.

    Deals with general repairs, etc. The second part (p. 331) is
    especially valuable for the large number of cleaning recipes.

Memoranda relative to binding publications for distribution to state and
territorial libraries and depositories. 1908. U. S. Superintendent of
Documents.

    An account of the tests of book cloths made by the Bureau of
    Standards.

Philip, A. J. The business of bookbinding from the viewpoint of the
binder, the publisher, the librarian and the general reader. 1912. S.
Paul. 6s. net.

    In spite of the title the viewpoint is that of the librarian.

Prideaux, S. T. Historical sketch of bookbindings. 1893. Lawrence,
London. $1.50 net.

Sawyer, H. P. How to care for books in a library. 1912. Democrat
Printing Co., Madison, Wis. $.10.

    A good article on mending.

Society of arts. Report of the Committee on leathers for bookbinding.
1905. Bell. 10s. 6d.

Stephen, G. A. Commercial bookbinding. 1910. Stonhill, London. 2s. 6d.

    The best book on this subject.

----. Machine book-sewing. 1908. Aberdeen University Press.

    Reprinted from the Library association record, June 1908.

----. Notes on materials for library bookbinding. Library Assistant,
1905-7, 5:143-6, 162-4.

Swezey, A. D. Binding records. Public Libraries, 1909, 14: 5-7.

Worcester (Mass.) County law library. Leather preservation. 1911.

----. A small binding plant in the building. 1912.

Zaehnsdorf, Joseph. Bookbinding. Macmillan. $1.50.

Zahn, Otto. On art binding. 1904. Toof & Co., Memphis. $1.50.

    By a well known artistic bookbinder.




APPENDIX C

LIST OF TECHNICAL TERMS


In this list terms relating to paper, to materials described in the body
of this work and to historical bindings, and terms seldom used have been
omitted.

=Acid free leather.= Leather which is manufactured without using acid.
As interpreted by some dealers, it means leather from which all acid has
been removed.

=Aldine style.= Decorative design consisting of solid face ornaments
without shading. First used by Aldus and other early Italian printers.

=All-along.= In hand-sewing when the thread passes from kettlestitch to
kettlestitch in each signature it is sewed all-along.

=Antique.= See Blind-tooled.

=Arabesque.= Decorative design consisting of many interwoven lines and
curves arranged in conventional patterns. Sometimes applied to a design
consisting of interwoven plants, animals, birds, etc.

=Arming press.= See Blocking press.

=Asterisk.= This well known sign is sometimes used to indicate that the
printed matter on which it appears is to take the place of pages
previously printed.

=Awl.= See Bodkin.

=Azure tools.= Tools with a series of horizontal lines parallel on their
faces.

=Back lining.= Cloth or paper glued to the back of a book to help hold
the signatures together.

=Backing.= Forcing over the folds on each side at the back to form
grooves into which boards fit, forming the joint.

=Backing boards.= Used for backing or forming the joint. Made of
hardwood sometimes faced with iron. Have a beveled edge, over which the
paper is forced by hammering and are thicker at this edge than at the
other, so that when placed one on each side of the book and all are
placed in the lying press, the power of the press is brought to bear on
the part of the book nearest the back.

=Backing hammer.= Has a broad, flat face and short handle. Used in
rounding and backing.

=Backing machine.= Machine run by power used in edition work for backing
books.

=Backing press.= A press having vertical steel plates brought together
with a screw. When the book is placed in it with the back slightly
projecting it can be backed in exactly the same way as if backing boards
were used.

=Band-driver.= Used in forwarding to eliminate irregularities of raised
bands.

=Band nipper.= Pincers used after leather has been put on over raised
bands in order to straighten them.

=Banding.= Decorating by means of horizontal stripes.

=Bark skiver.= Tanned with oak bark.

=Bastard title.= See Half title.

=Beading.= Small twist or roll formed when winding the cotton or silk in
head-banding.

=Beating.= Process of flattening and smoothing out the folded sheets to
make the leaves lie closely together.

=Beating hammer.= Heavy, short-handled hammer used for beating books to
make the leaves lie closely together.

=Beating stone.= Stone or iron bed on which books are beaten.

=Beveled boards.= Heavy boards with beveled edges, sometimes used for
the sides of very heavy or large books.

=Binder.= 1. Case used for the temporary protection of pamphlets and
periodicals. Can be detached and used on succeeding numbers. 2. One
whose business it is to bind books.

=Binder's title.= Title lettered on the back of a book. Frequently
differs from that on the title page.

=Binder's board.= See Boards.

=Binding slip.= Sheet of paper containing instructions to the binder
inserted in each book sent to the bindery.

=Blanks.= Books with blank leaves of good paper used for keeping records
which are more or less permanent. The binding of such books is a special
trade.

=Bleed.= When books are trimmed so that part of the print is cut off
they are said to bleed.

=Blind-tooled.= Books on which impressions have been made by tools
without the use of gilt are blind-tooled. Sometimes called "Antique"
tooling.

=Block.= The solid metal stamp used for impressing a design on a book
cover.

=Blocking.= Stamping the design in gold or other material on book
covers.

=Blocking press.= Used in stamping designs on cloth book covers or back.
Known also as stamping press and arming press.

=Board papers.= The parts of end papers pasted to the boards.

=Board shears.= Heavy shears with a gauge, for cutting boards for the
sides of books.

=Boards.= Boards for the sides of books are called cloth board, binder's
board, mill board, tar board. They are called boards in the full size
and also when cut for sides.

=Bodkin.= An awl used for punching holes in boards through which the
bands are laced.

=Body.= Main part of the book, from Chapter I to the end of the text.

=Bolt.= The folded edge of signatures at the head, fore edge and tail
of books.

=Book card=, or =Book slip=. Card kept in the book, used in charging the
book when it is borrowed.

=Book label.= See Label.

=Book pocket.= A pocket made of paper, generally pasted on the last
fly-leaf to hold the book card when the book is on the shelf, or to hold
the reader's card when the book is borrowed.

=Bosses.= Metal ornaments fastened on the boards of books.

=Broken.= 1. Paper folded over. 2. The back of a book which has been
cracked open from head to tail is broken.

=Broken up (or over).= Plates are broken up when they are folded over a
short distance from the back before being placed in the book.

=Burnish.= The gloss produced by the application of a burnisher to the
edges of a book.

=Burnisher.= Piece of agate or blood-stone set in handles and used to
produce a gloss on the edges of books.

=Calendered paper.= Paper with a highly polished surface.

=Cancels.= Leaves containing errors which are to be replaced with
corrected pages. The replacements are frequently marked with an
asterisk.

=Canvas.= Same as duck. See page 80.

=Caps.= Coverings which protect the edges of books during the processes
of covering and finishing.

=Case.= 1. A cover for a book made independently of the book, i. e. the
boards are not laced in. 2. Cover made to fit over book already bound in
order to protect it.

=Case bindings.= Books in which the boards and covering materials are
made into a case and the book glued into it. Term generally applied to
commercial work, which is practically all done by machinery.

=Casing-in.= The operation of putting a sewed and forwarded book into
its case.

=Catchword.= In old books and in a few modern books the first word of a
page is printed under the last line on the preceding page. This is
called the catchword.

=Center tools.= Specially-cut tools for ornamenting the centers of
panels.

=Circuit edges.= Projecting flexible covers turned over to protect the
leaves of the book. Used almost wholly on Bibles and prayer books.
Sometimes called divinity edges.

=Clasp.= A catch for fastening the covers of a book together.

=Clearing-out.= The process of removing the waste paper and paring away
superfluous leather on the inside of the covers before pasting down end
papers.

=Cloth boards.= 1. Boards covered with cloth. 2. Boards used for the
sides are sometimes called cloth boards instead of mill boards.

=Collation.= An examination of a book to see if it is complete. May be
done by signatures before book is bound. Must be done page by page in
books which are to be rebound.

=Combs.= An instrument with wire teeth used in marbling.

=Compensating guards.= Short stubs bound in the back to equalize space
taken up by thick folded plates.

=Creaser.= The tool used in marking on each side of raised bands.
Generally made of steel.

=Cropped.= Term applied to books which have been trimmed too much.

=Crushed.= Term applied to leather, generally morocco, which has been
pressed so that the surface, naturally grained, is made smooth.

=Cut edges.= See Edges cut.

=Cut flush.= In very cheap binding the book is trimmed after the cover
is on and edges of boards are cut flush with the leaves.

=Cutter=, or =Cutting machine=. A machine used for trimming the edges of
books. Sometimes called guillotine.

=Cutting boards.= Boards similar to backing boards, except that they are
not beveled. Used in trimming.

=Cutting in boards.= See In boards.

=Cutting press.= The "lying press" turned over so that the runners are
uppermost.

=Deckle edge.= The rough untrimmed edge of hand-made paper.

=Dentelle.= A form of book ornament which supposedly represents lace.

=Derome.= A style of ornament having dentelle border with small birds
among the arabesques.

=Diaper.= A form of ornament consisting of a small pattern repeated in
geometrical form.

=Divinity calf.= Dark brown calfskin blind-stamped and without gilding,
formerly used in binding religious books.

=Divinity edges.= See Circuit edges.

=Die.= An engraved stamp used for stamping a design.

=Double.= See Doublure.

=Doubled.= A design is doubled when the finisher tries to make a second
impression and the tool does not quite follow the lines of the first
impression.

=Doublure.= The lined and decorated inside face of boards on fine
bindings. When so lined the cover is said to be "double."

=Dummy.= 1. A book made up of blank leaves to show style of binding and
grade of workmanship. 2. A piece of leather or cloth mounted on a board
to show exact size and lettering of a periodical.

=Duodecimo.= Book printed on paper folded into twelve leaves. Generally
written 12mo. Loosely applied to books from six to eight inches high.

=Dutch metal.= An imitation of gold leaf which soon tarnishes.

=Edges cut.= A book which has all edges trimmed smooth.

=Edges gilt.= All edges trimmed smooth and gilded.

=Edges opened.= A book which has the folds of leaves cut by hand with a
paper knife, has its edges opened.

=Edges rolled.= The edges of the covers are marked with a roll.

=Edges trimmed.= Edges cut somewhat, but not enough to cut all the
folds.

=Edges uncut.= Uncut edges have not been trimmed in any way, though they
may have been opened with a paper knife.

=Edition de luxe.= Fine editions of books printed on large paper and
handsomely bound. Many books so-called are in reality cheaply bound.

=Eighteenmo.= A book printed on paper folded into eighteen leaves. Not
often found.

=Elephant folio.= See Folio.

=Embossing.= The process of producing raised designs by means of stamps.
Used in imitating leathers.

=End papers.= Folded sheets at the beginning and end of books, half of
which are pasted to the boards. Sometimes called lining papers.

=Eve style.= Decorative design consisting of geometrical figures joined
by interlaced circles. The figures contain flowers and the space
surrounding them contains scroll work and branches of laurel and palm.

=Extra binding.= Trade term for the best work.

=Fanfare style.= Leafy spirals interwoven with a delicate tracery over
the cover.

=Fast.= Colors are fast to sunlight if they do not fade; to water if
they do not wash off.

=Fillet.= 1. Plain lines stamped upon the back or cover of the book. 2.
The tool with which the work is done.

=Filling.= See Weft.

=Finishing.= 1. All processes after the book leaves the hand of the
forwarder are known as finishing processes. 2. The ornaments stamped on
a book.

=Finishing press.= A small wooden press with wooden screws which holds a
book with the back up.

=Finishing stove.= A small gas or electric stove used for heating
finishing tools.

=Flexible.= A form of binding in which the book is sewed on raised
bands, the thread being passed entirely around the bands.

=Flush cut.= See Cut flush.

=Fly leaves.= Blank leaves at the beginning and end of the book between
end papers and the book itself.

=Folder.= 1. Small flat piece of bone used in folding sheets and in
other binding processes. 2. Person engaged in folding sheets.

=Folding machines.= Power machine for folding sheets.

=Folio.= 1. A book printed on paper folded in two leaves--four pages.
Loosely applied to books over fifteen inches high. Very large books are
sometimes called elephant folios. 2. Consecutive page numbers of a book.

=Fore-edge.= The front edge of the leaves of a book.

=Font.= The complete number of letters, figures, etc., forming a set of
type.

=Format.= Size and shape of a book.

=Forwarding.= 1. All processes between sewing and finishing. 2. The
department which takes charge of books during these processes. Those who
work in it are called forwarders.

=Foxed.= Books having leaves stained by dampness are said to be foxed.

=French guard.= The back edge of an illustration turned over and folded
around the adjoining signature.

=French joint.= Joint formed by setting the boards a short distance away
from the back. See page 46.

=French morocco.= A very inferior quality of levant morocco. Many skins
so-called are sheep skins or cowhide.

=Frontispiece.= Illustration facing the title page.

=Full-bound.= Term applies to books entirely covered, back and sides,
with the same material, whether cloth or leather.

=Gascon style.= The distinguishing characteristic of this style of
decoration is that dotted lines are used instead of lines which are
continuous.

=Gathering.= Collecting the folded sheets, or signatures, in the order
in which they are bound.

=Gaufre edges.= Edges which have had impressions made by finishing tools
after the edges have been gilded.

=Gauge.= A tool used for obtaining the correct size of a volume in order
to mark it on boards for squaring.

=Gilding press.= Same as the finishing press.

=Gilt edge.= See Edges gilt.

=Gilt tops.= Top edges gilded.

=Glaire.= A liquid made by beating whites of eggs. Used in lettering and
gilding. See page 195.

=Goffered edges.= See Gaufre edges.

=Gold cushion.= Leather cushion on which the finisher cuts gold leaf.

=Gold knife.= A long straight knife used in cutting gold leaf.

=Gold leaf.= Gold beaten very thin, used for lettering and gilding.

=Gouge.= A finishing tool used to stamp the segment of a circle on a
book.

=Grain.= The outer surface of a piece of leather from which the hair has
been removed. Generally used with adjectives which indicate the
appearance of the grain in question.

=Graining.= 1. Process of "bringing up" the natural grain of leather by
artificial means. 2. Process of embossing leather to produce a
fictitious grain.

=Grater.= Tool used for rubbing backs after they are paste-washed.

=Grolier.= An elaborate style of ornament consisting of scroll work with
interwoven squares, circles and diamonds, parts of the design being
studded with gold dots.

=Grooves.= Projections at the back against which boards rest to form the
joint. Made by the backing hammer. Sometimes called joints.

=Guards.= 1. Narrow strips of paper bound in books to which plates or
leaves are attached later. 2. Narrow strips of cloth or paper used to
reinforce the folds of signatures, or pasted to single leaves and folded
around adjoining signatures.

=Guides.= The grooves in which the plough moves on the face of the
cutting press.

=Guillotine.= See Cutter, or Cutting machine.

=Half-bound.= Term indicating that leather is used on the back, with
cloth or paper on the sides. If small pieces of leather are placed on
the corners the book is still half-bound. If the corner pieces are large
the book is three-quarters bound.

=Half-title.= Brief title on the leaf preceding the main title page.
Also called Bastard title.

=Hand letters.= Single letters affixed to handles and used in lettering.

=Head.= The top of the back of the book.

=Headband.= A silk or cotton band attached to the head of the book to
strengthen it, improve its appearance, and make the back even in
thickness with the boards.

=Head cap.= Fold of leather over the headband.

=Heel-ball.= Shoemaker's preparation of wax used for taking rubbings of
the backs of books.

=Holeing.= Piercing the boards with an awl so that bands can be
laced-in.

=Hollow back.= See Loose back.

=Imperfections.= In commercial binderies, sheets rejected because
imperfect.

=In boards.= 1. Term used when books are cut after boards have been
attached. 2. Style of binding which has a very narrow cloth back and
paper covered sides.

=In print.= Obtainable from the publishers.

=India-rubbered.= When the backs of books consisting of single leaves
are covered with a solution of india rubber instead of being sewed they
are said to be India-rubbered. Not practicable for permanent bindings.

=Inlaid.= The cover of a book bound in leather in which leather of a
different kind or color has been inlaid.

=In quires.= Unbound books in sheets.

=Inset.= A folded sheet laid inside of another.

=In sheets.= A book is said to be in sheets before it has been bound,
whether the sheets are folded or not.

=Inside margin.= The border made by the turned-in leather on the inside
face of the boards.

=Inside tins.= Sheets of tin sometimes placed in books which are to
receive heavy pressure.

=Jansen style.= A style of decoration in which the book is absolutely
plain on the outside except for lettering. The inside covers, however,
may be elaborately decorated.

=Joints.= The part of the book which bends when the book is opened. See
also Grooves; French joint.

=Kettlestitch.= The stitch made at the head and tail of the book
fastening a signature at these points to the preceding signature.

=Keys.= Small metal objects which fasten the bands to the under side of
the sewing bench.

=Kip calf.= Made from the skin of a heifer. Stronger than calfskin.

=Knocking-down iron.= Iron plate on which books are placed when it is
necessary to hammer down the ends of laced-in bands to prevent them from
showing.

=Label.= A piece of paper or leather affixed to the back of a book on
which to letter information.

=Lacing-in.= Process of attaching the ends of bands to boards through
holes made with an awl. See page 42.

=Large-paper edition.= Copies of a book printed on paper with wide
margins.

=Laying press.= See Lying press.

=Law sheep.= Uncolored sheepskin. So-called because at one time it was
generally used on law books. See page 65.

=Lay cords.= The bands when stretched on the sewing bench ready for the
signatures.

=Leatherette.= Imitation leather, generally made of cloth.

=Lettering block.= A dummy book made of wood on which leather labels
that are to be lettered are placed for greater ease in gilding.

=Lettering box.= That part of the pallet in which type is screwed up
before lettering.

=Limp leather.= Books bound in full leather without stiff boards are
said to be bound in limp leather.

=Lining papers.= See End papers.

=Loose back.= Books are loose backed when the covering material is not
glued to the back, but springs out when the book is opened. Called
"hollow back" in England.

=Lying press.= The under side of the cutting press used in backing.
Sometimes called laying press.

=Magazine binder.= See Binder.

=Maioli style.= Decoration formed of shields or medallions with scroll
work running through them.

=Marbled calf.= Calfskin treated with acid so that it resembles marble.

=Marbling.= Process of staining the paper or the edges of books with
colors irregularly combined, similar to the irregular colorings and
markings in marble.

=Marker.= Piece of ribbon fastened to the headband and used as a book
mark. Also called Register.

=Marking-up.= Marking the position of the cords on the back.

=Millboard.= See Boards.

=Millboard machine.= Used for cutting and squaring boards.

=Mitred.= Term indicating that lines in finishing meeting each other at
right angles, continue but do not overrun each other.

=Mosaic binding.= A leather binding ornamented by designs made of inlaid
pieces of leather or other material of different colors.

=Mottled calf.= Light brown calf treated with acid to give it a mottled
appearance.

=Mull.= See Super.

=Octavo.= Book printed on paper folded into eight leaves. Usually
written 8vo. Loosely used to indicate that the size of a book is between
eight and ten inches in height.

=Off and on.= Term used in machine sewing, meaning that certain stitches
in each signature are skipped.

=Off-set.= Marks made on opposite page because the printer's ink had not
become thoroughly dry. In case of illustrations tissue paper is
frequently inserted to prevent this. Also called set-off.

=Opened edges.= See Edges opened.

=Out of boards.= A book trimmed before the boards have been fastened to
it.

=Out of print.= Not obtainable from the publishers.

=Overcasting.= Process of sewing single leaves over and over. Also
called whipstitching. See page 23.

=Pallet.= A tool used in lettering having an adjustable box for holding
type securely, with a handle attached.

=Panel.= 1. Space between raised bands, or between stamped lines on the
back. 2. A square or rectangular space on the side of a book, whether
sunken or enclosed by beveled edges or gilded lines.

=Papering-up.= Covering the leaves of a book, especially if it has
gilded edges, to protect it during further processes.

=Parchment.= A material similar to vellum, but not so thick.

=Paring.= Process of thinning the edges of leather with a sharp knife,
so that there will not be a rough edge when it is on the book. Sometimes
called skiving.

=Pastewash.= Paste diluted with water.

=Pasting-down.= Operation of pasting end papers to the boards.

=Payne, Roger.= Style of decoration distinguished by gold-tooled corner
pieces and by the grace and freedom of ornamentation.

=Pebble-grained.= Covering material grained in an irregular manner.

=Pegamoid.= An imitation leather made in England.

=Perforating machine.= A machine which punches holes in sections so that
they can be more easily overcast.

=Petits fers.= Small hand tools used in finishing, as distinguished from
the stamps or blocks used in a press.

=Pieced.= Any space on the cover of a book which has a piece of another
material attached to it. Most often used to mean leather which is used
as labels for titles; also called titled.

=Plate.= 1. Illustration printed from a plate. The term is often used
incorrectly for wood cuts. 2. In library usage any full-page
illustration not paged-in.

=Plough.= A tool used for trimming books.

=Pluviusin.= An imitation leather made in England.

=Pocket.= An envelope made of paper or cardboard generally attached to
the inside of the back cover and used to hold loose maps or plates. See
also Book pocket.

=Pointille style.= A form of decoration in which the design is marked
with small dots or points.

=Points.= Holes made in sheets during the process of printing which
serve as guides in registering and folding.

=Polisher.= A steel tool used to give a gloss to leather after
finishing.

=Portfolio.= A case made for holding loose plates or maps.

=Powder, Seme.= A form of decoration in which a small figure is repeated
regularly.

=Preliminary matter.= Half title, title, table of contents and preface,
and all other matter preceding the main part of the book.

=Press pin.= An iron bar used to turn the screws of standing presses.

=Presses.= For various kinds see Lying press; Cutting press; Finishing
press; Blocking press.

=Pressing boards.= Wooden boards placed between books in the standing
press. Brass strips which project over the edges of the board fit into
the grooves of the joint.

=Pressing plates.= Japanned or nickeled plates, which, when placed next
to leather bindings under heavy pressure give them a finish.

=Pulled.= A book taken from its cover and the signatures separated is
said to be pulled.

=Puppy.= The specially prepared rubber used to remove superfluous gold
leaf from a book is sometimes called the puppy.

=Quarto.= A book printed on paper folded into four leaves (eight pages).
Generally written 4to. Loosely applied to books between ten and fifteen
inches high.

=Quire.= Twenty-four sheets.

=Raised bands.= See Bands.

=Recasing.= Replacing a book in its original cover, either with or
without resewing.

=Recto.= Right hand page of an open book.

=Register.= 1. Ribbon attached to a book to be used as a book mark. 2.
Term indicating that the print on the verso falls exactly over that on
the recto.

=Rexine.= An imitation leather made in England.

=Roll.= Finishing tool with brass wheel having a design on the
circumference. Used in decorating leather bound books.

=Rolled edges.= See Edges rolled.

=Rolling machine.= Used in publisher's binding to press the leaves
firmly together.

=Roulette border.= Border design made with a roll.

=Rounding hammer.= Heavy hammer used in rounding.

=Roundlet.= Small circle in gold used in decorating books.

=Roxburgh binding.= Plain leather backed book, lettering near the top
enclosed in gold lines, gilt top, and cloth or paper sides.

=Rub-off=, or =Rubbing=. A copy of the back of a book showing exact
lettering. Made by placing a sheet of thin strong paper on the back and
rubbing it with a piece of heel-ball until all lettering is fully
outlined.

=Run-up.= The back of a book with a fillet from head to tail not mitred
at the bands is said to be run-up.

=Running title.= Short title of a book or chapter appearing at the head
of the page throughout the book or chapter.

=Saddle stitching.= A machine process which either sews or staples
pamphlets of one signature.

=Sawing-in.= Sawing the back of a book to make grooves in which the
bands will rest when the book is sewed.

=Section.= See Signature.

=Seme.= See Powder.

=Set-off.= See Off-set.

=Setting the headband.= Adjusting the leather so that it covers the
headband with a kind of cap.

=Sewer.= The person who sews the signatures together on a sewing bench
to form a book.

=Sewing bench.= A board about two feet long having at each end on the
front edge an upright. These are connected by a bar which is adjustable
in height and between which and the board are stretched the bands or
tapes on which the book is sewed.

=Sextodecimo.= See Sixteenmo.

=Shears.= See Board shears.

=Sheets in.= See In sheets.

=Signature.= 1. The letter or figure on the first page of each folded
sheet to ensure its proper place in the book when bound. 2. The folded
sheet itself. Often called section.

=Sixteenmo.= A book printed on sheets folded into sixteen leaves.
Generally written 16mo.

=Size.= A preparation used in gilding and finishing.

=Skiving.= See Paring.

=Slips.= The pieces of bands or tapes projecting beyond the book after
it is sewed.

=Smooth calf.= Plain, undecorated calf.

=Split boards.= 1. Boards split at the edge to admit slips and
back-lining. 2. Boards made of two boards glued together, leaving a
space for insertion of slips and back-lining.

=Sprinkled calf.= Calf treated with acid so that it looks as if it had
been sprinkled with dye.

=Sprinkled edges.= Edges which have been colored by shaking or spraying
coloring matter on them.

=Squares.= The parts of the board projecting beyond the edges of the
leaves of the book.

=Stabbing.= 1. Process of fastening together the signatures of a
pamphlet with wire. 2. Piercing the boards for lacing-in.

=Stabbed.= A pamphlet is said to be stabbed when the signatures are held
together by wire staples driven in vertically near the back and clinched
on the other side.

=Stamping press.= See Blocking press.

=Stamps.= Blocks or dies used to impress designs upon leather.

=Standing press.= A large fixed press capable of holding many books.

=Start.= Sections which after cutting project beyond the others, are
said to have started.

=Steamboating.= Cutting a number of books at the same time.

=Stitching.= Process of sewing signatures lengthwise with a sewing
machine. _See also_ Saddle stitching.

=Strawboard.= Very soft paper board easily broken or cut. Sometimes used
in cheap work.

=Super.= A thin, coarsely woven cotton cloth used for back-lining.
Called mull in England.

=Tacky.= Glue that is still sticky but not wet is tacky.

=Tail.= The bottom of the back of the book.

=Tar board.= See Boards.

=Thirty-twomo.= A book printed on sheets folded into thirty-two leaves.
Written 32mo.

=Three-quarters bound.= See Half-bound.

=Thrown out.= Folded maps or diagrams which are likely to be used a
great deal can be mounted on cloth guards the width of the book. When
opened they will be entirely outside the book and are said to be thrown
out.

=Tight back.= A book on which the covering material is glued to the
back. See page 44.

=Title.= Space between the bands upon which the title is lettered.

=Title skiver.= Very thin skiver used as labels on which to gild
lettering.

=Titled.= See Pieced.

=Tooling.= The decoration of leather made by stamping designs in gold
leaf upon it.

=Tools.= Brass stamps used in tooling.

=Top gilt.= Indicates that only the top edge of the book is gilded.

=Tree calf.= Imitation of the trunk and branches of a tree made with
acid on the sides of a book bound in full calf.

=Trimmed.= 1. Books which have only the edges of projecting leaves, not
the folds, cut off are said to be trimmed. 2. In library binding the
term generally means that all edges have been trimmed even.

=Trindle.= A small tool used to take out the round of a book when it is
being cut.

=Tub.= Stand supporting the lying press. Formerly a tub used to catch
the paper cut from the edges.

=Turning up.= When books are cut in boards it is necessary to take the
round out of the back. The process is assisted by the use of trindles
and is called turning up.

=Twelvemo.= See Duodecimo.

=Twenty-fourmo.= A book having twenty-four leaves to a sheet.

=Two on.= See page 23.

=Tying up.= When leather covers are put on over raised bands it is
necessary to tie them with twine so that the leather will stick to the
sides of the bands.

=Uncut.= See Edges uncut.

=Unopened.= When the folds of signatures have not been cut the book is
unopened.

=Varnish.= Bookbinder's varnish is used to give a gloss to leather. It
is claimed that it acts as a preservative also.

=Verso.= Left hand page of an open book.

=Warp.= The threads running lengthwise in cloth.

=Waste papers.= The part of the end papers or fly leaves which in some
kinds of work are removed when the end paper is pasted to the cover. The
terms end papers, fly leaves and waste papers are used in different
binderies with much the same meaning.

=Waterproof sheets.= Sheets of waterproof cardboard sometimes laid in or
between books when pressing.

=Weft.= The threads running crosswise in cloth. Also called woof, and
filling.

=Whipping=, or =whipstitching=. See Overcasting.

=Whole bound.= Term indicating that a book is bound in full leather. See
also Full bound.

=Wire sewing.= Sewing the signatures of a book to cloth by means of wire
staples driven through their centers.

=Wired.= Pamphlets held together by wire staples driven through and
clinched near the back edge, are said to be wired.

=Witness.= The leaves of a book which show the original size of the
sheet, although other sheets have been trimmed, are a witness to the
fact that the book has not been cut down.

=Woof.= See Weft.




INDEX

    Acid-free leather,                                  58, 90

    Acids used in dyeing, effects,                          57

    Adhesives,                                             167

    Advertisements, when to bind,                          135

    Age of animals, effect on leather,                      53

    Aldine vellum,                                          76

    A. L. A. Committee on Binding,                          11

    A. L. A. Specifications for reinforced books,          109

    American russia,                                        65

    Ammonia,                                               171

    Angora goatskin,                                        69

    Arrangement for binding,                               132

    Art canvas,                                             76

    Art vellum,                                             76

    Artistic binding,                                        7

    Back-lining,                                            34

    Backing,                                                33

    Backs, loose, mending,                                 181

    Backs, tight, mending,                                 181

    Backs, tight and loose,                                 44

    Bands,                                                  19

    Bands, frayed,                                          32

    Bands, number necessary,                            18, 91

    Bands, raised,                                          40

    Barbour's thread,                                       85

    Bench sewing,                                           19

    Bibliography of binding,                               221

    Bids for binding,                                       11

    Binder, instructions for,                              139

    Binders' boards,                                        83

    Binders for magazines,                                 199

    Binders ignorant of library binding,                     9

    Bindery in the library,                                209

    Bindery, equipment,                                    213

    Binding before purchase,                               103

    Binding records,                                       149

    Binding routine,                                       157

    Binding slip, use of,                             139, 140

    Boards,                                                 83

    Boards, cut,                                            36

    Bock,                                                   70

    Bone folders,                                          172

    Bookbinding terms,                                     225

    Books, discarding of,                                  131

    Books, opening of,                                     122

    Books, proper care,                                    122

    Booksellers, oppose reinforced books,                  112

    Brownie books, strong binding,                         113

    Brushes,                                               173

    Buckram,                                                76

    Buffing,                                                66

    Bureau of Standards, Specifications for cloth,         217

    Bureau of Standards, tests of cloth,                    78

    Burnishing,                                             32

    Calfskin,                                               70

    Calfskin vs. cowhide,                                   53

    Call number, location of,                              143

    Call numbers gilded,                                    39

    Canton flannel for lining,                              35

    Canvas,                                                 80

    Care of books,                                         122

    Case, making of,                                        36

    Cased books,                                            38

    Catechol group,                                         56

    Cheesecloth,                                           170

    Chivers, Cedric, binding from sheets,                  103

    Chivers, tests of leather,                              60

    Chivers, test of levant morocco,                        69

    Classic buckram,                                        76

    Cleaning cover,                                        177

    Cleaning pages,                                        174

    Climate, effect on leather,                             54

    Cloth,                                                  72

    Cloth boards,                                           83

    Cloth, cutting of,                                      36

    Cloth for sides,                                        89

    Cloth, government specifications,                  79, 217

    Cloth, grades of,                                       75

    Cloth guards,                                           90

    Cloth, manufacturers of,                                74

    Cloth, qualities of,                                    74

    Cloth, tests of,                                        78

    Cloth used in mending,                                 170

    Cloth vs. leather,                                     122

    Collation,                                         15, 133

    Commercial binding,                                      6

    Commercial binding, specifications,                    100

    Copying press,                                         173

    Corners of vellum,                                      72

    Corners rounded,                                        47

    Cost of binding,                                5, 11, 115

    Cost of binding, records of,                           152

    Cost of binding, suggestions for reducing,        104, 119

    Cotton vs. linen thread,                                85

    Covers, how cleaned,                                   177

    Covers of periodicals, when to bind,                   135

    Cowhide,                                                65

    Cowhide for fiction and juvenile,                       93

    Creases, how removed,                                  175

    Creasing for flexibility,                               25

    Crepeline,                                        170, 179

    Crushed levant,                                         69

    Cutting board,                                         174

    Dampness, effect on leather,                            59

    Decay of leather,                                       54

    Discarding books,                                 121, 131

    Duck,                                               80, 90

    Duck for newspapers,                                    97

    Dummy backs,                                           141

    Durabline,                                              81

    Embossing leather,                                      57

    End papers,                                             19

    End papers and fly leaves pasted together,              31

    End papers pasted down,                                 37

    End papers, quality,                                    85

    English buckram,                                        77

    Everyman's library, library edition,              112, 129

    Eyelet and tape binders,                               201

    Fabrikoid,                                          81, 82

    Fibre-filling preservative,                             97

    Fiction, specifications,                                93

    Finishing,                                              39

    Flesher for back-lining,                                35

    Flexible glue,                                          82

    Flexible sewing,                                        40

    Fly leaves and end papers pasted together,              31

    Fly leaves guarded,                                     17

    Fly leaves tipped on,                                   17

    Fly leaves, renewal,                                   183

    Folded plates, guarded,                                 90

    Folders, bone,                                         172

    Forwarding,                                             31

    Fox marks, how removed,                                175

    French joints,                                  37, 46, 91

    Gall nuts for tanning,                                  55

    Gas, effect on leather,                                 58

    Gaylord binders,                                       206

    Gilding,                                                39

    Gilding tops,                                           33

    Glaire,                                                195

    Glue,                                              82, 169

    Glue, flexible,                                         82

    Glue pot,                                              173

    Glue, removed from back of books,                       15

    Gluing,                                                 33

    Gluing for overcasting,                                 17

    Goatskins,                                              68

    Gold leaf,                                              85

    Government cloth,                                       77

    Government cloth, specifications,                      217

    Government documents, binding of,                   54, 77

    Government documents, materials used in binding,        51

    Graining leather,                                       57

    Grease in leather,                                      58

    Grease spots, how removed,                             177

    Guarding fly leaves,                                    17

    Guarding illustrations,                                 18

    Guarding signatures,                                    17

    Hair sheep,                                             64

    Hayes' thread,                                          85

    Headbands,                                              49

    Heat, effect on leather,                                59

    Hemlock bark,                                           56

    Home binderies,                                        209

    Huntting, H. R., Samson-back sewing,                   113

    Illustrations guarded,                              18, 90

    Illustrations mounted on cloth,                         91

    Imitation of morocco,                               64, 68

    Imperfect books, when to bind,                         133

    Imperial morocco cloth,                             81, 90

    Incomplete volumes, when to bind,                      138

    Index, where to place,                                 134

    Index volumes, lettering of,                           147

    Ink stains, how removed,                               176

    Instructions to binder,                                139

    Jaconet,                                           17, 170

    Javelle water,                                         175

    Joint authors, lettering,                              143

    Joints,                                                 46

    Juvenile books bound from sheets,                      105

    Juvenile books, specifications,                         93

    Keratol,                                            81, 82

    Kettlestitch,                                           22

    Kettlestitch, sawing for,                               18

    Kettlestitch, three for overcast books,                 27

    Knives,                                                172

    Knocking down,                                          16

    Kraft paper,                                           171

    Kraft paper for fly leaves,                             17

    Labeling, process,                                     191

    Labels made of leather,                                 39

    Labels on tight-back books,                             45

    Labels, removal of,                                    193

    Labor, effects on cost of binding,                     115

    Lacing-in,                                          38, 42

    Larch, for tanning,                                     56

    Law books, specifications,                              98

    Law sheep,                                              65

    Leather,                                                52

    Leather, causes of variation in,                        53

    Leather corners,                                        48

    Leather, decay of,                                  54, 73

    Leather, embossed,                                      57

    Leather for back-lining,                                35

    Leather imitation of,                                   81

    Leather kinds of,                                       63

    Leather labels,                                         39

    Leather, mechanical qualities,                          60

    Leather, preservation of,                               60

    Leather vs. cloth,                                     122

    Legal buckram,                                          80

    Lettering, arrangement,                                141

    Lettering by hand,                                     193

    Lettering, how indicated,                              139

    Lettering in white ink,                                193

    Lettering, joint authors,                              143

    Lettering, oversized books,                            147

    Lettering, pamphlets,                                  207

    Lettering, periodicals,                                146

    Lettering, pseudonyms,                                 143

    Lettering, thin volumes,                               147

    Lettering, two books in one,                           143

    Lettering with type,                                   194

    Levant morocco,                                         69

    Library binderies,                                     209

    Library binderies, administration,                     211

    Library binderies, cost of,                            214

    Library binding,                                         8

    Library buckram,                                        80

    Linen buckram,                                          77

    Linen finish cloth,                                     76

    Linen vs. cotton thread,                                85

    Loose back,                                         36, 44

    Loose joints, how mended,                              182

    Loose leaves, inserting,                               180

    Loose signatures, inserting,                           181

    Machine-bound books,                                     6

    Magazine binders,                                      199

    Making the case,                                        36

    Manila paper,                                          171

    Manila paper for fly leaves,                            17

    Maps, repair of,                                       183

    Materials,                                              51

    Materials for lettering,                               195

    Materials for repairing,                               167

    Mending,                                           16, 178

    Mending by binder,                                      90

    Mending materials,                                     167

    Mending, rules for,                                    166

    Mildew, how prevented,                                 176

    Millboards,                                             83

    Morocco,                                                68

    Morocco, bock,                                          70

    Morocco, imitation of,                                  64

    Morocco, Levant,                                        69

    Morocco, Niger,                                         70

    Morocco, Persian,                                       70

    Morocco, Turkey,                                        69

    Mucilage,                                              169

    Music, specifications for,                              99

    Newspapers, specifications,                             96

    Newspapers, wrapped in paper,                           96

    Niger morocco,                                          70

    Non-fiction, specifications,                            94

    Oak bark,                                           55, 56

    Oak bark for pigskin,                                   67

    Oak bark for sheepskin,                                 64

    Onion skin,                                            171

    Overcast books, cut before sewing,                      16

    Overcasting,                                        23, 25

    Overcasting, sawing for,                                19

    Oversized books, lettering,                            147

    Pages, cleaning of,                                    174

    Pages, how mended,                                     178

    Pages missing,                                         133

    Pamphlets, binding,                                    205

    Pamphlets, binding single copies,                      190

    Pamphlets, lettering,                                  207

    Panels,                                                142

    Panels, staining of,                                    39

    Paper, effect of folding,                               14

    Paper, effect on binding,                               14

    Parker, J. Gordon, on causes of decay in leathers,      55

    Paste,                                             83, 167

    Paste, poor, effect on binding,                         59

    Pasting down,                                           37

    Pasting machine,                                  169, 174

    Perforating machine,                                    25

    Periodicals, arrangement of,                       16, 134

    Periodicals, binding single copies,                    190

    Periodicals, lettering,                                146

    Periodicals, specifications,                            94

    Periodicals, two volumes in one,                       138

    Periodicals, vagaries of,                              134

    Periodicals, when to bind incomplete,                  138

    Persian morocco,                                        70

    Plates, folded, guarding,                               90

    Plates, unpaged, where to place,                       136

    Preparing for the bindery,                             125

    Press used in mending,                                 173

    Pressing,                                               38

    Pigskin,                                                67

    Pluviusin,                                              81

    Polished buckram,                                       76

    Preservation of leather,                                60

    Prices, schedule of,                                   118

    Printing Investigation Committee,                       77

    Processes,                                              13

    Pseudonyms, lettering,                                 143

    Publishers' binding,                                     6

    Publishers' reinforced books,                          109

    Publishers' reinforced books, failure of,              111

    Pyrogallol group,                                       55

    Questions binding assistants must ask,                 125

    Raised bands,                                           40

    Ratio of cost to circulation,                            5

    Reading list,                                          221

    Rebacking,                                              36

    Recasing instead of rebinding,                         130

    Recasing, process,                                     184

    Records for large libraries,                           153

    Records of binding,                                    149

    Records of previous volumes,                      140, 151

    Recovering,                                            121

    Recovering, process,                                   185

    Red rope manila,                                       171

    Reference books, specifications,                        98

    Regular sewing,                                         19

    Reinforced books,                                 108, 120

    Reinforced books, specifications,                      109

    Reinforcing, process,                                  188

    Repairing,                                             165

    Reports, binding of,                              138, 205

    Reprints, bound before purchase,                       119

    Reprints, use instead of rebinding,                    129

    Resewed commercial books,                              113

    Re-siding, process,                                    188

    Retanning,                                              58

    Rexine,                                                 81

    Roan,                                                   65

    Rod binders,                                           202

    Rounding,                                               33

    Routine of binding,                                    157

    Royal Society of Arts, investigation of leather,        55

    Rub or rub-off,                                    92, 140

    Russia leather,                                         71

    Samson-back sewing,                                    113

    Sawing,                                                 18

    Scientific books, when to rebind,                      131

    Scribner's, Charles, Sons Co., reinforced books,       109

    Sealskin,                                           63, 71

    Second-hand books, rebound before using,          108, 120

    Selection of binder,                                     9

    Semi-tar boards,                                        84

    Setting the square,                                     36

    Sewing,                                                 19

    Sewing, affected by paper,                              14

    Sewing bench,                                           20

    Sewing on tapes,                                        30

    Sewing two-on,                                          23

    Sex of animals, effect on leather,                      53

    Shaving of skins,                                       57

    Sheep-bound set of U. S. documents,                     54

    Sheepskin,                                              63

    Sheets, binding from,                                  103

    Shellac,                                               172

    Shellacking of covers,                                 177

    Signatures, guarding of,                             17-18

    Size, basis for prices,                                 89

    Skiver,                                                 65

    Society of Arts, investigation of leather,              55

    Society of Arts, on preservation of leather,            62

    Sound Leather Committee of the Library Association,     55

    Specifications,                                         87

    Specifications, books of illustrations,                100

    Specifications, commercial binding,                    100

    Specifications, fiction,                                93

    Specifications, general,                                88

    Specifications, juvenile,                               93

    Specifications, law books,                              98

    Specifications, music,                                  99

    Specifications, newspapers,                             96

    Specifications, non-fiction,                            94

    Specifications, periodicals,                            94

    Specifications, reference books,                        98

    Specifications, reinforced books,                      109

    Split boards,                                           44

    Split cowhide,                                          66

    Split sheepskins,                                       65

    Splitting of skins,                                     57

    Spring-back binders,                                   201

    Sprinkling,                                             32

    Squares,                                                36

    Stained labels,                                         39

    Stitching,                                              91

    Strawboards,                                            83

    Sulphuric acid,                                     57, 58

    Sumac,                                          55, 56, 57

    Sumac for sheepskin,                                    64

    Sunlight, effect on leather,                            58

    Super,                                                  35

    Supplements to periodicals,                            134

    Taking apart,                                           15

    Tanning materials,                                      55

    Tapes,                                                  85

    Tapes, sewing on,                                       30

    Tar boards,                                             84

    Technical books, when to rebind,                       131

    Technical terms,                                       225

    Thread,                                            84, 171

    Tides of Barnegat, reinforced,                         109

    Tight backs,                                            44

    Tight backs, mending,                                  181

    Title page, where to place,                            134

    Title pages, vagaries of,                              136

    Tobacco smoke, effect on leather,                       58

    Tooling,                                                39

    Tools for repairing,                                   172

    Tools used in lettering,                               194

    Tools used in mending,                                 172

    Torn leaves, mending,                                  178

    Trimming,                                           32, 48

    Turkey morocco,                                         69

    Turwar bark,                                            56

    Two-on, sewing,                                         23

    Use determines kind of binding,                          4

    Valueless books, discarding of,                        121

    Vaseline for leathers,                                  61

    Vellum,                                                 71

    Vellum corners,                                         48

    Warp, strength of,                                      75

    Waterproof cloths,                                      81

    Weft, strength of,                                      75

    Well-bound book, how to recognize,                      49

    Whipstitching,                                          24

    White ink, when used,                                  193

    Wire, Dr. G. E., on preservation of leather,            60

    Wool sheep,                                             64





End of Project Gutenberg's Library Bookbinding, by Arthur Low Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIBRARY BOOKBINDING ***

***** This file should be named 38387.txt or 38387.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/3/8/38387/

Produced by Hazel Batey and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
