The Project Gutenberg EBook of Selected Poems, by John Tutchin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Selected Poems
       (1685-1700)

Author: John Tutchin

Editor: Spiro Peterson

Release Date: December 25, 2011 [EBook #38407]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTED POEMS ***




Produced by David Starner, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY


JOHN TUTCHIN

_SELECTED POEMS_

(1685-1700)


_INTRODUCTION_

BY

SPIRO PETERSON


PUBLICATION NUMBER 110

WILLIAM ANDREWS CLARK MEMORIAL LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES

1964




GENERAL EDITORS

  Earl R. Miner, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  Maximillian E. Novak, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  Lawrence Clark Powell, _Wm. Andrews Clark Memorial Library_


ADVISORY EDITORS

  John Butt, _University of Edinburgh_
  James L. Clifford, _Columbia University_
  Ralph Cohen, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  Vinton A. Dearing, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  Arthur Friedman, _University of Chicago_
  Louis A. Landa, _Princeton University_
  Samuel H. Monk, _University of Minnesota_
  Everett T. Moore, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  James Sutherland, _University College, London_
  H. T. Swedenberg, Jr., _University of California, Los Angeles_


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY

  Edna C. Davis, _Clark Memorial Library_




INTRODUCTION


When John Tutchin died on September 23, 1707, he had already created
the image of himself which Alexander Pope has transmitted to posterity.
There, in Book II of _The Dunciad_ (1728), the Whig journalist appears
as one of two figures in a "shaggy Tap'stry":

  Earless on high, stood un-abash'd Defoe,
  And Tutchin flagrant from the scourge, below.

Pope, in his variorum notes on the passage, identified Tutchin as
the "author of some vile verses, and of a weekly paper call'd the
_Observator_," and revived the fiction of his sentence "to be whipp'd
thro' several towns in the west of _England_, upon which he petition'd
King _James_ II. to be hanged." The "invective" against James II's
memory, which Pope mentions, has now been identified in the Twickenham
Edition as _The British Muse: or Tyranny Expos'd_ (1701).[1] By 1728,
this was all the reputation that remained for Mr. John Tutchin,
Gentleman--irascible journalist, pamphleteer, and writer of verses.

The truth of the matter is that Pope was no more accurate about
Tutchin's being whipped than about Defoe's losing his ears. From the
sparse reliable information concerning Tutchin's early years, one
consistent pattern emerges: he tended to depict himself as a hero and a
martyr. Born in 1661 "a Freeman" of London, he was brought up in a
family of scholarly nonconformist ministers probably on the Isle of
Wight[2]. Even though an enemy claimed that he had been expelled from a
school at Stepney for stealing (_DNB_), he received some education and
travelled on the continent. In defending his skill with languages
against Defoe, he once told how at his school, boys translated and
capped verses, and how he travelled "from _Leivarden_ in _Friezland_,
thro' _Holland_ and the _Spanish Flanders_."[3] Throughout his life, he
proudly designated himself a gentleman: during his trial for libel in
late June of 1704, he even escaped punishment by setting forth that he
was a gentleman, and not a laborer as the indictment read.

In later life, he romanticized himself when young as the hero who fought
in the Duke of Monmouth's rebellion, received the brutal "whipping
sentence" from Lord Chief-Justice Jeffreys during "the bloody assezes"
of 1685, petitioned James II for "the Favour of being hang'd" to avoid
the sentence, and finally freed himself by paying so burdensome a bribe
that he was reduced to poverty. All these claims were first made in "The
Case, Trial, and Sentence of Mr. John Tutchin, and Several Others, in
Dorchester, in the County of Dorset," which Tutchin added to the fifth
edition of _The Western Martyrology; or, the Bloody Assizes_, published
in 1705. As J. G. Muddiman demonstrated in 1929, most of these claims
are outright fabrications. Tutchin was never indicted for high treason,
he could never have been challenged by Jeffreys to cap verses, and he
invented the petition to be hanged.[4] In _The Observator_ (July 25-29,
1702), he honestly admitted that he was never tried in Devonshire, but
claimed he did buy his liberty of James II; and in a later issue (Aug.
4-7, 1703) he challenged an enemy: "if he Pleases to give the World an
Account, _When_, _Where_, and for _What_ I was Whip'd thro' a
Market-Town, he will inform Mankind of more than I or any Body else
knows...." John Dunton believed in the whipping sentence; and Defoe, the
story of the petition to be hanged. Throughout Tutchin's stormy career,
his enemies made political capital of the flogging that never took
place. He was probably twenty-four years old when, using the alias
"Thomas Pitts," he was tried at Dorchester for "Spreading false news and
fined five marks and sentenced to be whipped"--but he came down with
smallpox and so was not whipped.[5] Lord Macaulay, who is incorrect on
the facts taken from _The Western Martyrology_, certainly exaggerated in
stating that Tutchin's temper was "exasperated to madness by what he had
undergone."[6] That the Monmouth adventure and its aftermath mark a
turning point in the young man's life, however, cannot doubted.

Tutchin may have fought with William III's army in Ireland as an
officer.[7] After the Glorious Revolution and the establishment of
William and Mary on the throne, Tutchin devoted himself to a succession
of liberal causes. On the one hand, he persisted in identifying himself
with the former commonwealth, the Monmouth cause, the Revolution, the
reform movement especially in the theater, and Whig liberty. He became
noted for tactless exposes of high-level misconduct in his pamphlets and
in _The Observator_ (Apr. 1, 1702-Sept. 23, 1707). His detractors
frequently paired him with Defoe as a monster or a villain. Again and
again, he made himself obnoxious to important personages such as the
Earl of Albemarle or the Duke of Marlborough.[8] On the other hand, his
hatred for tyranny propelled him frequently into such extremes as his
disgraceful complicity in William Fuller's impostures. In the years
1700-1704, he was generally reputed to be "Secretary to the abominal
Society of King-Killers"--the secret Calves-Head Club made up of
dissenters who met on January 30th, the anniversary of the death of
Charles I, to sing prophane anthems.[9]

Dunton generously summed up the widely varied causes of "the loyal and
ingenious _Tutchin_ (alias _Master Observator_); the bold Asserter of
English Liberties; the scourge of the High-flyers; the Seaman's
Advocate; the Detector of the Victualling-office; the scorn and terror
of Fools and Knaves; the Nation's _Argus_, and the Queen's faithful
Subject."[10] Even his death in Queen's Bench Prison, on September 23,
1707, was romanticized into another instance of martyrdom. "... _he
liv'd and dy'd_," announced the Country-man of _The Observator_, "_for
the Service of his Country_." Tutchin's followers dramatized his death
as the result of a politically-inspired thrashing which "six ruffians"
administered to him, in revenge for slanderous remarks made in _The
Observator_ against Vice-Admiral Sir Thomas Dilkes.[11] The "_Pulchrum
Est Pro Patria Mori_" portrait, reprinted here as the frontispiece, was
circulated to attest to Tutchin's political martyrdom. However, as the
autopsy-report demonstrates and as Muddiman rightly concludes, "Tutchin
really died from a specific disease and not from the thrashing undergone
seven months before his death."[12]

The young man of twenty four who went off to join Monmouth's forces had
already published, in 1685, _Poems on Several Occasions. With a
Pastoral. To Which is Added, A Discourse of Life_. In the preface,
writing like a fashionable man-about-town, Tutchin describes the lyrics,
translations, and satires of this volume as "trifles" which he had let
circulate and had now secured "by promising to Print them." The book
shows the variety in poetic kinds that one would expect in a young
writer who had been drinking deeply of Lord Rochester, Waller, Cowley,
the Earl of Roscommon, Oldham, and Dryden. Juvenalian satires
reminiscent of Oldham are neatly balanced by memorial verses to Oldham
and Rochester, late metaphysical lyrics ("And why in red dost thou
appear"), classical dialogues ("Cleopatra to Anthony"), translations of
Horace, and the well-turned "autobiographical" couplets of "A Letter to
A Friend." In its variety and themes, _Poems on Several Occasions_
resembles Oldham's _Works_, which was published twice in 1684. Tutchin's
"The Tory Catch," like Oldham's "A Dithyrambick. A Drunkard's Speech in
a Mask," has a speaker who ironically brags of the social misconduct
which the author satirizes. "A Letter to a Friend" is a skillfully
exaggerated account of the attractions and dangers in rhyming. Although
perhaps autobiographical in part, the poem also imitates the
long-standing tradition derived from Horace's first Epistle of Book I,
and revived most recently in Oldham's "A Letter from the Country to a
Friend in Town."[13] Both "The Tory Catch" and "A Letter to a Friend"
are reprinted here from _Poems on Several Occasions_.

Tutchin's first book shows two impulses: the awkwardly lyrical and the
directly satiric. He feels compelled, in the Preface, to defend his
choice of less serious subjects. His light poems do not, "in the least,
detract from _Virtue_; since I have Read the _Poems_ of _Beza_,
_Heinsius_, our own _Donne_, _&c._" He promises to turn to "some Graver
Subject." There are other equally significant comments in a Preface that
reveals a great deal about changing literary taste. In "To the Memory of
Mr. John Oldham," Tutchin curiously avoids the main subject of Dryden's
finer elegy, namely, Oldham's achievement in rough satire. His praise is
that "_Crashaw_ and _Cowley_ both did live in thee." However, in his
"Satyr Against Vice" and "Satyr Against Whoring," Tutchin has already
learned the art of declaiming, from the poet who has been called "the
English Juvenal," John Oldham.

In the years between 1685 and 1707, Tutchin's separate poems were mainly
occasional and satirical. Panegyric for William III dominates such an
early piece as _An Heroic Poem upon the Late Expedition of His Majesty_
(1689), and hatred for the Stuarts possesses a later poem like _The
British Muse: or Tyranny Expos'd_ (1701). In _Civitas Militaris_ (1690)
Tutchin engages in city politics. The elegy on the death of Queen Mary
irritated Defoe enough to have "_T----n_" placed among the "Pindarick
Legions" in _The Pacificator_ (1700). Two poems, however,--_The
Earth-quake of Jamaica_ (1692) and _Whitehall in Flames_ (1698)--differ
from the others in that they are Cowleyan "Pindaricks" moralizing on
disasters. _The Earth-quake of Jamaica_ is reprinted here to illustrate
Tutchin's descriptive talent. He starts with an actual event, the
Jamaican disaster of June 7, 1692; and then, as the epigraph on the
title page suggests, he presents a variation on Horace's rejection of
"senseless Epicureanism," in Ode 34 of Book I. _The Earth-quake of
Jamaica_ may have been worked over longer than was customary. It was
published shortly before December 10, the manuscript date on Narcissus
Luttrell's copy now in the Houghton Library. Some six months earlier, in
the late morning of June 7, the earthquake had erupted in Port Royal,
the "boom" port on the south side of the island. In three schocks
lasting less than three minutes, the famed capital of the buccaneers had
fallen. News of the disaster did not reach London until August 9. The
earthquake then became one of the most widely discussed events. The
_London Gazette_ ran stories on it, scientists like Sir Hans Sloane
published eye-witness accounts in the _Philosophical Transactions_ of
the Royal Society, the moralists declared God's wrath had come upon the
wickedest place in Christendom, and "the actors of the drolls" in
Southwark Fair even mockingly re-enacted the event until the Lord Mayor
put a stop to the performances.[14]

If contemporary accounts of the Port Royal earthquake are compared with
_The Earth-quake of Jamaica_, the reader becomes impressed by Tutchin's
way of adapting the well-known details to a moral comment on life. His
scenes are indeed graphic, but they do not have the immediacy of such
eye-witness accounts as the following, preserved by Luttrell:

    I cannot sufficiently represent the terrible circumstances that
    attended it; the earth swelled with a dismal humming noise, the
    houses fell, the earth opened in many places, the graves gave up
    some of their dead, the tomb stones ratled together; at last the
    earth sunk below the water, and the sea overwhelmed great numbers
    of people, whose shreiks and groanes made a lamentable eccho: the
    earth opened both behind and before me within 2 foot of my feet,
    and that place on which I stood trembled exceedingly; the water
    immediately boyled up upon the opening of the earth, but it pleased
    God to preserve me....[15]

Tutchin's aim is to compare vulnerable nature with vulnerable man: "Can
humane Race / Stand on their / Legs when Nature Reels?" He sees in the
disaster a challenge for English sinners to repent: the "Hurricane of
Fate" wails on "murder'd _Cornish_." He had not yet forgotten the
Monmouth adventure. For he alludes here to the act of Parliament passed
in 1689 reversing the attainder of Henry Cornish, the alderman who had
been brutally executed in 1685 for high treason through participating in
the Rye House Plot and attaching himself to the Duke of Monmouth. For
Tutchin, politics were always relevant.

Tutchin's true forte is not the descriptive poem, but satire. Poems
published in the years 1696 to 1705--from _A Pindarick Ode_ to _The
Tackers_--exploit the satirical impulse that had been latent in _Poems
on Several Occasions_. Increasingly he turns to general denunciation and
thinly disguised lampoon. Of the two main Augustan traditions in
satire--the "fine raillery" that Dryden perfected and the rough satire
that reached back to Donne, Cleveland, and Oldham--Tutchin belongs to
the latter. Defoe found him to be "so woundy touchy, and so willing to
quarrel," and noted that "Want of Temper was his capital Error."[16] The
specific circumstance that produced _A Pindarick Ode, in the Praise of
Folly and Knavery_ (1696), reprinted here, is generally said to be his
dismissal from the victualling office because he failed to establish his
case that the commissioners mismanaged public funds. Such corruption in
the administration would soon transform a deep admiration for William
III into the disenchantment of _The Foreigners_ (1700). That Tutchin was
uneasy in his effort to write satire in the mode of Dryden is suggested
by his abandonment of irony after the first part of _A Pindarick Ode_.
In his introductory verses, Benjamin Bridgwater accurately observes that
Erasmus' _Ironia_ no longer suffices:

  This hard'ned Age do's rougher Means require,
  We must be _Cupp'd_ and _Cauteriz'd_ with _Fire_.

Echoing Dryden's _Mac Flecknoe_, Tutchin invites Dullness and "Immortal
_Nonsence_" to inspire his ironic praise of the folly and knavery that
now ride roughshod over such traditional values as learning, love, wit,
and patriotism. A few of the lines have the moving quality of Augustan
satire at its best:

  Did e'er the old or new Philosophy,
  Make a Man splendid live, or wealthy die?

The irony of _A Pindarick Ode_ does not adequately mask the
denunciation. In Stanza X, it is even replaced by the antiquated Hero's
diatribe against "our modern Knavish Arts"--never to return to the rest
of the poem. Doubtless, the indictment of the "nefarious Brood at Home"
that grows rich in wartime was the heart of the satire. Defoe hinted at
this motive in the satirical vignette of Tutchin as Shamwhig, which
appeared in the first edition of _The True-Born Englishman_ (1700):

  As Proud as Poor, his Masters he'll defy;
  And writes a _Piteous *Satyr_ upon Honesty.
  Some think the Poem had been pretty good,
  _If he the Subject had but understood_.
  He got Five hundred Pence by this, and more,
  _As sure as he had ne're a Groat before_.[17]

Tutchin's satire would be henceforth the rough variety. In _The
Foreigners_ he would also resort to fierce lampoons of William III's
court favorites.

In the rash of satires that followed _The Foreigners_ and _The True-Born
Englishman_, the anonymous author of _The Fable of the Cuckoo_ (1701)
pointed to the common tradition shared by both poems. For he attacked
Defoe's "hatchet muse" as having been inspired by such "Modern Sharpers
of the Town" as Tutchin and "Old[ha]m the Bell-weather of Tory Faction,"
who first horned Defoe's satire, "And ever since perverted all good
Nature." Advertised in _The Flying Post_ for July 31-Aug. 1, 1700, _The
Foreigners_ was published shortly thereafter by the ardent Whig Anne
Baldwin. The "vile abhor'd Pamphlet, in very ill Verse, written by one
_Mr. Tutchin_, and call'd _The Foreigners_"--Defoe recalled years later
in _An Appeal to Honour and Justice_ (1715)--filled him "with a kind of
Rage." Tutchin's irascible temper had again taken hold. Scurrilously, he
assailed foreigners in high office, especially William III's Dutch
favorites, for their monopolizing preferments and usurping command,
under such transparent aliases as "Bentir" for William Bentinck, first
Earl of Portland, and "Keppech" for Arnold Joost van Keppel, first Earl
of Albemarle. The manner was Dryden's in _Absalom and Achitophel_; the
venom was Tutchin's own. Official reaction to _The Foreigners_ came
quickly. The untrustworthy William Fuller spread the gossip that Tutchin
fled from his Majesty's messengers, and found refuge "in a blind
Ale-house, at the Windmill, by Mr. Bowyers, at Camberwel." On August
10th, he was taken "into custody of a messenger"; and at the grand
inquest for the city of London, held on August 28th, there was presented
"a Poem called _The Foreigners_."[18] A mystery envelops the rest of the
legal proceedings. There may even be some truth in the allegation that
the parry would long since have "ruffled" Tutchin, except that he
pleased them with his "railing at King _William's_ Friends
sometimes."[19] _The Foreigners_ also aroused such ephemeral rejoinders
as _The Reverse: or, the Tables Turn'd_ and _The Nations: An Answer to
the Foreigners_. both published in 1700. Finally, in January of 1701,
there was published a satire of more lasting worth, Defoe's _The
True-Born Englishman_. Side by side, in _Poems on Affairs of State_
(1703), were reprinted _The Foreigners_ and _The True-Born Englishman_
among verses "_Written by the Greatest Wits of this Age_."[20]
Altogether, the two satirists had three poems apiece in the volume. One
of Tutchin's poems, "The Tribe of Levi" (1691), was anonymously
reprinted; the other two, _The Foreigners_ and _The British Muse_, were
identified as "by Mr. _T----n_." These were the achievements of
Tutchin's "hatchet muse."

The poems are reprinted from copies in libraries of the U.S. and Great
Britain. I am obligated to The Houghton Library for _Poems on Several
Occasions_ and _The Earth-quake of Jamaica_, to Yale University Library
for _The Foreigners_, and to the British Museum for _A Pindarick Ode,
in the Praise of Folly and Knavery_. For permission to reproduce
the "_Pulchrum Est Pro Patria Mori_" portrait of John Tutchin as the
frontispiece, I wish to express my thanks to the Trustees of the British
Museum.

                                                      Spiro Peterson
                                                      Miami University
                                                      Oxford, Ohio


NOTES TO THE INTRODUCTION

[1] _The Dunciad_, ed. James Sutherland (The Twickenham Edition, Methuen
& Co., Ltd., 1943), pp. 115-18.

[2] Tutchin's birth-year is variously given. The Van der Gucht engraving
and the authentic _Elegy_ of Tutchin's death state that he died "Aged
44"; but the mock _Elegy_, falsely claiming to be "Written by the Author
of the Review," gives his age to be 47. In _The Observator_ (Oct. 20-23,
1703), Tutchin implied that he was "Born some years after the
Restoration of King _Charles_ the 2d." His certificate of marriage to
Elizabeth Hicks on Sept. 30, 1686 places his age then at twenty-five,
and supports the birth-year 1661, as given in the _DNB_. See also _The
Observator_, May 17-20, 1704; July 8-12, 1704; and July 24-28, 1703. One
of Tutchin's enemies charged that he was born in the north of England
(_An Account of the Birth, Education, Life and Conversation of ... the
Observator_, 1705); and another, that his father was "a Scot, canting
Presbyterian Sot" (_The Picture of the Observator_, 1704).

[3] _The Observator_, June 2-6, 1705. Tutchin stated, in _The Case,
Trial, and Sentence_, that Judge Jeffreys had "a true Account" of his
activities in Holland. See J. G. Muddiman, ed., _The Bloody Assizes_
(Toronto, [1929]), p. 137.

[4] Muddiman, pp. 136-37. _The Case, Trial, and Sentence_ is reprinted
as a true record in T. B. Howell's _A Complete Collection of State
Trials_ (London, 1812), XIV, 1195-200, but as a highly questionable
document in Muddiman, pp. 137-46.

[5] Muddiman, p. 219.

[6] _The History of England_, ed. C. H. Firth (London, 1914), II, 639.
Insofar as the _DNB_ article on Tutchin relies on Macaulay, it is
erroneous.

[7] Shortly after Tutchin's death, the Country-man of _The Observator_
lauded his beloved master as "an Officer in the Army," and addressed him
"Captain Tutchin," as did the mock _Elegy_ and the friendly Dunton.

[8] Narcissus Luttrell, _A Brief Historical Relation of State Affairs_
(Oxford, 1857), V, 257; _Manuscripts of the Marquis of Bath_ (H.M.C.,
London, 1904), I, 105-06.

[9] The authorship of the Calves-Head anthems is assigned to Tutchin in
_The Reverse: or, the Tables Turn'd_ (1700), p. 7, and to both Tutchin
and Benjamin Bridgwater in _The Examination, Tryal, and Condemnation of
Rebellion Observator_ (1703), p. 17. See also Howard William Troyer,
_Ned Ward of Grubstreet_ (Harvard University Press, 1946), pp. 110, 117.

[10] _The Life and Errors of John Dunton_ (London, 1818), I, 356.

[11] See _The Observator_, Jan. 4-8, 1707, and "Postscript"; Jan. 12-15,
1707; and Sept. 20-24, 1707.

[12] Pp. 12-13. See also _The Observator_, Sept. 27-Oct. 1, 1707, and
William Bragg Ewald, _Rogues, Royalty, and Reporters_ (Boston, [1954]),
p. 14.

[13] For the two Oldham pieces, see _Poems of John Oldham_, introd.
Bonamy Dobree (Southern Illinois University Press, [c. 1960]) pp. 50-54,
72-79.

[14] _The Diary of John Evelyn_, ed. E. S. de Beer, 6 vols. (Oxford,
1955), V, 115; Luttrell, II, 565; W. Adolphe Roberts, _Jamaica: the
Portrait of an Island_ (New York, [c. 1955]), pp. 44-45; and Mary
Manning Carley, _Jamaica: the Old and the New_ (London, [c. 1963]), pp.
34-36, 157-58.

[15] Luttrell's entry for Aug. 13, 1692 (II, 539).

[16] _Review_, IV (Sept. 7, 1706) and IV (Nov. 20, 1707).

[17] Defoe's gloss on "_Piteous Satyr_" is "Satyr in Praise of Folly and
Knavery." (_The True-Born Englishman_, 1700, p. 37.) Since he regards
this as the title of the "_Satyr_ upon _Honesty_," Defoe may be
confusing _A Pindarick Ode_ with Tutchin's next satire, _A Search after
Honesty_ (1697).

[18] _Mr. William Fuller's Letter to Mr. John Tutchin_ (1703), p. 7;
Luttrell, V, 676, 683; _The Proceedings of the King's Commission of the
Peace, and Oyer and Terminer and Goal Delivery of Newgate ... the 28th,
29th, 30th and 31st Days of August 1700_.

[19] "A Dialogue between a Dissenter and the Observator," in _A
Collection of the Writings of the Author of the True-Born Englishman_
(1703), p. 227.

[20] II, 1-6, 7-46.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Mr. JOHN TUTCHIN

_Dy'd Septber 23d 1707. Aged 44._]


       *       *       *       *       *




POEMS

ON

Several Occasions.

WITH A

PASTORAL


To which is Added, A

DISCOURSE

OF

LIFE


By _JOHN TUTCHIN_.


_LONDON_,


Printed by J. L. for _Jonathan Greenwood_, at the

_Black Raven_ in the _Poultry_, near the

_Old Jury_. MDCLXXXV.




THE

Tory Catch.


I.

  A Friend of mine, and I did follow
  A Cart and Six, with Brandy fraught;
  We sate us down, and up did swallow
  Each a Gallon at a draught:
  The sober Sot can't drink with us,
  May kiss coy Wine with _Tantalus_.


II.

  With Musick fit for Serenading,
  We did ramble to and fro;
  Then to Drink and Masquerading,
  'Till we cannot stand nor go;
  One Leg by _Bacchus_ was quite lamed,
  'Tother _Venus_ had defamed.


III.

  At the Tavern we did whisk it,
  And full Pipes did empty drain:
  We eat Pint-Pots instead of Bisket,
  And piss'd 'em melted out again:
  We beat the Vintner, kiss'd his Wife,
  And kill'd three Drawers in the strife.


IV.

  In the Street we found some Bullies,
  And to make our valour known,
  We call'd 'em Fops, and silly Cullies,
  And knock'd the foremost of 'em down:
  And with praise to end the Fray,
  We, like good Souldiers, ran away.


V.

  To the Play-House we descended,
  For to get a grain of Wit,
  Our own with Wine was so defended.
  We sate spuing in the Pit,
  'Mongst Drunken Lords and Whoring Ladies,
  To see such sights whose only Trade is.




A

LETTER

TO A

FRIEND.


  Thanks for your Praises! were they due, I wou'd
  Pamper my self with Joy, and think 'em Good.
  Loaden with Laurels for mine unknown Art,
  You paint me Great, although beneath Desert.
  But if _Macenas_ had a lasting Fame,
  Because the best of Poets us'd his Name;
  Then Merit justly may to me belong,
  Because 'tis sung by your all-skilful Tongue.
  Oft have I blam'd my Stars, that I should be
  Plagu'd with this soft deluding _Poetry_:
  This Charming _Mistress_ that has kept my Heart,
  Quite from a Child, by her bewitching Art.
  From her glad Fountain I can always find
  A pleasing Philtre to make _Phillis_ kind:
  For tell me that coy _Maid_ could ever be
  Cruel, when urg'd by Charming _Poesie_?
  _Verse_ is the _Poet's_ Beauty, Wealth and Wit;
  And what soft _Virgin_ won't be won by it?
  But, wearied with Delight, I always try
  Against this Spell to find a Remedy.
  By good _Divinity_ I think to find
  A Soveraign Remedy for Soul and Mind:
  But then, with Holy Flame, I strait do burn,
  And all to _Hymns_, and _Sacred Anthems_ turn.
  Nay, when the Night does waking Thoughts redress,
  And Guardian Angels with our Souls converse,
  To busie Mortals is the sleeping Time;
  I dream and slumber all the Night in Rhyme.
  Then puzling _Logick_ next I take in hand;
  But this, Alas! can't _Poesie_ withstand.
  _Barbara_, _Celarent_, I with Ease express,
  And yoke rough _Ergo's_ into well-made _Verse_:
  My Faithless Lover's _Syllogism_ tries;
  I by stout _Logick_ find their _Fallacies_.
  Then _Scheibler_, _Suarez_, _Bellarmine_ I get,
  And sound the depth of _Metaphysick_ wit:
  Streight, in a fret, I damn 'em all at once,
  And vow they are as dull as _Zabarel_ or _Dunce_.
    Credit me, _Sir_, no greater plague can be,
  Than to be poison'd with mad _Poetrie_:
  Like Pocky Letchers, who have got a Clap,
  And paid the _Doctor_ for the dear mishap;
  But newly eased of their nausceous pain,
  Return unto their wanton Sin again.
  So Poets be they plague'd with naughty Verse,
  They never value good nor bad success:
  Or be they trebly damn'd, they will prefer
  Their next vile scribling to the _Theater_.
  Well might the Audience, with their hisses, damn
  The Bawdy Sot that late wrote _Limberham_:
  But yet you see, the Stage he will command,
  And hold the Laurel in's polluted Hand.
  In slothful ease, a while I took delight,
  And thought all Poets mad that us'd to write.
  So long I kept from Verse, I thought I'd lost
  My Versing Vein, and of my Fortune boast:
  But having tryal made, I quickly found
  My store renew'd, in numbers strong and sound
  With ease my happy fancies come and go,
  As Rivulets do from _Parnassus_ flow.
  Then finding that in vain I long had try'd
  The _Poet_ from the _Tutchin_ to divide;
  I charming _Poesie_ make my delight,
  And propagate the humor still to Write.
    Our new Divines do alter not one jot,
  From what their Tribe in older times have wrot;
  Except, like _Parker_, to have something new,
  They broach new Doctrines, either false or true:
  _A Publick Conscience_, which for nought does pass,
  But proves the Writer is a publick Ass;
  Who the new Philosophick world have told,
  Have for a new but varnish'd o're the old.
  But all Poetick Phancy can't draw dry,
  Th' unfathom'd Wells of deepest Poesie.
  The _Bifront Hill_ is always stout and strong;
  The _Muses_ still are handsome, always young.
  The clearest streams of Chrystal _Helicon_
  Do o're the Pebles in sweet Rhymings run.
  Why then should you, _Dear Sir_, (that have pretence
  To the extreamest bounds of Wit and Sense)
  Lay by your Quills and hold your Tune-ful Tongue,
  While all the witty want your pleasing Song?
  Once more renew those Lays that gave delight,
  That chear the Day, and glad the gloomy Night:
  May with your dying breath your Verses end;
  Thus prays your constant, and

                                               _Your truest Friend_,
                                                             _J. T._


       *       *       *       *       *




THE

EARTH-QUAKE

OF

JAMAICA,

Describ'd in a

Pindarick Poem.


By Mr. TUTCHIN.


  _----namq; Diespiter
  Igni corusco nubila dividens
    Plerumq; per purum tonantes
      Egit Equos volucremq; currum,
  Quo bruta Tellus & vaga flumina,
  Quo Styx, & invisi horrida Taenari
      Sedes, Atlanteusq; finis
        Concutitur. Valet ima summis
  Mutare,----_

                  Horat. lib. I. Ode 34.


_LONDON_,

Printed, and are to be sold by _R. Baldwin_, near the

_Oxford-Arms_ in _Warwick-lane_, 1692.




THE

Earthquake of Jamaica

Describ'd in a POEM.


I.

    Well may our Lives bear an uncertain date;
      Disturb'd with Maladies within,
    Without by cross Events of Fate,
    The worst of Plagues on Mortals wait,
      Pride, Ignorance and Sin.
    If our ancient Mother Earth,
    Who gave us all untimely Birth,
    Such strong Hysterick Passion feels;
    If Orbs are from their Axles torn,
    And Mountains into Valleys worn,
      All in a moments space,
        Can humane Race
    Stand on their Legs when Nature Reels?
      Unhappy Man! in all things cross'd,
      On every giddy Wave of Fortune toss'd;
        The only thing that aims at Sway,
    And yet capricious Fate must still Obey;
      Travels for Wealth to Foreign Lands,
    O're scorching Mountains, and o're desart Sands,
      Laden with Gold, when homeward bound,
  Is in one vast impetuous Billow drown'd:
        Or if he reaches to the Shoar,
        And there unlades his Oar,
  Builds Towns and Houses which may last and stand,
      Thinking no Wealth so sure as firm Land;
      Yet Fate the Animal does still pursue;
  This slides from underneath his Feet, and leaves him too.


II.

    Environ'd with Ten Thousand Fears we live,
    For Fate do's seldom a just warning give;
  Quicker than Thought its dire Resolves are made,
      And swift as Lightning flies,
      Around the vast extended Skies:
  All things are by its Bolts in vast Confusion laid.
    Sometimes a Flaming Comet does appear,
    Whose very Visage does pronounce,
    Decay of Kingdoms, and the Fall of Crowns,
    Intestine War, or Pestilential Year;
      Sometimes a Hurricane of Fate,
      Does on some great Mans Exit wait,
      A murder'd _Cornish_, or some _Hercules_,
      When from their Trunks Almighty _Jove_,
  Who breaks with Thunder weighty Clouds above,
        To Honour these
      Large Pines and Oaks does Lop,
  And in a Whirlwind lays 'em upon _Oeta_'s Top.
    E're this vast Orb shall unto Chaos turn,
    And with Consuming Flames shall burn,
    An Angel Trumpeter shall come,
    Whose Noise shall shake the Massie Ground,
    In one short moment shall express,
    His Notes to the whole Universe;
    The very Dead shall hear his Sound,
      And from their Graves repair,
    To the impartial Bar,
  Those that have been in the deep Ocean drown'd,
  Shall at his Call come to receive their Doom.


III.

      But here, alas! no Omens fly,
      No secret Whisper of their Destiny
      Was heard; none cou'd divine
      When Fate wou'd spring the Mine:
      Safe and secure the Mortals go,
      Not dreaming of a Hell below;
  In the dark Caverns of the gloomy Earth,
  Where suffocating Sulphur has its Birth,
    And sparkling Nitre's made,
      Where _Vulcan_ and his _Cyclops_ prove;
      The Thunderbolts they make for _Jove_;
      Here _AEolus_ his Winds has laid,
    Here is his Windy Palace, here 'tis said
    His Race of little puffing Gods are bred,
    Which serve for Bellows to blow up the Flame,
    The dire ingredients are in order plac'd,
    Which must anon lay Towns and Cities waste.
  Strait the black Engineer of Heaven came,
      His Match a Sun-beam was,
  He swift as Time unto the Train did pass,
  It soon took Fire; The Fire and Winds contend,
  But both concur the Vaulted Earth to rend;
  It upwards rose, and then it downwards fell,
      Aiming at Heaven, it sunk to Hell:
      The Neighb'ring Seas now own no more,
      The sturdy Bulwarks of the Shoar,
      The gaping Earth and greedy Sea,
      Are both contending for the Prey;
      Those whom the rav'nous Earth had ta'ne,
      Into her Bowels back again
  Are wash't from thence by the insulting Main.


IV.

  The Old and Young receive alike their Doom,
      The Cowards and the Brave,
      Are buried in one Grave;
  For Fate allows 'em all one Common Tomb.
      The Aged and the Wise
  Lose all their Reason in the great Surprise.
      They know not where to go,
      And yet they dare not stay,
      There's Fire and Smoak below,
  And the Earth gaping to receive the Prey:
      If to the Houses Top they Crawl,
  These tumble too, and downwards fall:
      And if they fly into the Street,
      There grizly Death they meet;
      All in a hurry dye away,
      The wicked had not time to pray.
  The Soldier once cou'd teach grim Death to kill,
      In vain is all his Skill,
      In vain he brandisheth his Steel:
      No more the Art of War must teach,
  But lyes Fates Trophy underneath the Breach:
      The good Companions now no more Carouse,
      They share the Fate of the declining House,
      Healths to their Friends their Bumpers Crown'd:
      But while they put the Glasses round,
      Death steps between the Cup and lip,
  Nor would it let 'em take one parting Sip.


V.

  The Mine is sprung, and a large Breach is made,
  Whereat strong Troops of Warring Seas invade;
        These overflow;
    Where Houses stood and Grass did grow,
        All sorts of Fish resort:
  They had Dominions large enough before,
      But now unbounded by the Shoar,
      They o're the Tops of Houses sport.
  The Watry Fry their Legions do extend,
    And for the new slain Prey contend;
    Within the Houses now they roam,
  Into their Foe, the very Kitchen, come.
    One does the Chimney-hearth assail,
  Another slaps the Kettle with his slimy Tail.
      No Image there of Death is seen,
      No Cook-maid does obstruct their Sway,
      They have entirely got the day.
      Those who have once devour'd been
      By Mankind, now on Man do Feed:
      Thus Fate decides, and steps between,
  And sometimes gives the Slave the Victors meed.
  The Beauteous Virgins whom the Gods might love,
      Cou'd not the Curse of Heav'n remove;
      Their goodness might for Crimes Atone,
        Inexorable Death spares none.
  Their tender Flesh lately so plump and good,
  Is now made Fishes and Sea-monsters Food;
        In vain they cry,
  Heav'n is grown Deaf, and no Petition hears,
  Their Sighs are answer'd like their Lovers Pray'rs,
        They in the Universal Ruin lye.


VI.

  Nor is inexorable Fate content
  To ruine one poor Town alone;
  More Mischief by the Blow is done:
  Death's on a farther Message sent.
  When Fate a Garrison does Sack,
  The very Suburbs do partake
      Of Martial Law,
      Its Forces draw
  To every Mountain, Field and Wood,
  They Ravage all the Neighbourhood.
  Worse than the weak Assaults of Steel,
  Its Instruments of Death all places feel.
  They undiscover'd, like fell Poison kill,
      Its Warriours fierce,
  The Earth, the Air, and Men do pierce;
  And mounted, fight upon the winged Winds.
  Here a great Mountain in a Valley's thrown,
  And there a Valley to a Mountain grown.
  The very Breath of an incensed God,
  Makes even proud _Olympus_ Nod.
  Chang'd is the Beauty of the fruitful Isle,
  And its fair Woods lopp'd for its Funeral Pile.
  The moving Earth forms it self in Waves,
  And Curls its Surface like the Rowling Seas;
  Whilst Man (that little thing) so vainly Raves,
  Nothing but Heaven can its own Wrath appease.


VII.

  But Fate at length thought fit to leave its Toil,
  And greedy Death was glutted with the Spoil.
  As weary Soldiers having try'd their Steel,
  Half drown'd with Blood, do then desist to kill.
      More Ruin wou'd a second Deluge make,
      Blot out the Name of the unhappy Isle.
  It fares with her as when in Martial Field,
  Resolv'd and Brave, and loath to yield,
      Two num'rous Armies do contend,
  And with repeated Shouts the Air do Rend.
  Whilst the affrighted Earth does shake,
  Some large Battalions are entirely lost,
  And Warring Squadrons from the mighty Host:
        Here by a Shot does fall
        Some Potent General;
          And near to him,
      Another loses but a Limb.
  Part of the Island was a Prey to Fate,
  And all the rest do's but prolong its date,
        'Till injur'd Heav'n finds,
  Its Bolts a Terror strike on humane Minds;
  Sure we may hope the Sinners there Repent,
  Since it has made their lewdest Priest Relent.


FINIS.


       *       *       *       *       *




A

Pindarick ODE,

IN THE

PRAISE

OF

Folly and Knavery.


By Mr. _TUTCHIN_.


_LONDON_,

Printed and Sold by _E. W._ near _Stationers-Hall_.

1696. Price 6_d._




A

Pindarick ODE

In the Praise of

Folly and Knavery.


I.

    My humble Muse no Hero Sings,
    Nor Acts, nor Funerals of Kings:
    The great _Maria_ now no more,
    In Sable Lines she does deplore;
    Of mighty _William_'s growing fame,
    At present must forget the name,
  Yet she affects something that is sublime,
    And would in _Dytherambick_ strain              }
    Attempt to rise, and now disdain                }
    The Shrubs and Furzes of the Plain:             }
  He that's afraid to fall, shou'd ne'r pretend to climb.


II.

    Let others boast of potent Wit,
    And Summon in the awful _Nine_,
    With all their Aids of Fancy, Humor, Sence,
    Fair polish'd Learning, Eloquence,
    And call their gawdy works Divine:
    Hov'ring above my Head let _dullness_ sit,
    The only God that's worshipp'd by the Age;
    Immortal _Nonsence_ guide my Pen,
    The Fames of _Shakespear_ and of _Ben_,
    Must warp, before my nobler fire
    To their regardless Tombs retire.
    Thus Arm'd, with Nonsence, I'll engage
      Both _Universities_,
    And their Pedantick fooleries,
    Show the misguided World the Cheat,
  And let _Man_ know that _Nonsence_ makes him Great.


III.

    Almighty _Folly_! How shall I thy praise
    To Human Understandings raise?
        What shall I do
        Thy worth to shew?
    The Glorious Sun, that rules the Day,
    Gives vital warmth and life by ev'ry Ray.
      His Blessings he in common grants,
      To Hemlock as to nobler Plants;
      Thy Virtue thou dost circumscribe,
        And dost dispence
        Thy influence,
      But to the Darlings of thy Tribe,
        Thou Wealth and Honour dost bestow
        On thy triumphant _Fools_,
      Whilst abject Sence do's barefoot go;
  So weak's the Learning of the noisie Schools.


IV.

  Tell me, ye Learned Sots! who spend your time
      In reading Books,
    With thoughtful Heads and meagre Looks,
      To Learnings Pinacle, who climb
      Through the wild Briers of _Philosophy_,
      The Thorns of harsh _Philology_,
    The dirty Road where _Aristotle_ went
      Encumber'd with a thousand _terms_
        Uncouth, Unintelligible,
        Not by any fancy fathomable,
      Bringing distracted Minds to harms;
    The rankest _Hellebore_ cannot prevent.
      Tell me, I say, ye Learn'd Sots!
    Did e'r the old or new Philosophy,
    Make a Man splendid live, or wealthy die?
  Tho' you may think your Notions truer,
      They'll ne'r advance your Lotts,
  To the Estate of Wise Sir _Jonathan_ the Brewer.


V.

      A _Fool_! Heav'ns bless the charming Name,
        So much admir'd in Ages past,
      As long as this, and all the World shall last,
    Shall be the Subject of Triumphing Fame.
  A _Fool_! what mighty wonders has he wrought?
        What mighty Actions done?
        Obey'd by all, controul'd by none;
  Even _Love_ its self is to its Footstool brought.
    For t'other day, I met amidst the Throng
    A Lady wealthy, beautiful and young;
    _Madam_, said I, I wish you double Joy,
    Of a ripe Husband and a budding Boy,
    And with my self a sight of him you Wed,        }
    The happy Part'ner of your Bridal Bed.          }
    Sir, she reply'd, I him in Wedlock had;         }
    Pointing unto an Image by her side,
    An odder Figure no Man e'r espy'd,
    Long was his Chin, and carotty his Beard,
    His Eyes sunk in, and high his Nose was rear'd,
    A nauseous ugliness possess'd the Tool,
    And scarce had Wit enough to be a Fool:
    Bless me (thought I) if Fools such fortune get,
    Then who (the Devil) wou'd be plagu'd with wit.


VI.

  View but the Realms of _Nonsence_, see the State,
      The Pageant pomp attends the show,
  When the great God of _Dullness_ does in triumph go,
      How splendid and how great
    His num'rous Train of Blockheads do appear?
      Almighty _Jove_,
      That governs all above,
  Is but a puny to this Mighty God,
    The blustring God of War,
    Who with one Nod
  Makes the Earth tremble from afar,
  Guarded with puissant Champions stern and bold
  That breath Destruction, talk of bloody Jars,
  Have nought but ragged Cloaths to keep off cold,
  And tatter'd Ensigns relicks of the Wars.
  The God of _Dullness_ mounted on his Throne
      Beneath a Canopy
      Of fix'd stupidity,
  Prostrate his num'rous Subjects tumble down,
      They pay obeisance to their gloomy God,
      And at his Nod
        They act, they move,
        They hate, they love,
      They bless, they curse, they swear,
      For they his Creatures are,
    He amply does his Benefits afford,
  For each confirmed Blockhead is a Lord.


VII.

    Then talk no more of Parts and Sence,
    For Riches ne'r attend the Wise,
    Have you to dullness no pretence,
    You shall to Grandeur never rise;
    He with a gloomy mien Divinely dull,
  Whose very aspect tells the World he is a Fool,
      Whose thicker Skull
    Is proof against each storm of Fate,
  Is Born for Glory, and he shall be Great.
      Who 'ere wou'd rise,
      Or great Preferment get,
      Must nere pretend to Wit,
    Or be that monstrous, ill shap'd Man call'd Wise;
      He must not boast
    Of Learning's Value, or its cost;
    But, if he wou'd Preferment have,
  He must be much a _Fool_, or much a _Knave_.


VIII.

    A _Knave_! the finer Creature far,
    Tho' of the foolish Race of _Issachar_.
  As the unwieldy _Bear_ among her young
      Deform'd, and shapeless Cubs,
      Finds one more strong,
      Active and sprightly than the rest:
      Him she transforms and rubs,
      And licks into a better shape the Beast.
  Thus do's the gloomy God of Folly do,
      With the insipid Race:
    He do's his num'rous Offspring call,            }
    He handles one and feels his Skull;             }
    If it be thick, he says, Be thou a Fool.        }
    Another, if about his Face
    He spies a roguish Mein, a cunning Look;
    If there appears
  The hopes of Falshood in his tender Years,
      Good signs of Perjury
      And hardn'd Villany;
  This for his secret Councils he do's save,
  Lays on his Paw, and bids him, Be a _Knave_.


IX.

  A _Knave_! the elder brother to the _Fool_:
    His vast Dominions are no less
    Than the whole Universe:
    The Lands are bounded by the Sea:
    The Seas the sturdy Rocks obey:
  The Storms do know the Limits of their Rule:
    Neither the Land nor Sea this Hero bind,
      But unconfin'd
      O're both he finds a way,
    O're both he bears Imperial sway:
      His gay Attendants are the Cheat,
      That ruines Kingdoms to be Great.
      The fawning, flattring Fop, who creeps
      Just like a Spaniel at your Heels,
      To some illustrious Knave, who sweeps
      Away a Kingdoms Wealth at once,
      And with the Publick Coin his Treasure fills;
  For Kingdoms work t'enrich the _Knave_ and _Dunce_.


X.

    Honesty's a Garb we're mock'd in,
      Only wore by _Jews_ and _Turks_.
    Merit is a Popish Doctrine;
      Men have no regard to Works.
  Substantial Knavery is a Vertue will
        Your Coffers fill;
        And Altars raise,
        Unto your Praise.
  Be but a Knave, you'll keep the World in awe,
        And fear no Law;
        For no Transgression is,
        Where all Men do amiss.
  But here methinks an antiquated _Hero_ starts,
        Surpris'd at my Discourse;
        He starts and boggles like a Horse,
        And damns our modern Knavish Arts.


XI.

    Vain _Youth_, he says misguided by a _Knave_,
    By some dull Blockhead tempted from thy rest;
    The worldly Grandeur thou dost vainly crave,
    Is nought but Noise and Foolishness at best.
        What Man wou'd quit his Sense,
  Or, the wise Dictates of right Reason's Rule,
        In vain pretence
    To be a rich, a gawdy _Fool_?
  Or, quit his Honesty, so much despis'd,
        And basely condescend,
        To every little Knavish End;
        Run headlong into every Cheat,
  Attempt each Villany to make him Great.
  Believe me Youth, (be better now advis'd)
      Thy early Vertues will thy Temples spread,    }
        With lasting Lawrels 'round thy Head.       }
      Shall flourish when the Wearers dead.         }
  I who have always honest been, though poor,
  In whom the utmost signs of Age appears,
  And sink beneath the Burthen of my Years,
          Cou'd never yet adore
  A Knave or Blockhead, were he ne'er so Great;
  Or, be like to them, to purchase an Estate.


XII.

  Poor thredbare _Vertue_ ne'er admir'd in Court,
  But seeks its Refuge in an honest Mind,
      There it securely dwells,
      Like _Anchorets_ in Cells,
  Where no Ambition nor wild Lust resorts:
  To love our Country is indeed our Pride;
  We glory in an honest Action done;
      When the Reward is laid aside
      The Glory and the Action is our own,
        We seldom find
      The Good, the Just, the Brave,
      Have their Reward
      From Princes they did save
  From dire Destruction, or a poisoning Foe;
        They let them go
      Contemn'd, disdain'd; and most regard
      Those Villians sought their overthrow.
      As if the Just, the Brave, the Good,
      Were but a _Bridge_ of Wood
    To waft to great Preferments o'er,
      Those, who were our foes before,
  And then be tumbl'd down like useless Logs,
      While those, who just pass'd o'er,
    And the obliging Bridge shou'd thank,
    Do scornfully stand grinning on the Bank,
      To see the venerable Ruines float
      Adrift upon the Stream,
        Contemn'd by them,
  Who give the Childrens Bread unto the Dogs;
      _In vain_, says he, _we've fought_----
        But at this Word
  He fiercely look'd, and then he grasp'd his Sword.


XIII.

  Pity it is, he said, this Sword of mine,
    Of late so gloriously did shine,
    In Foreign Fields 'midst Show'rs of Blood,
    With which I've cut my Passage through
    The Snowy _Alps_ and _Pyrenean_ Hills,
  Where Death the Land with vast Destruction fills,
      'Mongst Warriors, who
  Venture their Lives for their dear Countries good,
      Should now be laid aside
    'Mongst Rubbish Iron old,
    From reaking Blood scarce cold;
    Or else converted to a _Knife_,
    For some damn'd Villain first to cut
    A Princes Bread, and next his Throat:
  In vain we venture to preserve his Life,
    In vain to Foreign Fields we come,
    In vain to Foreign Force alli'd,
    If a nefarious Brood at Home
      Embarrass his Affairs,
      Prolong the Wars,
    Only t' enrich his Enemies,
  Weaken his Government, and his Allies.


XIV.

  'Tis strange a Prince, shou'd ere a _Fool_ preferr,
        To be an Officer!
  A _Knave_ may serve an unjust Government,
        But ne'er prevent
    Those Mischiefs may attend the just:
        For who would trust
    A Villain may be bought by Gold,
  Unless design'd on purpose to be sold?
  If Princes wou'd use _Fools_ as Shop-men do
        Their Signs or Boards of show,
    To tell the passers by there's better stuff
    Within, 'tis rational enough.
      But to set Centry at the Door,                }
      A Patriot or a Senator,                       }
      Philosopher or Orator,                        }
    To tell the Passers by their is within,
      A _Merry Andrew_ to be seen,
      Is very much ridiculous,
    Tho' to our grief we often find it thus.
        Thus Princes Bastardize
      Their Countries Sons Legitimate,
      And give the fair Estate
      Unto a Spurious Brood,
    That ne'er did good;
  The honest Work, the _Knave_ enjoys the Prize.


XV.

      A Government adorn'd with Fools,
      Empty Trifles, useless Tools,
  Looks like a Toy-Shop gloriously bedeckt
      With gawdy gewgaws, Childrens play things,
      Painted Babies, Tinsel Creatures,
      Wooden Folk, with Human features,
    Made just for show, and no advantage brings,
      And prove of no effect.
      It dwindles to a _Raree-Show_,
      In which no Man must act a Part
      But the dull _Blockhead_ and the _Beau_,
      The huffing _Fop_ without a Heart;
    What Wise Man would a Journey take
    On a dull Steed has broke his Back?
      Or have recourse
      Unto a _Hobby-Horse_?
    Those act by such wise Rules,
  Who prop Just Princes by a Tyrant's Tools.


XVI.

    Surely the Genius of a fruitful Isle
        Is either lost,
        Or what is worst,
    Murder'd by those who shou'd support her Fame,
        Add Glory to her Name;
    The Heavens themselves have cast an angry look,
        Seldom the Glorious Sun does shine
        But Veils its face Divine.
    _Jove_ does misguide the Seasons every Year;
        Nought can we read in Nature's Book,
    To reap her Fruits scarce worth our while.
          Our Mother Earth,
        From whose unhappy Womb,
          We Mortals come,
        Ne'er shows a Glorious Birth,
    But proves abortive as our Actions are;
        Nought have we left but hope,
      Just like the Blind at Noon we grope:
  The number of our Sins we must fulfil,
  And if we're sav'd, it is against our will.


_FINIS._


       *       *       *       *       *




THE

FOREIGNERS.

A

POEM.


PART I.


_LONDON_,

Printed for _A. Baldwin_ in _Warwicklane_,

MDCC.




The Foreigners.


  Long time had _Israel_ been disus'd from Rest,
  Long had they been by Tyrants sore opprest;
  Kings of all sorts they ignorantly crav'd,
  And grew more stupid as they were enslav'd;
  Yet want of Grace they impiously disown'd,
  And still like Slaves beneath the Burden groan'd:
  With languid Eyes their Race of Kings they view,
  The Bad too many, and the Good too few;
  Some rob'd their Houses, and destroy'd their Lives,
  Ravish'd their Daughters, and debauch'd their Wives;
  Prophan'd the Altars with polluted Loves,
  And worship'd Idols in the Woods and Groves.

    To Foreign Nations next they have recourse;
  Striving to mend, they made their State much worse.
  They first from _Hebron_ all their Plagues did bring,
  Cramm'd in the Single Person of a King;
  From whose base Loins ten thousand Evils flow,
  Which by Succession they must undergo.
  Yet sense of Native Freedom still remains,
  They fret and grumble underneath their Chains;
  Incens'd, enrag'd, their Passion do's arise,
  Till at his Palace-Gate their Monarch dies.
  This Glorious Feat was by the Fathers done,
  Whose Children next depos'd his Tyrant Son,
  Made him, like _Cain_, a murd'rous Wanderer,
  Both of his Crimes, and of his Fortunes share.

    But still resolv'd to split on Foreign Shelves,
  Rather than venture once to trust Themselves,
  To Foreign Courts and Councils do resort,
  To find a King their Freedoms to support:
  Of one for mighty Actions fam'd they're told,
  Profoundly wise, and desperately bold,
  Skilful in War, Successful still in Fight,
  Had vanquish'd Hosts, and Armies put to flight;
  And when the Storms of War and Battels cease,
  Knew well to steer the Ship of State in Peace.
  Him they approve, approaching to their sight;
  Lov'd by the Gods, of Mankind the Delight.
  The numerous Tribes resort to see him land,
  Cover the Beach, and blacken all the Strand;
  With loud Huzza's they welcome him on shore,
  And for their Blessing do the Gods implore.

    The Sanhedrim conven'd, at length debate
  The sad Condition of their drooping State,
  And Sinking Church, just ready now to drown;
  And with one Shout they do the Hero crown.

    Ah Happy _Israel_! had there never come
  Into his Councils crafty Knaves at home,
  In combination with a Foreign Brood,
  Sworn Foes to _Israel_'s Rights and _Israel_'s Good;
  Who impiously foment Intestine Jars,
  Exhaust our Treasure, and prolong our Wars;
  Make _Israel_'s People to themselves a prey,
  Mislead their King, and steal his Heart away:
  United Intrests thus they do divide,
  The State declines by Avarice and Pride;
  Like Beasts of Prey they ravage all the Land,
  Acquire Preferments, and usurp Command:
  The Foreign Inmates the Housekeepers spoil,
  And drain the Moisture of our fruitful Soil.
  If to our Monarch there are Honours due,
  Yet what with _Gibeonites_ have we to do?
  When Foreign States employ 'em for their Food,
  To draw their Water, and to hew their Wood.
  What Mushroom Honours dos our Soil afford!
  One day a Begger, and the next a Lord.
  What dastard Souls do _Jewish_ Nobles wear!
  The Commons such Affronts would never bear.
  Let no Historian the sad Stories tell
  Of thy base Sons, Oh servile _Israel_!
  But thou, my Muse, more generous and brave,
  Shalt their black Crimes from dark oblivion save;
  To future Ages shalt their Sins disclose,
  And brand with Infamy thy Nation's Foes.

    A Country lies, due East from _Judah_'s Shoar,
  Where stormy Winds and noisy Billows roar;
  A Land much differing from all other Soils,
  Forc'd from the Sea, and buttress'd up with Piles.
  No marble Quarrys bind the spungy Ground,
  But Loads of Sand and Cockle-shells are found:
  Its Natives void of Honesty and Grace,
  A Boorish, rude, and an inhumane Race;
  From Nature's Excrement their Life is drawn,
  Are born in Bogs, and nourish'd up from Spawn.
  Their hard-smoak'd Beef is their continual Meat,
  Which they with Rusk, their luscious Manna, eat;
  Such Food with their chill stomachs best agrees,
  They sing _Hosannah_ to a Mare's-milk Cheese.
  To supplicate no God, their Lips will move,
  Who speaks in Thunder like Almighty _Jove_,
  But watry Deities they do invoke,
  Who from the Marshes most Divinely croak.
  Their Land, as if asham'd their Crimes to see,
  Dives down beneath the surface of the Sea.
  _Neptune_, the God who do's the Seas command,
  Ne'er stands on Tip-toe to descry their Land;
  But seated on a Billow of the Sea,
  With Ease their humble Marshes do's survey.
  These are the Vermin do our State molest;
  Eclipse our Glory, and disturb our Rest.

    _BENTIR_ in the Inglorious Roll the first,
  _Bentir_ to this and future Ages curst,
  Of mean Descent, yet insolently proud,
  Shun'd by the Great, and hated by the Crowd;
  Who neither Blood nor Parentage can boast,
  And what he got the _Jewish_ Nation lost:
  By lavish Grants whole Provinces he gains,
  Made forfeit by the _Jewish_ Peoples Pains;
  Till angry Sanhedrims such Grants resume,
  And from the Peacock take each borrow'd Plume.
  Why should the _Gibeonites_ our Land engross,
  And aggrandize their Fortunes with our loss?
  Let them in foreign States proudly command,
  They have no Portion in the Promis'd Land,
  Which immemorially has been decreed
  To be the Birth-right of the _Jewish_ Seed.
  How ill do's _Bentir_ in the Head appear          }
  Of Warriours, who do _Jewish_ Ensigns bear?       }
  By such we're grown e'en Scandalous in War.       }
  Our Fathers Trophies wore, and oft could tell
  How by their Swords the mighty Thousands fell;
  What mighty Deeds our Grandfathers had done,
  What Battels fought, what Wreaths of Honour won:
  Thro the extended Orb they purchas'd Fame,
  The Nations trembling at their Awful Name:
  Such wondrous Heroes our Fore-fathers were,
  When we, base Souls! but Pigmies are in War:
  By Foreign Chieftains we improve in Skill;
  We learn how to intrench, not how to kill:
  For all our Charge are good Proficients made
  In using both the Pickax and the Spade.
  But in what Field have we a Conquest wrought?
  In Ten Years War what Battel have we fought?

    If we a Foreign Slave may use in War,
  Yet why in Council should that Slave appear?
  If we with _Jewish_ Treasure make him great,
  Must it be done to undermine the State?
  Where are the Antient Sages of Renown?            }
  No _Magi_ left, fit to advise the Crown?          }
  Must we by Foreign Councils be undone?            }
  Unhappy _Israel_, who such Measures takes,
  And seeks for Statesmen in the Bogs and Lakes;
  Who speak the Language of most abject Slaves,
  Under the Conduct of our _Jewish_ Knaves.
  Our _Hebrew_'s murder'd in their hoarser Throats;
  How ill their Tongues agree with _Jewish Notes_!
  Their untun'd Prattle do's our Sense confound,
  Which in our Princely Palaces do's sound;
  The self-same Language the old Serpent spoke,
  When misbelieving _Eve_ the Apple took:
  Of our first Mother why are we asham'd,
  When by the self-same Rhetorick we are damn'd?

    But _Bentir_, not Content with such Command,
  To canton out the _Jewish_ Nation's Land;
  He do's extend to Other Coasts his Pride,
  And other Kingdoms into Parts divide:
  Unhappy _Hiram_! dismal is thy Song;
  Tho born to Empire, thou art ever young!
  Ever in Nonage, canst no Right transfer:
  But who made _Bentir_ thy Executor?
  What mighty Power do's _Israel_'s Land afford?    }
  What Power has made the famous _Bentir_ Lord?     }
  The Peoples Voice, and _Sanhedrim_'s Accord.      }
  Are not the Rights of People still the same?
  Did they e'er differ in or Place or Name?
  Have not Mankind on equal Terms still stood,
  Without Distinction, since the mighty Flood?
  And have not _Hiram_'s Subjects a free Choice
  To chuse a King by their united Voice?
  If _Israel_'s People cou'd a Monarch chuse,
  A living King at the same time refuse;
  That _Hiram_'s People, shall it e'er be said,
  Have not the Right of Choice when he is dead?
  When no Successor to the Crown's in sight,
  The Crown is certainly the Peoples Right.
  If Kings are made the People to enthral,
  We had much better have no King at all:
  But Kings, appointed for the Common Good,
  Always as Guardians to their People stood.
  And Heaven allows the People sure a Power
  To chuse such Kings as shall not them devour:
  They know full well what best will serve themselves,
  How to avoid the dang'rous Rocks and Shelves.

    Unthinking _Israel_! Ah henceforth beware
  How you entrust this faithless Wanderer!
  He who another Kingdom can divide,                }
  May set your Constitution soon aside,             }
  And o'er your Liberties in Triumph ride.          }
  Support your Rightful Monarch and his Crown,
  But pull this proud, this croaking Mortal down.

    Proceed, my Muse; the Story next relate
  Of _Keppech_ the Imperious Chit of State,
  Mounted to Grandeur by the usual Course
  Of Whoring, Pimping, or a Crime that's worse;
  Of Foreign Birth, and undescended too,
  Yet he, like _Bentir_, mighty Feats can do.
  He robs our Treasure, to augment his State,
  And _Jewish_ Nobles on his Fortunes wait:
  Our ravish'd Honours on his Shoulder wears,
  And Titles from our Antient Rolls he tears.
  Was e'er a prudent People thus befool'd,
  By upstart Foreigners thus basely gull'd?
  Ye _Jewish_ Nobles, boast no more your Race,
  Or sacred Badges did your Fathers grace!
  In vain is Blood, or Parentages, when
  Ribbons and Garters can ennoble Men.
  To Chivalry you need have no recourse,
  The gawdy Trappings make the Ass a Horse.
  No more, no more your Antient Honours own,
  By slavish _Gibeonites_ you are outdone:
  Or else your Antient Courage reassume,
  And to assert your Honours once presume;
  From off their Heads your ravish'd Lawrels tear,
  And let them know what _Jewish_ Nobles are.


_THE END._


       *       *       *       *       *




THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

WILLIAM ANDREWS CLARK MEMORIAL LIBRARY

University of California, Los Angeles


PUBLICATIONS IN PRINT


1948-1949

     16. Nevil Payne, _Fatal Jealousy_ (1673).

     17. Nicholas Rowe, _Some Account of the Life of Mr. William
     Shakespeare_ (1709).

     18. "Of Genius," in _The Occasional Paper_, Vol. III, No. 10
     (1719); and Aaron Hill's Preface to _The Creation_ (1720).


1949-1950

     22. Samuel Johnson, _The Vanity of Human Wishes_ (1749) and two
     _Rambler_ papers (1750).

     23. John Dryden, _His Majesties Declaration Defended_ (1681).


1950-1951

     26. Charles Macklin, _The Man of the World_ (1792).


1951-52

     31. Thomas Gray, _An Elegy Wrote in a Country Churchyard_ (1751);
     and _The Eton College Manuscript_.


1952-1953

     41. Bernard Mandeville, _A Letter to Dion_ (1732).


1954-1955

     49. Two St. Cecilia's Day Sermons (1696, 1697).

     52. Pappity Stampoy, _A Collection of Scotch Proverbs_ (1663).


1958-1959

     75. John Joyne, _A Journal_ (1679).

     76. Andre Dacier, _Preface to Aristotle's Art of Poetry_ (1705).


1959-1960

     80. [P. Whalley], _An Essay on the Manner of Writing History_
     (1746).

     83. _Sawney and Colley_ (1742) and other Pope Pamphlets.

     84. Richard Savage, _An Author to be lett_ (1729).


1960-1961

     85-6. _Essays on the Theatre from Eighteenth-Century Periodicals._

     90. Henry Needier, _Works_ (1728).


1961-1962

     93. John Norris, _Cursory Reflections Upon a Book Call'd, An Essay
     Concerning Human Understanding_ (1690).

     94. An. Collins, _Divine Songs and Meditacions_ (1653).

     95. _An Essay on the New Species of Writing Founded by Mr.
     Fielding_ (1751).

     96. _Hanoverian Ballads._


1962-1963

     97. Myles Davies, Selections from _Athenae Britannicae_
     (1716-1719).

     98. _Select Hymns Taken Out of Mr. Herbert's Temple_ (1697).

     99. Thomas Augustine Arne, _Artaxerxes_ (1761).

     100. Simon Patrick, _A Brief Account of the New Sect of Latitude
     Men_ (1662).

     101-2. Richard Hurd, _Letters on Chivalry and Romance_ (1762).


1963-1964

     103. Samuel Richardson, _Clarissa_: Preface, Hints of Prefaces,
     and Postscript.

     104. Thomas D'Urfey, _Wonders in the Sun, or, the Kingdom of the
     Birds_ (1706).

     105. Bernard Mandeville, _An Enquiry into the Causes of the
     Frequent Executions at Tyburn_ (1725).

     106. Daniel Defoe, _A Brief History of the Poor Palatine Refugees_
     (1709).

     107-8. John Oldmixon, _An Essay on Criticism_ (1728).




William Andrews Clark Memorial Library: University of California,
Los Angeles

THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY


GENERAL EDITORS

  EARL MINER
    University of California, Los Angeles

  MAXIMILLIAN E. NOVAK
    University of California, Los Angeles

  LAWRENCE CLARK POWELL
    Wm. Andrews Clark Memorial Library

  _Corresponding Secretary:_
    Mrs. Edna C. Davis, Wm. Andrews Clark Memorial Library


The Society's purpose is to publish reprints (usually facsimile
reproductions) of rare seventeenth and eighteenth century works. All
income of the Society is devoted to defraying costs of publication and
mailing.

Correspondence concerning subscriptions in the United States and Canada
should be addressed to the William Andrews Clark Memorial Library, 2205
West Adams Boulevard, Los Angeles, California. Correspondence concerning
editorial matters may be addressed to any of the general editors. The
membership fee is $5.00 a year for subscribers in the United States and
Canada and 30/- for subscribers in Great Britain and Europe. British and
European subscribers should address B. H. Blackwell, Broad Street,
Oxford, England. Copies of back issues in print may be obtained from the
Corresponding Secretary.


PUBLICATIONS FOR 1964-1965

  JOHN TUTCHIN, _Selected Poems_ (1685-1700). Introduction by Spiro
    Peterson.

  SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE, _An Essay upon the Original and Nature of
    Government_ (1680). Introduction by Robert C. Steensma.

  T. R., _An Essay Concerning Critical and Curious Learning_ (1698).
    Introduction by Curt A. Zimansky.

  ANONYMOUS, _Political Justice. A Poem_ (1736). Introduction by
    Burton R. Pollin and John W. Wilkes.

  _Two Poems Against Pope_: LEONARD WELSTED, _One Epistle to Mr. A.
    Pope_ (1730); ANONYMOUS, _The Blatant Beast_ (1740). Introduction
    by Joseph V. Guerinot.

  ROBERT DODSLEY, _An Essay on Fable_ (1764). Introduction by Jeanne
    K. Welcher and Richard Dircks.


THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

William Andrews Clark Memorial Library

2905 WEST ADAMS BOULEVARD, LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA  90018

Make check or money order payable to THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Selected Poems, by John Tutchin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTED POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 38407.txt or 38407.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/4/0/38407/

Produced by David Starner, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
