The Project Gutenberg EBook of Geographic Variation in the North American
Cyprinid Fish, Hybopsis gracilis, by Leonard J. Olund and Frank B. Cross

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Geographic Variation in the North American Cyprinid Fish, Hybopsis gracilis

Author: Leonard J. Olund
        Frank B. Cross

Release Date: December 27, 2011 [EBook #38425]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Erica
Pfister-Altschul and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net







    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
    MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

    Volume 13, No. 7, pp. 323-348, pls. 21-24, 2 figs.

    February 10, 1961




    Geographic Variation
    In the North American Cyprinid Fish,
    Hybopsis gracilis

    BY

    LEONARD J. OLUND AND FRANK B. CROSS


    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
    LAWRENCE
    1961


    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

    Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
    Robert W. Wilson


    Volume 13, No. 7, pp. 323-348, pls. 21-24, 2 figs.
    Published February 10, 1961


    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
    Lawrence, Kansas


    PRINTED IN
    THE STATE PRINTING PLANT
    TOPEKA, KANSAS
    1961

    [Illustration]

    28-5871




Geographic Variation
In the North American Cyprinid Fish,
Hybopsis gracilis

BY

LEONARD J. OLUND AND FRANK B. CROSS




CONTENTS


                                                     PAGE

    INTRODUCTION                                      325

    METHODS, MATERIALS, AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS           326

    DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIES HYBOPSIS GRACILIS      327
        _Hybopsis gracilis gracilis_                  328
        _Hybopsis gracilis gulonella_                 330

    INTRASPECIFIC VARIATION                           333

    NATURAL HISTORY                                   334
        _Habitat_                                     334
        _Associated Species_                          336
        _Food_                                        338
        _Spawning Season_                             338

    DISCUSSION                                        340

    LITERATURE CITED                                  343




INTRODUCTION


The flathead chub, _Hybopsis gracilis_ (Richardson), occurs in the
Plains Region of Canada and the United States, in four major drainage
systems: Mackenzie River, which discharges into the Arctic Ocean;
Saskatchewan River, which discharges into Hudson Bay via Nelson River;
and Missouri-Mississippi System and Rio Grande, both draining into the
Gulf of Mexico. Each of these systems is occupied in part only. In the
Mackenzie Basin, _H. gracilis_ has been reported as far north as Fort
Good Hope (Walters, 1955:347). Flathead chubs occur in the Saskatchewan
Basin from Alberta eastward to Lake Winnipeg, Manitoba, but have not
been found in other streams that flow into Lake Winnipeg (Red River,
Brokenhead River and Whitemouth River) nor in Nelson River downstream
from Lake Winnipeg. In the Missouri Basin the species occurs more or
less continuously from the high plains adjacent to the Rocky Mountains
in Montana and Wyoming down the mainstream of the Missouri River to its
mouth, and down the mainstream of the Mississippi River as far as
Barfield, Arkansas, but not to the Gulf. The species probably attains
its greatest abundance in the Missouri Basin, but it is scarce or absent
in tributaries north and east of the Missouri mainstream, in the South
Platte Basin, and in the central part of the Platte River in Nebraska.
The flathead chub is unknown in the Mississippi Basin above the mouth of
the Missouri River, and in the Ohio River Basin above its mouth. In the
Arkansas River Basin, records are restricted to (1) the headwaters and
tributaries of the Arkansas River from eastern Colorado downstream as
far as Garden City, Kansas, (2) the Cimarron River at Kenton, Cimarron
County, Oklahoma, and (3) the South Canadian River and tributaries from
northeastern New Mexico eastward as far as Norman, McClain County,
Oklahoma, but rarely there. Thus, the range in the Arkansas Basin seems
to consist of three isolated segments. Likewise, isolated populations
exist in the Rio Grande System, where flathead chubs are confined to the
upper parts of the Rio Grande and Pecos basins, above the confluence of
the Rio Grande and Pecos Rivers. Records resulting from introductions
have been reported for the Gila River by Koster (1957:62) and from the
Snake River, Wyoming, by Simon (1946:72).

Six names apply to the flathead chub, the earliest of which is _Cyprinus
gracilis_ Richardson (1836:120). Other names have sometimes been
accepted as applicable to valid species and/or subspecies, but usage,
diagnoses, and stated ranges have been confusingly inconsistent. For
most of the past 100 years, _Platygobio_ Gill has been recognized as the
appropriate generic name for the flathead chub, but Bailey (1951:192)
places _Platygobio_ and other nominal genera of barbeled minnows having
short guts, protractile premaxillae, and four teeth (primary row) in the
single genus _Hybopsis_ (Agassiz, 1854). Strangely, the orthotype of
_Hybopsis_, _H. gracilis_ Agassiz, is a junior synonym of _H. amblops_
(Rafinesque) (Hubbs and Ortenburger, 1929b:66) and is a younger name
than _C. gracilis_ Richardson.

The purpose of this paper is to redescribe the species and to make known
its pattern of geographic variation. Natural history will also be
considered, as will habitat, food habits, and breeding season.




METHODS, MATERIALS AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Ten meristic characters and seventeen measurements of body-parts (the
latter expressed as proportions of standard length) have been analyzed.
They are: number of rays in the dorsal, anal, caudal, pectoral and
pelvic fins; number of scales in the lateral line, before the dorsal
fin, around the body and around the caudal peduncle; number of
vertebrae; body-depth, depth of caudal peduncle, length of caudal
peduncle, predorsal length, length of depressed anal and dorsal fins,
length of pectoral and pelvic fins, head-length, head-depth,
head-width, snout-length, postorbital length of head, length of orbit,
interorbital width, length of upper jaw and width of gape.

Counts and measurements were made as described by Hubbs and Lagler
(1958), with the exception of scales before the dorsal fin, which were
counted as the number of vertical scale-rows between the upper margin of
the opercular cleft and the origin of the dorsal fin. Vertebral counts,
made from roentgenograms, excluded vertebrae in the Weberian complex
(presumably always four) but included the hypural vertebra.

Counts and measurements were made on series (usually ten fish) from
localities throughout the range. To minimize effects of allometric
growth, the fish were divided into several length-groups prior to
analysis of proportional measurements: 30-50mm, 50-70mm, 70-100mm,
100-150mm, 150-200mm and 200mm standard length and over. The majority of
specimens examined were 70-100mm in standard length.

Specimens were obtained from the following institutions: University of
Alberta (abbreviated UA in the text); Museum of Zoology, University of
Michigan (UMMZ); University of Missouri (UM); Montana State College
(MSC); University of Oklahoma Museum of Zoology (UOMZ); University of
Saskatchewan; Royal Ontario Museum, Division of Zoology, Toronto (ROMZ);
University of Wyoming (WU); Museum of Natural History, University of
Kansas (KU). Specimens examined are listed in the accounts of the
subspecies.

We are grateful to D. A. Boag, Reeve M. Bailey, Arthur L. Witt, C. J. D.
Brown, Carl Riggs, F. M. Atton, W. B. Scott, and George Baxter, all
staff-members of the institutions listed in the immediately preceding
paragraph, for placing specimens at our disposal. Mr. William Peters
analyzed the contents of stomachs of specimens that were used for study
of the food habits. Mr. Artie L. Metcalf assisted in collecting
specimens. Drs. Kenneth B. Armitage and E. Raymond Hall offered valued
suggestions in connection with the preparation of the manuscript.




DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIES


=Hybopsis gracilis= (Richardson)

Flathead Chub

(Synonymy under accounts of subspecies)

_Description._--Pharyngeal teeth 2,4-4,2, hooked; dorsal fin of
moderate size, falcate, first principal ray longest, extending beyond
posterior rays in depressed fin, its origin usually slightly in front
of insertion of pelvic fin, approximately equidistant from tip of snout
and base of caudal fin, rays 8, rarely 9; pectoral fin strongly
falcate, rays 14-20, usually 16-18; pelvic rays 8, rarely 9; anal fin
falcate, rays 8, rarely 9; caudal rays 19, rarely 20.

Body slightly compressed, nearly terete; head-length 23.1-28.8 per cent
of standard length; head broad and flattened, snout subconical,
premaxillae protractile, upper lip not medially expanded; mouth
subterminal, nearly horizontal, large; a single pair of terminal
maxillary barbels; orbit usually 5-7 per cent of standard length;
lateral line slightly decurved; intestine short, peritoneum silvery.

Color brown or olivaceous dorsally, silver or creamy white ventrally,
without distinctive markings; dusky lateral band evident in preserved
specimens.

Taste-buds present on membrane between first and second principal rays
of all fins, and on first to sixth interradial membranes of pectoral
fin. On the caudal fin, taste buds between first and second principal
rays of upper and lower lobes, though present, are less well developed
than on other fins. Moore (1950:88) states that taste buds are numerous
on the barbels, cheeks, lips, chin, snout, opercles and branchial
membranes, and are present in decreasing numbers over the body.

Nuptial tubercles of male minute and densely scattered over top of head
and snout; usually present on pectoral rays 1-8, weak when present on
rays beyond the eighth, never found beyond the eleventh ray; minute
tubercles usually found on dorsal, pelvic and anal fins, rarely on lower
scales of caudal peduncle; predorsal scales have a fine peripheral row
of tubercles.


=Hybopsis gracilis gracilis= (Richardson)

(Plate 22)

  _Cyprinus (Leuciscus) gracilis_ Richardson, 1836:120 and Pl. 78
    (original description; Saskatchewan R. at Carlton House).

  _Coregonus angusticeps_ Cuvier and Valenciennes, 1848:534
    (original description; Saskatchewan R.).

  _Pogonichthys communis_ Girard, 1856:188 (in part; original
    description); Girard, 1858:247 and plate 55 (in part;
    characters; synonymy); Suckley, 1860:361 (Milk R.); Cope,
    1879:440 (Fort Benton, Mo. R.; Judith R.).

  _Platygobio gracilis_, Jordan and Gilbert, 1882:219 (in part;
    characters; synonymy); Graham, 1885:74 (Kansas R.; synonymy);
    Jordan, 1885:29 (records); Jordan and Meek, 1886:13 (Mo. R., St.
    Joseph, Mo.); Meek, 1892:245 (characters; Mo. R., Sioux City,
    Iowa); Eigenmann, 1895:111 (Craig; Poplar; Brandon; Medicine
    Hat); Meek, 1895:137 (Platte R., Fremont, Neb.); Evermann and
    Cox, 1896:412 (in part; habitat; synonymy); Jordan and Evermann,
    1896:326 (in part; characters; synonymy); Thompson, 1898:214
    (Brandon; Saskatchewan R.); Evermann and Goldsborough, 1907:98
    (records from Canada); Forbes and Richardson, 1920:170
    (characters; habitat; synonymy; records from Illinois; but Fig.
    45 is _Hybopsis meeki_ Jordan and Evermann, not _H. gracilis_);
    Hankinson, 1929:446 (records from North Dakota); Jordan, 1929:76
    (in part; characters); Jordan, Evermann and Clark, 1930:136 (in
    part; synonymy); Churchill and Over, 1933:45 (characters; food;
    habitat; spawning; records from South Dakota); O'Donnel,
    1935:481 (Ohio R., Cairo, Ill.; Miss. R., Chester, Ill.); Hinks,
    1943:57 (records from Canada); Clemens, _et al._, 1947:17
    (records from Saskatchewan); Dymond, 1947:19 (distribution in
    Canada); Rawson, 1951:208 (Great Slave Lake; Mackenzie R.);
    Shoemaker, Pickering and Durham, 1951:84 (Miss. R., Cates, Tenn.;
    Miss. R., between Hickman and Barfield, Ark.); Wynne-Edwards,
    1952:18 (distribution in Canada); Miller and Paetz, 1953:47
    (Peace R. at town of Peace River); Walters, 1955:347
    (distribution in Canada; dispersal into Canada); Keleher,
    1956:265 (Saskatchewan R., Manitoba); Lindsey, 1956:771
    (distribution in Canada); Keleher and Kooyman, 1957:110 (Kelsey
    Lake, Manitoba); Lindsey, 1957:657 (Laird and Peace drainages,
    British Columbia); Scott, 1958:16 (distribution in Canada);
    Slastenenko, 1958:7 (distribution in Canada).

  _Platygobio pallidus_ Jordan and Gilbert, 1882:220 (original
    description; Ohio R., Cairo, Ill.); Jordan and Evermann,
    1896:326 (characters; synonymy; Ohio R., Cairo, Ill.); Jordan,
    Evermann and Clark, 1930:136 (Ohio R., Cairo, Ill.; synonymy).

  _Platygobio gracilis communis_, Simon, 1946:71 (in part;
    characters; food; habitat; spawning); Moore, 1950:87 (habitat;
    sense organs).

  _Hybopsis gracilis communis_, Bailey, 1951:192 (record from Iowa;
    key); Harlan and Speaker, 1951:75 (characters; distribution in
    Iowa); Hubbs, 1951:9 (habitat; Miss. R.); Harrison and Speaker,
    1954:516 (habitat); Personius and Eddy, 1955:42 (habitat; Little
    Mo. R.).

  _Hybopsis gracilis_, Cleary, 1956:271 (record from Iowa;
    distributional map); Bailey, 1956:332 (record from Iowa; key);
    Harlan and Speaker, 1956:90 (characters; distribution in Iowa);
    Eddy, 1957:111 (in part; characters; key); Moore, 1957:110 (in
    part; key); Underhill, 1959:100 (Vermillion R., South Dakota).

_Diagnosis._--Post-Weberian vertebrae 40-42, usually 41-42; lateral
line scales 50-56; pectoral rays 15-20, usually 17 or more; head-depth
12.3-15.1 per cent of standard length, usually 14.7 per cent or less.
See Figs. 1 and 2.

_Other characters._--Circumference scale-rows 31-42; predorsal
scale-rows 20-29; size large, as much as 246 mm standard length (see
Fig. 1 of Pl. 24); head-length 23.4-27.4 per cent of standard length,
usually 25.5 per cent or less; postorbital length of head 10.9-13.9 per
cent of standard length, usually 12.5 per cent or less; predorsal length
46.0-51.7 per cent of standard length; orbit 5.1-6.8 per cent of
standard length; prepelvic length 46.6-52.2 per cent of standard length;
caudal peduncle length 17.2-22.1 per cent of standard length.

_Range_ (Plate 21).--Mackenzie Basin south from Fort Good Hope;
Saskatchewan Basin east to Lake Winnipeg; mainstream of Missouri River
and Mississippi River south to Barfield, Arkansas; intergrading with _H.
g. gulonella_ in upper Missouri Basin and lower parts of major
tributaries to Missouri River in Nebraska and Kansas.

_Specimens examined._--Below are listed museum numbers, number of
specimens (in parentheses), localities, and year of collection.
Collections marked with asterisk (*) are intergrades more closely
resembling _H. g. gracilis_ than _H. g. gulonella_. Records from
literature are cited in the synonymy.

ALBERTA: UA (6), Milk R. at town of Milk River, 1950; UA (3), Athabasca
R. at Fort McMurray, 1955; UA (1), Red Deer R. at Steveville, 1952; UA
(2), Peace R. at town of Peace River, 1952; UA (11), Peace R. at
Dunvegan, 1956; UA (2), Simonette R. tributary to Smoky R., date
unknown; ROMZ 17704 (1), Milk R. W town of Milk River, 1955.

ARKANSAS: UMMZ 128573 (5), Mississippi Co., Mississippi R., 1939.

ILLINOIS: UMMZ 134799 (146), Mississippi R. at Grand Tower, 1936; UMMZ
147045 (8), Mississippi R. at Cairo, 1944.

KANSAS: KU 1234 (173), Leavenworth Co., backwater of Missouri R. near
Corral Cr., 1940; * KU 1814 (1), Douglas Co., floodpool of Kansas R.,
below Lakeview, 1951; * KU 1825 (1), Douglas Co., floodpool of Kansas
R., 1951; * KU 1841 (56), Douglas Co., Kansas R. at Lawrence, 1951; * KU
1898 (6), Douglas Co., floodpool of Kansas R., 1951; * KU 1911 (5),
Douglas Co., floodpool of Kansas R., 1951; * KU 1928 (2), Jefferson Co.,
floodpool of Kansas R., 1951; KU 3850 (30), Atchison Co., Missouri R.,
1957; * KU 4377 (2), Douglas Co., Kansas R. at Lawrence, 1958; * KU 4655
(2), Douglas Co., Kansas R. at Lawrence, 1959.

MANITOBA: ROMZ 13834 (1), Kelsey Lake, 25 miles east of the Pas, no
date; ROMZ 14500 (25), Saskatchewan R. at the Pas, 1947; ROMZ 16325 (1),
Lake Winnipeg, no date.

MISSOURI: UMMZ 147126 (130), Mississippi R. at Cliff Cave, 1944.

MONTANA: * MSC 1878 (36), Carbon Co., Elbow Cr., 1957; * MSC 1943 (11),
Phillips Co., Frenchman Cr., 1957; * MSC 2021 (10), Pondora Co., Marias
R., 1955; * MSC 2022 (4), Lewis and Clark Co., Missouri R. below Holter
Dam, 1948; * MSC 2052 (6), Gallatin Co., Missouri R. near Trident, 1948;
* MSC 3074 (3), Custer Co., Hardy Reservoir, 1952; UMMZ 94146 (34), near
mouth of Powder R., 1926.

NEBRASKA: * KU 4158 (9), Holt Co., Niobrara R. 6 mi. N Midway, 1958; *
UM (field no. 59-81) (56), Butler Co.-Colfax Co. line, Platte R. 1.5 mi.
S Schuyler, 1959; * UM (field no. 59-74) (5), Dodge Co., Platte R. 1 mi.
S North Bend, 1959; UMMZ 134826 (46), Otoe Co., Missouri R. 1.5 mi. E
Minersville, 1940; UMMZ 134799 (67), Cass Co., Missouri R., 1940; UMMZ
135341 (43), Knox Co., Missouri R. 2 mi. NE Niobrara, 1940; UMMZ 135818
(95), Thurston Co., Missouri R. NE Macy, 1941.

NORTHWEST TERRITORY: ROMZ 13627 (1), Great Slave Lake, no date; ROMZ
13628 (1), Great Slave Lake, no date.

SASKATCHEWAN: * ROMZ 3885 (2), Sucker Cr., trib. Cypress Lake, 1927;
ROMZ 14368 (2), South Saskatchewan R. at Yorath Island, 1941; ROMZ 16620
(5), South Saskatchewan R. at Saskatoon, 1953; KU 5126 (5), South
Saskatchewan R. at Birson Ferry, 1957; KU 5127 (3), South Saskatchewan
R. at Leader, 1957; KU 5128 (2), North Saskatchewan R. at Cecil Ferry,
1957; KU 5129 (1), South Saskatchewan R. at Clarkboro Ferry, 1957.

SOUTH DAKOTA: * KU 4961 (9), Haakon Co., Bad R. at Midland, 1959; * KU
4963 (17), Washabaugh Co., White R. 6 mi. SW Belvidere, 1959; * UMMZ
120362 (168), White R. 6.5 mi. S Kadoka, 1934; * UMMZ 127484 (11), Todd
Co., Little White R., 1934; UMMZ 127488 (29), Charles Mix Co., Missouri
R., 1934; * UMMZ 127678 (32), Cheyenne R., E Wasta, 1939; UMMZ 166762
(21), Hughes Co., Missouri R. 3 mi. NE Pierre, 1952; * UMMZ 166803 (91),
Harding Co., Little Missouri R. at Camp Crook, 1952; UMMZ 166845 (121),
Carson Co.-Walworth Co. line, Missouri R. 2.5 mi. N Mobridge, 1952; UMMZ
166985 (61), Yankton Co., Missouri R. at Yankton, 1952.

WYOMING: * WU 2073 (6), Washakie Co., Big Horn R. at Worland, 1956.


=Hybopsis gracilis gulonella= (Cope)

(Plate 23)

  _Pogonichthys communis_ Girard, 1856:188 (in part; original
    description); Girard, 1858:247 (in part; characters; synonymy);
    Cope and Yarrow, 1875:653 (characters; Pueblo, Colo.).

  _Pogonichthys (Platygobio) gulonellus_ Cope, 1864:277 (original
    description; near Bridger's Pass, Wyo.).

  _Platygobio gulonellus_ Cope, 1865:85 ("Platte R., near Fort
    Riley" [Fort Riley is on Kansas R., not Platte R.; Cope's
    specimens probably are from Platte drainage, on basis of known
    distributions of other species reported]).

  _Ceratichthys physignathus_ Cope and Yarrow, 1875:651 (original
    description; Arkansas R., Pueblo, Colo.).

  _Platygobio communis_, Gill, 1876:408 (characters; Platte Valley;
    Green River, Utah [the latter probably erroneous]).

  _Couesius physignathus_, Jordan and Gilbert, 1882:219 (characters;
    synonymy; Arkansas R., Pueblo, Colo.); Jordan, 1885:29
    (records).

  _Platygobio gracilis_, Jordan and Gilbert, 1882:219 (in part;
    characters; synonymy); Cragin, 1885:109 (Garden City, Kans.);
    Gilbert, 1885:98 (Garden City, Kans.); Jordan, 1885:29
    (records); Evermann and Cox, 1896:412 (in part; habitat;
    synonymy); Jordan and Evermann, 1896:326 (in part; characters;
    synonymy); Ortenburger and Hubbs, 1927:125 (Canadian R., Norman,
    Okla.); Hubbs, 1927:75 (parasites; teratology; records from New
    Mexico); Hubbs and Ortenburger, 1929a:28 (S. Canadian R.,
    Durham, Okla.); Jordan, 1929:76 (in part; characters); Jordan,
    Evermann and Clark, 1930:136 (in part; synonymy).

  _Platygobio physignathus_, Jordan and Evermann, 1896:325
    (characters; synonymy; records from upper Arkansas R.); Ellis,
    1914:62 (characters; synonymy; records from Colorado);
    Cockerell, 1927:123 (distribution in Colorado); Jordan, Evermann
    and Clark, 1930:136 (synonymy; records from upper Arkansas R.).

  _Platygobio gracilis communis_, Simon, 1946:71 (in part;
    characters; food; habitat; spawning).

  _Platygobio gracilis gulonellus_, Simon, 1946:72 (characters;
    records from Wyoming; Arkansas R.).

  _Platygobio gracilis:_ _communis_ x _gulonellus_, Simon, 1946:92
    (North Platte R., Neb.-Wyo. line).

  _Platygobio gracilis physignathus_, Moore, 1950:87 (habitat; sense
    organs).

  _Hybopsis gracilis communis_, Beckman, 1952:50 (characters; food;
    habitat); Cross, Dalquest and Lewis, 1955:222 (records from
    Texas).

  _Hybopsis gracilis physignathus_, Beckman, 1952:50 (characters;
    habitat).

  _Hybopsis gracilis_, Eddy, 1957:111 (in part; characters; key);
    Koster, 1957:61 (characters; habitat; spawning; food); Moore,
    1957:110 (in part; key); Smith, 1958:177 (fossil record; Doby
    Springs, Okla.).

_Diagnosis._--Post-Weberian vertebrae 36-38, rarely 39; lateral line
scales 42-54, usually less than 50; pectoral rays 14-19, usually fewer
than 17; head-depth 13.5-18.0 per cent of standard length, usually 14.8
per cent or more. See Figures 1 and 2.

_Other characters._--Circumference scale-rows 30-40, slightly fewer than
in _H. g. gracilis_; predorsal scale-rows 17-27, somewhat fewer than in
specimens from Canada, but much the same as specimens from the
Missouri-Mississippi system; size small, rarely as much as 130 mm
standard length (Fig. 1 of Pl. 24); head-length 24.0-28.0 per cent of
standard length, usually more than 25.5 per cent; postorbital length of
head 11.2-14.4 per cent of standard length, usually more than 12.5 per
cent (both characters illustrate the larger head of _H. g. gulonella_);
predorsal length 46.4-52.7 per cent of standard length, longer than in
the other subspecies; orbit 5.0-6.6 per cent of standard length;
prepelvic length 47.4-53.7 per cent of standard length, longer than in
_H. g. gracilis_; caudal peduncle length 17.1-22.7 per cent of standard
length, essentially the same in both subspecies.

The label on types of this subspecies, in the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia, states merely "near Bridger's Pass, Wyo.,
Expedition of 1856, Dr. W. A. Hammond" (letter from Dr. James Boehlke to
Cross, dated Jan. 27, 1960). Dr. Hammond was a surgeon who also
collected scientific specimens, assigned to an expedition under the
command of Lt. F. T. Bryant. Bryant's log is recorded in the Proceedings
of the 35th Congress (1858:455-481). The site at which these specimens
were taken cannot be ascertained from the log, but study of it is
helpful in indicating the probable locations.

The expedition left Fort Riley on June 21, 1856, on the following route:
up Republican River; across to Fort Kearney on Platte River; west along
Platte River to S. Platte River; up S. Platte River to Pole (Lodgepole)
Creek; Pine-Bluffs (Neb.-Wyo. line); across East Fork to West Fork of
Laramie River; Cooper's Creek; West Fork of Medicine Bow; Pass Creek and
down canyon of Pass Creek; across N. Platte River; up Sage Creek; on
August 15, camped on Muddy Creek, tributary to Green River (first record
of fish, trout); back to Sage Creek; August 19-21, camped on island in
North Platte River; to Pass Creek; Elk Creek; west branch of Medicine
Bow; Aspen Creek; West Fork of Laramie River; August 29, to East Laramie
River where a large supply of fish was caught; tributary of Cache la
Poudre then downstream to mouth of this river; down South Platte River
past mouth of Crow Creek and Beaver Creek; left South Platte River 14
miles below mouth of Beaver Creek, toward Republican River; down Rock
Creek to Arikaree; down Arikaree to Republican River and down the
Republican to Fort Riley.

Mention is made of fish only twice in the entire log. We doubt that
Muddy Creek or the East Laramie River is the type locality of _P.
gulonellus_, because the flathead chub has not since been found in
either of these streams. The most likely collection site for _P.
gulonellus_ is the North Platte River near the mouth of Sage Creek, in
what is now Carbon County, Wyoming, where the expedition was camped for
three days. This species is known to occur in the North Platte River,
and since the type locality is reported as "near Bridger's Pass" this is
the probable location.

_Range_ (Plate 21).--Upper mainstream and tributaries of Rio Grande,
Pecos, Arkansas and North Platte Rivers; isolated populations in
tributaries of the upper Missouri River.

_Specimens examined._--Below are listed museum numbers, number of
specimens (in parentheses), localities and year of collection. Series
marked by asterisks (*) are intergrades tending toward _H. g.
gulonella_. Literature reports are cited in the synonymy.

COLORADO: KU 4742 (162), Bent Co., Purgatoire R. at Las Animas, 1959; KU
4748 (105), Pueblo Co., Arkansas R. at west edge of Pueblo, 1959; KU
4758 (50), Fremont Co., Arkansas R. at Florence, 1959; KU 4769 (64),
Fremont Co., Beaver Cr., 1959.

KANSAS: KU 2648 (2), Finney Co., Arkansas R., 1958; KU 2858 (13), Finney
Co., Arkansas R. at Garden City, 1951; KU 3964 (12), Kearney Co.,
Arkansas R., 1958; * KU 4041 (2), Cheyenne Co., Republican R., 1958; KU
4732 (30), Hamilton Co., Arkansas R. at Kendall, 1959; * KU 4868 (1),
Kansas-Nebraska line, Republican R. 1.5 mi. S. Hardy, 1959.

MONTANA: * MSC 1960 (8), Powder River Co., E. Fork of Powder R., 1957;
MSC 2010 (64), Dawson Co., Redwater R., 1957.

NEBRASKA: * KU 2140 (2), Dawson Co., Platte R., at Gothenburg, 1931; *
KU 4863 (20), Furnas Co., Republican R. at Cambridge, 1959; * UM (field
no. 59-49) (74), Scotts Bluff Co., North Platte R. at Morrill, 1959; *
UMMZ 133918 (17), Dixon Co., Logan Cr., 1939; * UMMZ 134813 (31), North
Platte R., Neb.-Wyo. line, 1941; * UMMZ 135084 (14), Harlan Co., Beaver
Cr. 0.25 mi. S Stamford, 1940; * UMMZ 135200 (41), Scotts Bluff Co.,
North Platte R. 1 mi. SE Henry, 1940; * UMMZ 135280 (59), Cherry Co.,
Niobrara R. 3 mi. SE Valentine, 1940; * UMMZ 135700 (25), Buffalo Co.,
South Loup R. 8 mi. N Miller, 1941; * UMMZ 135778 (54), Thurston Co.,
Logan Cr. 2.5 mi. W Pender, 1941; * UMMZ 135786 (25), Dixon Co., Logan
Cr. 0.5 mi. NW Wakefield, 1941.

NEW MEXICO: KU 4219 (50), Colfax Co., Cimarron Cr. at Springer, 1958; KU
4235 (19), Mora Co., Sapello Cr. near Sapello, 1958; KU 4245 (157),
Bernalillo Co., Rio Grande 12 mi. S Bernalillo, 1958; KU 4255 (22), Rio
Arriba Co., Rio Grande at Velarde, 1958; KU 4266 (53), Sandoval Co., Rio
Grande 2 mi. N Cochiti Pueblo, Marcelino Baca bridge, 1958; KU 4269
(91), San Miguel Co., Pecos R., 3 mi. S Pecos, 1958; KU 4274 (25),
Sandoval Co., Jemez R. at Jemez Canyon Dam, 1958; KU 4294 (113),
Guadalupe Co., Pecos R. 3 mi. N. Dilia, 1958; UMMZ 94897 (146), Pecos R.
at San Tuan, 1926; UMMZ 94898 (1), Pecos R. at San Juan, 1926; UMMZ
118209 (68), Sapello Cr. at Sapello, 1937; UMMZ 133131 (7), Pecos R.
0.5 mi. N Santa Rosa, 1940; UMMZ 133136 (1), Rio Grande at Albuquerque,
1940.

OKLAHOMA: KU 2329 (1), Cleveland Co.-McClain Co. line, S. Canadian R.,
1952; UOMZ 26355 (10), Cimarron Co., Cimarron R. 2 mi. N. Kenton, 1957;
UOMZ 5917 (2), Cleveland Co., S. Canadian R. S Norman, 1925.

TEXAS: KU 3409 (18), Hemphill Co., Canadian R. at town of Canadian,
1955.

WYOMING: WU 2084 (4), Platte Co., N. Platte R. at Glendo, 1956; WU 2095
(3), Converse Co., N. Platte R. at Douglas, 1956; UMMZ 104064 (58), N.
Platte R. below Guernsey Dam, 1937; * UMMZ 114642 (7), drainage ditch in
Wind R. drainage, 1936; * UMMZ 114644 (20), drainage ditch at Riverton,
1936; * UMMZ 127518 (63), Weston Co., Beaver Cr., 1934; * UMMZ 127681
(20), Big Horn Co., Big Horn R. tributary, 1939; * UMMZ 136488 (9),
Crook Co., Belle Fourche R. 15 mi. N Devil's Tower, 1941; * WU 2122 and
two uncatalogued series at WU (13), Belle Fourche R., no precise
locality or date; UMMZ 159969 (14), Natrona Co., N. Platte R. 2 mi. E
Casper, 1950.




INTRASPECIFIC VARIATION


Two subspecies of _H. gracilis_ are recognized by us: one northern and
eastern, characteristically inhabiting large rivers (_H. g. gracilis_),
and one southern and western, characteristically inhabiting small
streams (_H. g. gulonella_). Other scientific names that have been
applied to this fish in the past are listed in the synonymy.

_H. g. gulonella_ is a chubby, deep-bodied fish, whereas _H. g.
gracilis_ is long and slender. The head of the creek subspecies is
deeper and longer than that of _H. g. gracilis_, being rounded
anteriorly when seen in sideview. The head of the large-river subspecies
is acutely wedge-shaped in profile. _H. g. gracilis_ has a larger orbit
than _H. g. gulonella_. Fins of _H. g. gracilis_ are more strongly
falcate than those of the other subspecies. _H. g. gracilis_ has a
greater number of lateral line scales, pectoral rays and post-Weberian
vertebrae than the creek subspecies. The large-river subspecies attains
much larger size than does the creek subspecies (Plate 24). Except in
areas of intergradation, complete separation of the two subspecies can
be made on the basis of lateral line scales, pectoral rays,
post-Weberian vertebrae and head-depth. The regressions of head-depth on
standard length in _H. g. gracilis_ from the Saskatchewan River (several
localities) and in _H. g. gulonella_ from Beaver Creek, Arkansas River
Drainage (KU 4769) are shown in Plate 24. Although values for the
largest specimens of _H. g. gracilis_ are omitted from Plate 24, the
regression remains essentially linear to standard lengths of
approximately 250 mm. On the basis of head-depth alone, separation of
the two subspecies is possible in specimens larger than 40 mm. Similar
results were obtained by using the regression of postorbital length on
standard length, and could have been obtained by using other
proportional measurements.




NATURAL HISTORY


_Habitat_

The species inhabits alkaline streams with shifting sand bottoms where
the waterlevel fluctuates considerably with heavy rains and melting
snow. The flathead chub is found in silty water and often is the
predominant species in streams that have high turbidity. The remarkable
ability of this fish to withstand exceedingly high turbidity is
illustrated by its predominance in the Little Missouri River, which has
an average concentration of suspended silt two and one-half times that
of the Missouri River at Kansas City (Personius and Eddy, 1955:42).

[Illustration: FIGURE 1. Graphic analysis of lateral line scales,
pectoral rays and post-Weberian vertebrae in _Hybopsis gracilis_.
In each symbol, horizontal line = range, vertical line = mean,
open rectangle = one standard deviation on each side of mean, black
rectangle = twice the standard error on each side of mean.

_H. g. gracilis_ is found in large rivers throughout its range,
occasionally migrating into smaller streams, especially in the spawning
season. It prefers the main channel of rivers in moderate to strong
current. All series examined are from elevations lower than 3,000 feet.

Numbers to left of symbols = number of specimens examined from that
locality; combined collections indicated by brackets. The dash-lines
represent drainage patterns of rivers in which this species occurs.]

_H. g. gulonella_ occupies small rivers and creeks, preferring pools
with moderate currents. In fall, dense concentrations of this subspecies
have been found in small pools, where brush, driftwood or other debris
deflects the current and prevents filling with drifting sand. Hundreds
of flathead chubs were collected in such pools in the Purgatoire and
Arkansas rivers. Specimens were also collected with ease in Beaver
Creek, Colorado, from pools with murky water and slight flow, over
bottoms of gravel and bedrock. No brush or other debris was near the
pools. In each case the streams carried little water, although they
undoubtedly carry greater volumes of water in spring and early summer
after rains and spring thaws. The preferred bottom-type for this
subspecies seems to be gently shifting sand.

_H. g. gulonella_ is found in warm-water streams, whereas _H. g.
gracilis_ occurs in cooler water. The southwestern subspecies was taken
in August in the Mora River drainage at Sapello (temperatures above 80 deg.
F.) but not at Mora (temperatures below 70 deg. F.). In the Purgatoire
River, a thriving population was found where the water temperature was
92 deg. F., on September 6, 1959. In the Arkansas and Pecos rivers and the
Rio Grande this subspecies is most abundant below the mountainous parts
of the stream-courses, but at elevations higher than 4,000 feet on the
plains.


_Associated Species_

[Illustration: FIGURE 2. Graphic analysis of head-depth, postorbital
length of head and predorsal length of _Hybopsis gracilis_, expressed
as thousandths of standard length. Numbers in parenthesis = number
of specimens examined from each locality. In each symbol, horizontal
line = range, vertical line = mean, open rectangle = one standard
deviation on each side of mean, black rectangle = twice the standard
error on each side of mean. The dash-lines represent drainage patterns
of rivers in which this species occurs. All measurements are of
specimens 70 to 100 mm in standard length.]

In the Pecos and Arkansas basins, species commonly taken with _H. g.
gulonella_ are _Catostomus commersonnii_, _Hybognathus placita_,
_Notropis lutrensis lutrensis_, _Notropis stramineus missuriensis_,
_Pimophales promelas_, and _Campostoma anomalum plumbeum_. The only
spiny-rayed fishes that we have found with _H. g. gulonella_ are
_Lepomis cyanellus_ and _L. humilis_, both of which are scarce.
Associates of _H. g. gracilis_ include the same species, plus other
ostariophysan fishes such as species of _Carpiodes_, _Ictiobus_, and
silt-adapted species of _Hybopsis_ and _Notropis_.

We failed to find the flathead chub at any of 11 localities in the South
Platte drainage, where we collected in September, 1959. Dr. George
Baxter, of the Department of Zoology, University of Wyoming, told
us that he has never found _H. gracilis_ in that drainage. The fauna
of the South Platte includes _Catostomus catostomus_, _Semotilus
atromaculatus_, _Hybopsis biguttata_, _Hybognathus hankinsoni_,
_Notropis cornutus frontalis_, _Etheostoma nigrum_ and _E.
exile_--species rarely if ever found with _H. gracilis_.

Ecologically, _H. g. gulonella_ seems to be the counterpart of
_Semotilus atromaculatus_ in streams where the latter species is absent.
Observations of _H. g. gulonella_ in the Purgatoire River indicated
that loosely-organized groups of flathead chubs congregated one to four
inches above the bottom of pools, and near or under protective cover
such as roots of vegetation or debris lodged against shore. Individuals
moved about independently within the group (rather than as schools), and
occasionally rose to the surface, perhaps for food.


_Food_

The flathead chub is chiefly carnivorous, but its food includes some
aquatic vegetation (Table 1). Most organisms found in specimens (both
subspecies) were terrestrial insects (Coleoptera, Diptera, Orthoptera);
all insects were adult stages, except those designated as larvae in
Table 1. Roundworms probably were parasites, rather than food.

Hubbs (1927:76) states that the food of young flathead chubs that were
obtained from the Arkansas River System in New Mexico consisted "almost
entirely of crustaceans (small ostracods and cladocerans to the
exclusion of all else but an occasional larval or adult insect, etc.)."


_Spawning Season_

Specimens of _H. g. gulonella_ that have been examined reach sexual
maturity at approximately 65 mm standard length. Most specimens of _H.
g. gracilis_ less than 85 mm in standard length are immature, but larger
specimens probably are mature.

The spawning season is in late summer, beginning in July and extending
into September. Specimens from the Peace River, collected on August 10,
1952, include females that were mostly spent and tuberculate males.
Males and females in spawning condition were collected in the Milk River
in August of 1955. A large prespawning female was obtained in Red Deer
River in June of 1952. A male from Fort McMurray had fairly well
developed tubercles on August 9, 1955. A prespawning female was taken
from the Saskatchewan River at Clarkboro Ferry on June 7, 1957.
Tuberculate males were collected in the Powder River on June 30, 1957.
Specimens from the White River in South Dakota, collected on July 7,
1934, include tuberculate males. The specimens discussed above are _H.
g. gracilis_ or intergrades tending toward that subspecies.

Specimens of _H. g. gulonella_ collected in the Arkansas River at Pueblo
and Florence, Colorado, on September 7, 1959, include some tuberculate
males, although most females are spent. On August 8, 1957, a series of
flathead chubs that includes tuberculate males was collected in the
Redwater River, Montana. In the Pecos River on August 25, 1958,
spawning seemingly had been completed, although a few males still bore
tubercles.

TABLE 1. ORGANISMS FOUND IN STOMACHS OF HYBOPSIS GRACILIS FROM VARIOUS
LOCATIONS, EXPRESSED AS PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL VOLUME.

  A: S. Saskatchewan R., Clarkboro Ferry, Sask.
  B: Milk R., Alberta
  C: Missouri R., S. D.
  D: Missouri R., Neb.
  E: Arkansas R., Fremont Co., Colo.
  F: Arkansas R., Pueblo Co., Colo.
  G: Pecos R., San Miguel Co., N. M.

  ==============================+=====+=====+=====+=====+=====+=====+=====
                                |  A  |  B  |  C  |  D  |  E  |  F  |  G
  ------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
  No. specimens examined        |  1  |  7  |  6  | 10  | 10  | 10  | 10
                                |     |     |     |     |     |     |
  No. specimens containing food |  1  |  6  |  1  |  2  |  1  |  3  |  7
  ------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
  KIND OF ORGANISM              |     |     |     |     |     |     |
                                |     |     |     |     |     |     |
  Aphasmidia                    |10.0 |00.7 |     |03.0 |     |     |
  Arthropoda                    |     |     |     |     |     |     |
    Araneae                     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
      Argiopidae                |     |     |     |     |04.0 |     |
      Theridiidae               |     |     |     |     |04.0 |     |
    Insecta                     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
      Ephemeroptera (nymph)     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
        Baetidae                |     |05.0 |     |     |     |     |
        Heptagenidae            |     |08.0 |     |     |     |     |
      Hemiptera                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |
        Corixidae               |35.0 |00.3 |     |     |     |     |
      Hymenoptera               |     |     |     |     |     |     |
        Formicidae              |     |21.0 |     |     |     |     |60.0
      Coleoptera                |     |     |     |     |     |     |
        Staphylinidae           |     |01.7 |07.0 |     |     |     |
        Scolytidae              |     |13.3 |70.0 |     |     |     |
        Tenebrionidae           |     |05.7 |     |     |70.0 |     |
        Carabidae               |     |05.7 |     |     |     |01.0 |
        Curculionidae           |     |01.0 |     |     |     |     |
        Coccinellidae           |     |     |     |     |     |     |09.0
      Trichoptera (case)        |     |01.7 |     |     |     |     |
      Diptera                   |     |     |     |     |     |     |
        Mymaridae               |     |00.3 |     |     |     |     |
        Empididae               |     |01.3 |     |     |     |     |
        Cecidomyiidae           |     |     |     |     |04.0 |     |
        Trachinidae             |     |00.7 |     |     |     |     |
        Simulidae               |     |06.7 |20.0 |     |     |     |
        Tabanidae               |     |     |     |     |06.0 |     |
        Chironomidae            |     |     |     |     |06.0 |     |
        Not identified to family|     |01.0 |     |     |     |     |
      Orthoptera                |     |     |     |     |     |     |
        Locustidae              |     |07.7 |     |     |     |     |
        Tettigoniidae           |     |     |03.0 |70.0 |     |     |09.0
        Tetrigidae              |     |     |     |     |06.0 |     |
      Homoptera                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |
        Fulgoridae              |     |05.0 |     |     |     |     |01.0
      Insect egg                |     |00.7 |     |     |     |     |
  Plants                        |     |     |     |     |     |     |
    Cyanophyceae                |     | 09.0|     |     |     | 99.0| 20.0
    Cyperaceae                  |     | 02.0|     |     |     |     | 01.0
    Zannichellia palustris      |     | 00.3|     |     |     |     |
    Vascular remains            | 55.0|     |     | 27.0|     |     |
                                |     |     |     |     |     |     |
  Miscellaneous                 |     |     |     |     |     |     |
    Sand                        |     | 00.7|     |     |     |     |
    Pharyngeal tooth            |     | 00.3|     |     |     |     |
                                +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
      Total (%)                 |100.0| 99.8|100.0|100.0|100.0|100.0|100.0
  ------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----

Spawning apparently occurs when river levels recede to the seasonal
lows. In late summer, temperatures of these rivers probably are maximal,
their turbidities are reduced, and their sandy bottoms are stable.
Underhill (1959) reports that this species is rare in the Vermillion
River, a northeastern tributary of the Missouri River, except in autumn
when large numbers occur near the mouth of the river. We suspect that
this is associated with spawning.

[Illustration: PLATE 21

Distribution of collections examined.]

[Illustration: PLATE 22

_Hybopsis gracilis gracilis._ Missouri River, Thurston County, northeast
of Macy, Nebraska. Largest specimen 87.5 mm standard length.]

[Illustration: PLATE 23

_Hybopsis gracilis gulonella._ Pecos River, San Miguel County, 3 miles
south of town of Pecos, New Mexico. Largest specimen 91 mm standard
length.]

[Illustration: PLATE 24

FIG. 1. Top: _Hybopsis gracilis gracilis_, 230.0 mm standard length,
one of the largest specimens examined. Missouri River, Carson
County-Walworth County line, 3 miles northeast of Mobridge, South
Dakota, at mouth of Grand River.

Bottom: _Hybopsis gracilis gulonella_, 121.6 mm standard length, the
largest specimen examined of this subspecies. Beaver Creek, Fremont
County, 10 miles northeast of Florence, Colorado, on Highway 115.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Regression of head-depth on standard length in
_Hybopsis gracilis gracilis_ from the Saskatchewan River, and in _H. g.
gulonella_ from Beaver Creek, Arkansas River Drainage (KU 4769).]




DISCUSSION


_Hybopsis gracilis_ is highly variable in several morphological
characteristics, including size and shape of head, body, and fins, and
number of scales, vertebrae, and fin-rays. The variations are correlated
in a way that indicates the existence of two subspecies. One of these,
_H. g. gracilis_, attains large size, and has 1) a slender, streamlined
body, 2) a depressed head that is acutely wedge-shaped in profile, 3)
strongly falcate fins with the dorsal and pelvic fins originating
anteriorly, and 4) many scales, vertebrae, and pectoral fin-rays. The
second subspecies, for which _H. g. gulonella_ is the oldest applicable
name, is small, and has 1) a deep, chubby body, 2) head convex in dorsal
contour (less depressed than in _H. g. gracilis_), 3) fins less falcate
than in the latter subspecies, with the dorsal and pelvic fins
originating more posteriorly, and 4) fewer scales, vertebrae, and
pectoral fin-rays than _H. g. gracilis_. These differences are
consistently expressed throughout the size-ranges of the subspecies, and
in series collected at the same or nearby localities in several
different years. Considerable variability was found in features other
than those mentioned above, but individual variation among specimens
from the same locality and adjacent localities is so great that none is
diagnostic of subspecies. For example, orbital size and length of fins
(but not their falcate shape) are variables that have little diagnostic
value, although both features seem to vary in clinal fashion, with the
higher values in the north.

Variation in _H. gracilis_, as shown in the graphic analysis (Figs. 1
and 2) and distribution map (Plate 21), presents two clines: a
north-south cline and a large-river to small-river (mainly east-west)
cline. The absence of _H. gracilis_ from certain portions of river
systems is a matter of concern. The species has not been found in the
lower Arkansas River and the Rio Grande, nor in sandy tributary creeks
in eastern Kansas and Missouri that appear to provide suitable habitat.
It has already been noted that _H. g. gulonella_ seems to be the
ecological equivalent of _Semotilus atromaculatus_ in streams in which
_S. atromaculatus_ is not found. _S. atromaculatus_ occurs in creeks of
eastern Kansas and Missouri, and may provide interspecific competition
that prevents establishment of the flathead chub in these creeks.
Regardless of cause, the gaps in distribution of _H. gracilis_ tend to
limit gene flow.

Many characters used in the separation of the two subspecies are known
to be influenced by environmental conditions, especially temperature.
Hubbs (1922, 1926, 1941), Schultz (1927), Vladykov (1934), Taning (1952)
and Weisel (1955), among others, have pointed out a correlation between
temperature (or developmental rate of fish) and the number of vertebrae,
scales, and fin-rays. Likewise, Martin (1949) and Hart (1952) have shown
that the proportions of some body-parts vary in response to temperature
during early development. In _H. gracilis_, the general nature of the
clines found in a majority of characters (but not all characters)
suggests a temperature influence. However, temperature-dependent
variability that has so far been demonstrated experimentally in fishes
is generally of lesser magnitude than the differences distinguishing _H.
g. gracilis_ and _H. g. gulonella_. To our knowledge, the most extreme
differences that have been induced by modification of temperature are
those reported for _Salmo trutta_ by Taning (1952:181-182), who states:
"Shock treatment produced by especially great changes in temperature
(_c._ 10-14 deg. C), especially during the super-sensitive period [of
somatic differentiation that fixes vertebral number] may produce ... a
difference of 3-4 vertebrae ... in offspring of the same parents." The
difference cited approximates that which distinguishes natural
populations of _H. g. gracilis_ and _H. g. gulonella_. Although we
cannot assume that the sensitivity of the brown trout is the same as
that of the flathead chub, the causative conditions in Taning's study
could scarcely be expected in nature; furthermore, it seems significant
that extremely high (as well as extremely low) mean numbers of scales
and vertebrae were found at southern localities, and that low mean
numbers of scales and vertebrae were found as far north as Wyoming and
Montana. We think it likely that temperature does influence the
expression of characters in _H. gracilis_, directly in individual
development, and indirectly as a selective mechanism in the evolutionary
process. The extent to which each kind of influence exists can be proved
only by experimental work with both subspecies, which we hope to
undertake at a later date.

Other environmental factors that may have selective influence in this
species are rate of current, volume of flow, and turbidity. Interaction
of these environmental factors could result in genetic fixation of
morphological characters through natural selection. The characters that
distinguish _H. g. gracilis_ from _H. g. gulonella_ seem adaptive to
life in large rivers and small streams. Evidence that these characters
are under limited, direct environmental influence is found among
populations in the Arkansas River System. Although populations in the
Arkansas River have no continuity with populations of _H. g. gracilis_,
upstream-downstream variations like those found in other river systems
are apparent, but in lesser degree. The direction of variation in the
Arkansas River is the reverse of that in the Platte and other
tributaries of the Missouri River. For example, the populations farthest
upstream (Florence, Pueblo) have slightly higher mean numbers of lateral
line scales than do populations from Kansas, downstream.

A remarkable effect of extreme parasitism in _H. gracilis_ has been
described by Hubbs (1927). Very young chubs that harbored numerous
tapeworms (_Proteocephalus_) had unusually large numbers of lateral-line
scales, large eyes, short snouts, small fins, small mouths lacking
barbels, and coalescent nares (internarial bridge weak or absent). Some
of these abnormalities presumably resulted from retention of larval
characteristics of the fish, correlated with the degree of infestation
by tapeworms. No teratological adults were found, indicating that severe
infections prevent survival to maturity.

_H. g. gracilis_ occurs in three separate river systems (Mackenzie,
Saskatchewan, Missouri-Mississippi) from latitude 36 deg. N to 66 deg. N, and
longitude 89 deg. W to 123 deg. W. _H. g. gulonella_ exists as several
seemingly-isolated populations in the upper parts of the Rio Grande,
Pecos, South Canadian, Cimarron, Arkansas, Platte, and upper Missouri
basins, from latitude 35 deg. N to 48 deg. N, and longitude 97 deg. W to 100 deg. W.

There is evidence of high mobility on the part of both subspecies, based
on irregularity of their occurrence in certain localities. Many
collections have been made in the Cimarron River in the vicinity of
Kenton, Oklahoma, from 1925 to the present, but only one of these (in
1957) contained flathead chubs. Bait dealers who seine the South
Canadian River in Dewey County, Oklahoma, have taken flathead chubs in
abundance in some seasons, but not at all in others. Seasonal variation
in abundance in the lower Vermillion River, South Dakota (Underhill,
1959:100) has been cited, and the number collected in the lower Kansas
River near Lawrence has varied similarly. Many rivers occupied by _H. g.
gulonella_ (and by intergrades) are intermittent, and in some years
their sand-filled channels become wholly dry for many miles. These
factors probably promote mixing of the two subspecies, and may account,
over long periods of time, for the wide dispersal of _H. g. gulonella_
in the Missouri Basin. Flathead chubs are known from Pleistocene beds at
Doby Springs, Oklahoma (the Doby Springs local fauna) (Smith, 1958:177).
Drainage connections between the Arkansas, Kansas and Platte river
systems existed in Kansan and Nebraskan times (Frye and Leonard,
1952:189-190). Populations that have subsequently become isolated in
those rivers could be accounted for in this way. Flathead chubs could
have entered the Rio Grande-Pecos system by stream-capture from the
Arkansas System, in northeastern New Mexico or southern Colorado. _H. g.
gracilis_ undoubtedly entered the Saskatchewan and Mackenzie basins from
the upper Missouri Basin, following glacial retreat (Walters, 1955:347).




LITERATURE CITED


AGASSIZ, L.

  1854. Notice of a collection of fishes from the southern bend of the
        Tennessee River, in the state of Alabama. Amer. Jour. Sci. and
        Arts, 17(50):297-308 and 353-365.

BAILEY, REEVE M.

  1951. A check-list of the fishes of Iowa, with keys for
        identification. _In_ Iowa fish and fishing, by James R. Harlan
        and Everett B. Speaker. 1st edition. Iowa Cons. Comm. 185-237.

  1956. A check-list of the fishes of Iowa, with keys for
        identification. _In_ Iowa fish and fishing, by James R. Harlan
        and Everett B. Speaker. 3rd edition. Iowa Cons. Comm. 325-377.

BECKMAN, WILLIAM C.

  1952. Guide to the fishes of Colorado. Univ. Colorado Mus., 11:1-110.

BRYANT, FRANCIS T.

  1858. Report of Francis T. Bryant to Col. J. J. Abert, Chief, Corps
        Top. Engs., USA. _In_ Executive Documents of the Senate of the
        U. S., First Session, 35th Congress, and Special Session of
        1858. 3:455-481.

CHURCHILL, EDWARD P., and WILLIAM H. OVER.

  1933. Fishes of South Dakota. South Dakota Dept. Game and Fish. 1-87.

CLEARY, ROBERT E.

  1956. The distribution of the fishes of Iowa. _In_ Iowa fish and
        fishing, by James R. Harlan and Everett B. Speaker. 3rd
        edition. Iowa Cons. Comm. 267-324.

CLEMENS, W. A., A. MACDONALD, H. MCALLISTER, A. MANSFIELD and D. RAWSON.

  1947. The fishes of Saskatchewan. _In_ Report of the Royal Commission
        on the fisheries of the province of Saskatchewan. 1-131.

COCKERELL, THEODORA D. A.

  1927. Zoology of Colorado. Univ. Colorado, Boulder. 1-262.

COPE, E. D.

  1864. Partial catalogue of the cold-blooded Vertebrata of Michigan.
        Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, part 1:276-285.

  1865. Partial catalogue of the cold-blooded Vertebrata of Michigan.
        Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, part 2:78-88.

  1879. A contribution to the zoology of Montana. Amer. Nat.,
        13:432-441.

COPE, E. D., and H. C. YARROW.

  1875. Report upon the collections of fishes made in portions of
        Nevada, Utah, California, Colorado, New Mexico, and Arizona,
        during the years 1871, 1872, 1873, and 1874. _In_ Report upon
        geographical and geological explorations and surveys, west of
        the one hundredth meridian, in charge of First Lieut. Geo. M.
        Wheeler. Volume V, Zoology. 635-703.

CRAGIN, F. W.

  1885. Preliminary list of Kansas fishes. Bull. Washburn Lab. Nat.
        Hist., 1(3): 105-111.

CROSS, FRANK B., WALTER W. DALQUEST and LEO LEWIS.

  1955. First records from Texas of _Hybopsis gracilis_ and _Notropis
        girardi_, with comments on geographic variation of the latter.
        Texas Jour. Sci., 7(2):222-226.

CUVIER, M. LE BON and M. A. VALENCIENNES.

  1848. Histoire naturelle des poissons. Libraire de la Societe
        Geologique de France, Paris, 21:1-536.

DYMOND, J. R.

  1947. A list of the freshwater fish of Canada east of the Rocky
        Mountains, with keys. Royal Ontario Mus. Zool., Toronto,
        1:1-36.

EDDY, SAMUEL.

  1957. How to know the freshwater fishes. Wm. C. Brown Co., Dubuque,
        Iowa. 1-253.

EIGENMANN, CARL H.

  1895. Results of explorations in western Canada and the northwestern
        United States. Bull. U. S. Fish Comm., 14:101-132.

ELLIS, MAX M.

  1914. Fishes of Colorado. Univ. Colorado Studies, 11(1):1-136.

EVERMANN, BARTON W., and ULYSSES O. COX.

  1896. Report upon the fishes of the Missouri River drainage. Govnt.
        Printing Office, Washington. 325-429.

EVERMANN, BARTON WARREN, and EDMUND LEE GOLDSBOROUGH.

  1907. A check list of the freshwater fishes of Canada. Proc. Biol.
        Soc. Washington. 20:89-120.

FORBES, STEPHEN ALFRED, and ROBERT EARL RICHARDSON.

  1920. The fishes of Illinois. Illinois Nat. Hist. Survey. 1-357.

FRYE, J. C., and A. B. LEONARD.

  1952. Pleistocene geology of Kansas. Kansas Geol. Survey. 99:1-230.

GILBERT, CHAS. H.

  1885. Second series of notes on the fishes of Kansas. Bull. Washburn
        Lab. Nat. Hist., 1(3):97-99.

GILL, THEODORE.

  1876. Report on ichthyology. _In_ report of explorations across the
        Great Basin of the territory of Utah in 1859, by Captain J. H.
        Simpson. Appendix L. 385-431.

GERARD, CHARLES.

  1856. Researches upon the cyprinoid fishes inhabitating the fresh
        waters of the United States of America, west of the Mississippi
        Valley, from specimens in the museum of the Smithsonian
        Institution. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 8:165-213.

  1858. Fishes. _In_ Explorations and surveys for a railroad route from
        the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean. War Dept.,
        Washington. 1-368.

GRAHAM, I. D.

  1885. Preliminary list of Kansas fishes. Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci.,
        9:69-78.

HANKINSON, THOMAS L.

  1929. Fishes of North Dakota. Papers of the Michigan Acad. Sci., Arts
        and Letters., 10:439-460.

HARLAN, JAMES R., and EVERETT B. SPEAKER.

  1951. Iowa fish and fishing. Iowa Cons. Comm. 1st edition. 1-237.

  1956. Iowa fish and fishing. Iowa Cons. Comm. 3rd edition. 1-377.

HARRISON, HARRY M., and EVERETT B. SPEAKER.

  1954. An annotated list of the fishes in the streams tributary to the
        Missouri River in Iowa. Proc. Iowa Acad. Sci., 61:511-523.

HART, J. S.

  1952. Geographic variations of some physiological and morphological
        characters in certain freshwater fishes. Pub. Ontario Fish.
        Res. Lab., 72:1-79.

HINKS, DAVID.

  1943. The fishes of Manitoba. Dept. Mines and Nat. Res., Province of
        Manitoba. 1-102.

HUBBS, CARL L.

  1922. Variations in the number of vertebrae and other meristic
        characters of fishes correlated with the temperature of water
        during development. Amer. Nat., 61:360-372.

  1926. The structural consequences of modifications of the
        developmental rate in fishes, considered in reference to certain
        problems of evolution. Amer. Nat., 60:57-81.

  1927. The related effects of a parasite on a fish. Jour. Parasitology,
        14(2):75-84.

  1941. Increased number and delayed development of scales in abnormal
        suckers. Papers Michigan Acad. Sci., Arts and Letters,
        26(1940):229-239.

  1951. _Notropis amnis_, a new cyprinid fish of the Mississippi fauna,
        with two subspecies. Occ. Papers Mus. Zool., Univ. Michigan.
        532:1-30.

HUBBS, CARL L., and KARL F. LAGLER.

  1958. Fishes of the Great Lakes region. Cranbrook Inst. Sci.,
        26:1-213.

HUBBS, CARL L., and A. I. ORTENBURGER.

  1929a. Further notes on the fishes of Oklahoma, with descriptions of
        new species of Cyprinidae. Publ. Univ. Oklahoma Biol. Sur.,
        1(2):17-44.

  1929b. Fishes collected in Oklahoma and Arkansas in 1927. Publ. Univ.
        Oklahoma Biol. Sur., 1(3):45-112.

JORDAN, DAVID STARR.

  1885. A catalogue of the fishes known to inhabit the waters of North
        America, north of the Tropic of Cancer. Annual report of the
        Commissioner of Fish and Fisheries for 1884. Govnt. Printing
        Office, Washington. 1-185.

  1929. Manual of the vertebrate animals of the northeastern United
        States, inclusive of marine species. World Book Company, N. Y.
        1-446.

JORDAN, DAVID STARR, and BARTON WARREN EVERMANN.

  1896. The fishes of North and Middle America: a descriptive catalogue
        of the species of fish-like vertebrates found in the waters of
        North America, north of the Isthmus of Panama. Part 1. Bull. U.
        S. Nat. Mus., 47:1-1240.

JORDAN, DAVID STARR, BARTON WARREN EVERMANN, and HOWARD WALTON CLARK.

  1930. Check list of the fishes and fish-like vertebrates of North
        America north of the northern boundary of Venezuela and
        Colombia. Report of the United States Commissioner of Fisheries
        for the fiscal year 1928, with appendices. Part 2. Govnt.
        Printing Office, Washington. 1-670.

JORDAN, DAVID STARR, and CHARLES H. GILBERT.

  1882. Synopsis of the fishes of North America. Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus.,
        16:1-1018.

JORDAN, DAVID STARR, and SETH E. MEEK.

  1886. List of fishes collected in Iowa and Missouri in August, 1884,
        with descriptions of three new species. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus.,
        8:1-17.

KELEHER, J. J.

  1956. The northern limits of distribution in Manitoba for cyprinid
        fishes. Canadian Jour. Zool., 34(4):263-266.

KELEHER, J. J., and B. KOOYMAN.

  1957. Supplement to Hinks' "The fishes of Manitoba." Dept. Mines and
        Nat. Res., Province of Manitoba. 103-117.

KOSTER, WILLIAM J.

  1957. Guide to the fishes of New Mexico. Univ. New Mexico Press, in
        cooperation with the New Mexico Dept. of Game and Fish,
        Albuquerque, New Mexico. 1-116.

LINDSEY, C. C.

  1956. Distribution and taxonomy of fishes in the Mackenzie drainage
        of British Columbia. Jour. Fish. Res. Bd. Canada.
        13(6):759-789.

  1957. Possible effects of water diversions on fish distribution in
        British Columbia. Jour. Fish. Res. Bd. Canada. 14(4):651-668.

MARTIN, W. R.

  1949. The mechanics of environmental control of body form in fishes.
        Pub. Ontario Fish. Res. Lab., 70:1-91.

MEEK, SETH E.

  1892. A report upon fishes of Iowa, based upon observations and
        collections made during 1889, 1890, and 1891. Bull. U. S. Fish
        Comm., 10:217-248.

  1895. Notes on the fishes of western Iowa and eastern Nebraska. Bull.
        U. S. Fish Comm., 14:133-138.

MILLER, R. B., and M. J. PAETZ.

  1953. Preliminary biological surveys of Alberta watersheds.
        1950-1952. Govmt. Province of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta.
        2:1-114.

MOORE, GEORGE A.

  1950. The cutaneous sense organs of barbeled minnows adapted to life
        in the muddy waters of the Great Plains region. Trans. Amer.
        Micro. Soc., 69(1):69-95.

  1957. Fishes. _In_ Vertebrates of the United States, by W. F. Blair,
        A. P. Blair, P. Brodkorb, F. R. Cagle and G. A. Moore.
        McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, New York, 30-210.

O'DONNEL, D. JOHN.

  1935. Annotated list of the fishes of Illinois. Illinois Nat. Hist.
        Sur. Bull., 20(5):473-500.

ORTENBURGER, A. I., and CARL L. HUBBS.

  1927. A report on the fishes of Oklahoma, with descriptions of new
        genera and species. Oklahoma Acad. Sci., 6(1926):123-141.

PERSONIUS, ROBERT G., and SAMUEL EDDY.

  1955. Fishes of the Little Missouri River. Copeia. 1:41-43.

RAWSON, D. S.

  1951. Studies of the fish of Great Slave Lake. Jour. Fish. Res. Bd.
        Canada. 8(4):207-240.

RICHARDSON, JOHN.

  1836. Fauna Boreali-Americana. Part 3, the fish. Richard Bentley, New
        Burlington Street, London. 1-327.

SCHULTZ, LEONARD P.

  1927. Temperature-controlled variation in the golden shiner,
        _Notemigonus crysoleucas_. Proc. Michigan Acad. Sci., Arts and
        Letters. 6:417-432.

SCOTT, W. B.

  1958. A checklist of the freshwater fishes of Canada and Alaska.
        Royal Ontario Mus., 1-30.

SHOEMAKER, HURST H., QUENTIN H. PICKERING and LEONARD DURHAM.

  1951. The occurrence of the flathead chub, _Platygobio gracilis_, in
        Tennessee. Jour. Tennessee Acad. Sci., 24(1):84.

SIMON, JAMES R.

  1946. Wyoming fishes. Wyoming Game and Fish Dept., 1-129.

SLASTENENKO, E. P.

  1958. The distribution of freshwater fishes in the provinces and main
        water basins of Canada. Bull. Shevchenko Sci. Soc., 1(6):1-11.

SMITH, C. LAVETT.

  1958. Additional Pleistocene fishes from Kansas and Oklahoma. Copeia.
        3:176-180.

SUCKLEY, GEORGE.

  1860. Report upon the fishes collected on the Pacific Railroad
        Survey. Pacific Railroad Report. 12(3):307-368.

TANING, A. VEDEL.

  1952. Experimental study of meristic characters in fishes. Biol. Rev.
        Cambridge Phil. Soc., 27(2):169-193.

THOMPSON, ERNEST SETON.

  1898. A list of fishes known to occur in Manitoba. Forest and Stream.
        51(11):214.

UNDERHILL, JAMES C.

  1959. Fishes of the Vermillion River, South Dakota. Proc. South
        Dakota Acad. Sci., 38:96-102.

VLADYKOV, VADIM D.

  1934. Environmental and taxonomic characters of fishes. Trans. Royal
        Canadian Inst., 20(43):99-140.

WALTERS, VLADIMIR.

  1955. Fishes of western Arctic America and eastern Arctic Siberia.
        Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 106(5):255-368.

WEISEL, GEORGE F.

  1955. Variation in the number of fin rays of two cyprinid fishes
        correlated with natural water temperatures. Ecology. 36(1):1-6.

WYNNE-EDWARDS, V. C.

  1952. Freshwater vertebrates of the Arctic and Subarctic. Bull. Fish.
        Res. Bd. Canada. 94:1-28.


_Transmitted November 8, 1960._


28-5871


[Transcriber's Note:

The following changes have been made to the original text:

    Table of Contents: page number of "Food" and "Spawning Season"
                      changed from 339 to 338
    Page 327: "abbreviated AU" changed to "abbreviated UA"
    Page 344: "Societe Geologique" changed to "Societe Geologique"]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Geographic Variation in the North
American Cyprinid Fish, Hybopsis gracilis, by Leonard J. Olund and Frank B. Cross

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION ***

***** This file should be named 38425.txt or 38425.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/4/2/38425/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Erica
Pfister-Altschul and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
