The Project Gutenberg EBook of Robin's Rambles, by May Byron

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Robin's Rambles

Author: May Byron

Illustrator: A. Fairfax Muckley

Release Date: January 6, 2012 [EBook #38504]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROBIN'S RAMBLES ***




Produced by Katherine Delany, Hazel Batey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Illustration: This Book Belongs To.


ROBIN'S RAMBLES

By MAY BYRON

Illustration: Robin Feeding Young.

Illustrated by

A. FAIRFAX MUCKLEY


  HUMPHREY MILFORD
  OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
  LONDON


Illustration: Harvest Mice.

PRINTED BY THOS. FORMAN AND SONS, NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND

Illustration: Robin's Rambles.




ROBIN'S RAMBLES


Robin was a very spick and span little person: always neat and dapper,
in fact a wee bit dandified, you might say. He lived in the East Country
in a nice little garden belonging to a nice little house, beside a
stream that went slowly through fields. The house was white-washed pink,
and the roof was tiled with red like Robin's breast. He thought himself
extremely beautiful, remarkably clever, and braver than anybody that
ever lived. But his wife didn't agree with him a bit.

Mrs. Robin did not bother as to whether she was beautiful, clever, or
brave. She was much too busy for that. For several weeks she had been
getting a home ready for her little ones, and when you have to collect
your home brick by brick, or twig by twig, it takes a good deal of
thought and trouble. Mrs. Robin was now sitting on her nest (which was
in a hole in the ground against the back of the stable), upon five
red-speckled eggs; so she had a bit of a rest; but it was rather dull
and uninteresting for her. Robin, of course, ought to have stayed there
to keep her company and chat a bit, and bring her little tempting
titbits for lunch. But he was so curious and inquisitive about other
people's affairs that he took very little notice of his own. Besides, he
was a born rambler.

Illustration: Fighting for Crumbs

So every morning Mrs. Robin would say to him, "What is the latest news,
my dear?" And he would say, "Really, my love, there is very little
doing. I will just take a little stroll and see what news I can pick up
that will amuse you!" And off he would go--and away he would stay, for
every day he went a longer and longer stroll. And when he came back,
either he was too tired to tell Mrs. Robin his adventures, or else she
was going to sleep and wouldn't listen.

One day he grew suddenly very curious about the kitchen. This was partly
on account of crumbs. He knew the crumbs came out from there, because he
saw the Sparrow family and the Starling household fighting for them. "I
can't be mixed up with people like these," said Robin to himself.
"Squabbling over food--disgusting I call it! I shall take my meals in
private like a gentleman." And he was just going in through the scullery
when he saw a surprised pair of green eyes staring at him as he stood in
the doorway. This was young Missy Kitten, and she wanted to make
friends with him: she was a cheerful little soul and would have liked to
play. But just as she put out a fat soft paw to pat him, old Mother
Tabbykins jumped up from beside the kitchen fire, and came to stop Missy
Kitten playing with strangers. Robin departed more suddenly than he had
come, but Mother Tabbykins kept a bit of his tail-feather.

Illustration: Old Mother Tabbykins jumped up

Illustration: Missy Kitten wants to Play

Next day he went along the stream, till he came to the windmill. It was
standing still, and Robin was quite fidgety with curiosity. He hopped
in through the dusty door, and the mice who lived there were very glad
to see him. They were humble, dingy sort of people, and they thought him
very lively and quite grand, because of the airs he gave himself. But,
while he was telling them wonderful traveller's tales about himself and
the things he had seen, suddenly the windmill sails began to turn, and
everything started creaking and whirring. Robin went off so fast that he
got home perfectly breathless. "My dear--the end of the world is come!"
he puffed and panted. "Nothing of the sort," replied Mrs. Robin sharply.
"You wait till you hear!" he exclaimed, and he told her all about it.
But she didn't sympathise one bit.

Illustration: He got home perfectly breathless.

"I shall be out longer to-day," said Robin next morning. "I want to see
more of the world. It's a stupid, humdrum life, just pecking and
flapping round a stable." "Maybe you'll go farther and fare worse,"
replied Mrs. Robin. "Nonsense," said he, "it's all very well for you,
leading the lazy life you do, just sitting on a lot of eggs. But there,
I can't expect you to understand. Ta-ta!" and he disappeared.

Illustration: Mr. Red Vole came out.

He crept along a blackthorn hedge, which ran through a field full of
cowslips; at the foot of the hedge there was a dyke, or wide ditch with
reeds and bulrushes in it every here and there. This was quite a
delightful ramble for Robin, at first: but soon his curiosity began to
get him into trouble. He came across a little hole and wanted to
explore it--he simply loved poking and prying into other people's
holes,--and Mr. Red Vole came out very snappish and snarlish. "What do
you want here?" said Mr. Red Vole. "Didn't you see the notice outside:
'No tramps or hawkers'? Nobody is admitted except on business!"--"But I
am on business," said Robin resentfully. "Whose?" enquired Mr. Red Vole.
"Your own, or somebody else's?"--"I will give you the answer to-morrow,"
said Robin with a perky air, and he flew away rather quickly, for Mr.
Red Vole had most disagreeable-looking teeth.

"Don't you mind him," said Tom Sedge-Warbler, who was swinging on a tall
bulrush hard by. "His bark is worse than his bite. I've known him as
cross as two sticks with me, because he said I kept him awake at night.
I said, 'Well, here's a bit of willow-down. Stuff your ears with that.'
And, would you believe it, he called me names!"

"Oh, you sing at night, do you?" said Robin.

Illustration: Tom Sedge-Warbler was swinging on a tall bulrush.

"I sing whenever I feel like it," said Tom Sedge-Warbler. "I hate
doing things at stated times. I haven't got one of your neat and tidy
minds that go by the clock."

Illustration: The Family at the Mill.

"But there's nobody to hear you at night," said Robin, who thought it
was waste of a song unless there was someone near to admire it. Tom
Sedge-Warbler told him, "Bless you, yes, there is--heaps of 'em. Why,
only last night the Water-Lady--hold hard--I'm going to sing now--it's
coming on--I can't stop!" And he suddenly burst forth like a musical box
that has been wound up to go on for ever. Robin said impatiently, "Do
stop for half a second!--I want to know several things." But Tom
Sedge-Warbler only shook his cheerful head and went on, on, on, on, on,
on.... And at this moment there came a fierce and furious wind, a
perfectly enormous wind, all wild and whirling. It goes about in the
East Country and nowhere else, and it is called the "Roger." And it
caught up Master Robin and whiffed him right away, as if he had been a
little bit of straw, along with all sorts of other things,--real bits of
straw, and broken leaves, and old egg shells. Away and away it took him,
and at last it let him fall, most dreadfully alarmed, into a marshy bank
beside a broad, where he had never been in his life before. A broad is
another East Country thing. It is a large wide sheet of water. It's not
a lake and not a pond--it's a broad, that's all you can say,--with
reeds, and rushes, and sedges, and lovely water plants all along the
shore. And it goes along-along till it comes to another broad.

Well, there was Robin, far away from the pink-washed house, in this
outlandish place, as he thought it. Nobody saw him except Bill the
Weasel. But Bill the Weasel knew him for a stranger, and decided to
follow him all the way.

Illustration: Nobody saw him except Bill the Weasel.

Illustration: Old Mother Snipe flounced up.

As soon as Robin had recovered his breath, he also recovered his
curiosity. He set about rambling at once. To begin with, he tracked the
noises. The place was full of strange noises. There was an extraordinary
bleating, for one thing, which he thought was his old friend Dame
Nanny-goat who lived in a field at home. But when he had tracked the
bleating right up to where it began, in a tussock of rushes, old
Mother Snipe flounced up out of the rushes, and shrieked, "You
impertinent little Jackanapes! What are you poking after here?" And she
drove him out of the rushes with angry words. But Bill the Weasel
followed him all the way.

Illustration: Bill the Weasel welcomes the Stranger.

Then he saw a very odd and remarkable person with a crest. Not the kind
you have on note-paper, but a frilly thing on his head. The crested
person was very busy diving, and Robin went and waited on the shore till
he should come up again. "Could you kindly inform me as to the best way
home?" shouted Robin between the dives. The crested person was Gaffer
Grebe, who was collecting wet water-weeds to make his floating nest
with, for he couldn't endure dry nests that stay still in one place. "I
have no time for gossipping," mumbled Gaffer Grebe, with his mouth full
of building material. "It isn't gossipping! it's thirst for knowledge,"
said Robin. Gaffer Grebe didn't trouble himself to answer. He flapped
his wings very loudly and aimed some of the wet water-weeds at the
stranger.

Illustration: Gaffer Grebe was collecting wet water-weeds.

"Great rude ugly thing!" said Robin to himself as he made his way
towards another noise. It did seem very strange that anyone so
beautiful, so clever and brave as he, should be treated like a little
street-urchin and ordered off. He went sulkily along the edge of the
broad; and Bill the Weasel followed him all the way.

Illustration: The Battle of the Beaks.

Then he came upon a fearfully exciting scene. Robin Ruff and Richard
Ruff were fighting together furiously, just like Tweedledum and
Tweedledee. For they were so exactly alike that he couldn't tell which
was which: only the magnificent frill around Robin Ruff's neck was a
slightly different colour from the magnificent frill round the neck of
Richard Ruff. They had worn off all the grass underfoot with fighting,
but there were plenty of scraps of feather flying about. And little
Miss Reeve stood by watching them. "Most unladylike of her!" thought
Robin. "Why doesn't she try and make peace?" So he boldly edged in and
called out, "Oh, I say, you fellows! this is coming it a =leetle= too
strong. Stop! I tell you, stop!" Then they turned upon him with flaming
eyes and slashing beaks, and he had to scramble away as best he could.
It never does to interfere in a fight between friends. They would much
rather fight you than each other. Robin just escaped in time. But Bill
the Weasel was so close behind them that he nearly got skewered by the
beaks of the two Ruffs. And at this moment Hob, the Marsh Harrier,
caught sight of Robin from where he was hovering, high in the air above.

Illustration: Scraps of feather flying about.

Illustration: Hob, the Marsh Harrier, was hovering high in the air
above.

Meanwhile it was getting dark, and more extraordinary noises were to be
heard,--more than ever. The Nooper Swans and the Brent Geese, and other
mysterious families whom Robin did not know, were calling overhead
continually, and there was a constant boom-boom-boom going on among the
reed-beds. Robin was a trifle scary and nervous now; this ramble had had
so many adventures in it. But still he was eaten up by curiosity, and he
tried to explore the reed-bed where the boom-boom was. And he pushed his
way between the roots of the bulrushes, and flew a little here and
there, while the sunset gradually faded out of the sky, until he came
to a most wonderful place.

Illustration: The Brent Geese were calling overhead.

But Bill the Weasel was just behind him: and Hob the Marsh Harrier was
above him in mid-air.

This place was all fenced round with tall bulrushes, and inside you
could see a green marshy spot, with cuckoo flowers and king-cups
growing, and Somebody was booming there all alone. Then a beautiful
fairy person who was the Water-Lady slid down a bulrush and said, "You
mustn't go in there: trespassers will be prosecuted. No admittance except
on business. That's the law of the broad."

"Why not?" said Robin. "Whose place is it?"

Illustration: A beautiful fairy person slid down a bulrush.

"That," said the Water-Lady, "is the Home of the Last-of-the-Bitterns,
and he must never be spoken to by anybody but me. He wants to do all the
talking himself."

"How does he do the boom-boom?" said Robin, wild with curiosity. For he
thought he would like to learn how to boom-boom himself. It would
silence Mrs. Robin when she scolded him.

But the Water-Lady said, "Sh-s-s-h, go away!" and disappeared inside.
She was all in pale pink and gold, like the cuckoo-flowers and
king-cups.

Robin wouldn't go away. He suddenly became very obstinate, and
determined to find out what the Last-of-the-Bitterns looked like. And he
squeezed, and shoved, and slithered between the bulrushes. And he was
just inside, and just saw the Last-of-the-Bitterns standing there,
humped-up and dreadfully old, when three things happened at once.

Bill the Weasel made a grab at his neck, and missed.

Hob the Marsh Harrier dropped upon him from above--but fell by accident
into the water, owing to the Last-of-the-Bitterns suddenly shifting his
position.

And the Water-Lady seized Robin in her arms, and flung her pink and gold
scarf about him.

"Don't move!" she screamed in a high, thin shrill voice, just like wind
among the reeds. "Don't move! Don't speak! Don't wriggle!"

Illustration: The Water-Lady seized Robin in her arms.

Illustration: The Home of the Last-of-the-Bitterns.

"Do these folk know who-who-who I am?" rumbled the Last-of-the Bitterns.
"Do they suppose there is room-room-room for them in the same place as
Me?"

Then the Last-of-the-Bitterns gave Bill a peck which it took him a month
to get over. And he gave Hob another peck, so that he went away very wet
and with a headache. And then he boomed a song of victory, so loud that
the whole broad trembled.

Meanwhile the Water-Lady, with Robin still in her arms, rose up out of
the reed-beds and flew miles and miles and miles--or so it seemed. By
this time Robin was quite sure that he was neither very brave nor very
clever. And as to being very beautiful, for once he never thought about
that at all. The Water-Lady stopped in the middle of a turnip-field,
where the Bunnies were playing by moonlight. And she gave Robin a good
shaking. "Let this be a lesson to you," said she, "to keep yourself to
yourself." And she departed.

Illustration: The Bunnies were playing by moonlight.

Then the Bunnies very politely escorted Robin home, which was really
just round the corner. He thought he had been hundreds of years away,
but it was only half a day. And he expected a terrific lecture from
Mrs. Robin, and had made up his mind to promise never to ramble any
more.

Illustration: The Bunnies Politely Escorted him Home.

But Mrs. Robin was so happy that she had nothing in the world but smiles
for him. "Come in, dear," she called to him, all beaming. For the five
little Robins were hatched: and they were the finest children ever seen!
They were also (so Mrs. Robin said) the most beautiful, the dearest and
the bravest.

As for Robin, he does nothing now from morning to night but look after
them. They are always hungry, and always saying so. There isn't a
moment's time for anything but meal-times. Robin's rambles are over for
the present.

Illustration: Robins Feeding Young.




Transcribers Note

The word leetle which is shown as =leetle= was underlined in the original
book.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Robin's Rambles, by May Byron

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROBIN'S RAMBLES ***

***** This file should be named 38504.txt or 38504.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/5/0/38504/

Produced by Katherine Delany, Hazel Batey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
