The Project Gutenberg EBook of Select List of Books ... Relating to the
Far East, by Appleton Prentiss Clark Griffin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Select List of Books ... Relating to the Far East

Author: Appleton Prentiss Clark Griffin

Release Date: January 11, 2012 [EBook #38552]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECT BOOKS--FAR EAST ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

SELECT LIST OF BOOKS
(WITH REFERENCES TO PERIODICALS)

RELATING TO THE
FAR EAST

COMPILED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
APPLETON PRENTISS CLARK GRIFFIN
CHIEF BIBLIOGRAPHER

WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1904




PREFATORY NOTE


This List deals with the later conditions in the Far East. The
political and economic aspects are the special subjects dealt with. For
convenience of consultation the titles are arranged under the following
subdivisions: Russia; History, politics, etc.; Russian expansion;
Trans-Siberian railroad; Tibet; Manchuria; Japan; Korea; Russo-Japanese
relations; Far East: American relations; Far East: European relations;
Anglo-Russian relations; and China.

_History of Russia._--A compendium of Russian history is Morfill's "A
history of Russia from the birth of Peter the Great to Nicholas II."
Rambaud's "The history of Russia" is a work of greater extent, the
later editions bring the history down to 1904. In Wallace's "Russia"
the history stops at 1877.

Recent works in English on the _internal affairs of Russia_ are
Brueggen's "Russia of to-day;" Drage's "Russian affairs;" Latimer's
"Russia and Turkey in the nineteenth century;" Leroy-Beaulieu's "The
empire of the tsars and the Russians;" Palmer's "Russian life in town
and country;" and Schierbrand's "Russia, her strength and her
weakness." The volumes issued by the Russian government in connection
with the World's Columbian exposition contain much statistical
information. Works in foreign languages to be specially noted are:
Anspach's "La Russie economique et l'oeuvre de M. de Witte;" Brueggen's
"Das heutige Russland;" Danielson's "Histoire du developpement
economique de la Russie depuis l'affranchissement des serfs;" Delage's
"Chez les Russes;" Deschamps's "La Russie au 20^{me} siecle;"
Kovalevski[)i]'s "La Russie a la fin du 19^e siecle;" Kupchanko's
"Russland in Zahlen;" Machat's "Le developpement economique de la
Russie;" Niet's "La Russie d'aujourd'hui" and Strannik's "La pensee
russe contemporaine."

_Russian navy._--Clarke's "Russia's sea-power, past and present; or,
The rise of the Russian navy" and Jane's "The imperial Russian navy;
its past, present, and future."

_Russian expansion._--Rambaud's "The expansion of Russia" is a valuable
economic study. Skrine's "The expansion of Russia, 1815-1900" is a
sympathetic record down to 1900; Norman's "All the Russias" inclines to
look with favor on Russian policies; Beveridge's "The Russian advance"
is the result of a study of conditions made in a visit in 1901 and is
commendatory of Russia; Chirol's "The middle eastern question"
considers phases of Russian expansion with special regard to Russian
relations with Afghanistan, Persia and Tibet, and to the position of
the Indian empire; Gerrare's "Greater Russia" is written with the
object of conveying "an adequate idea of Russia's advance: her
industrial progress, commercial prospects, the openings presented for
both capital and labour, the markets closed to foreign enterprise." G.
Frederick Wright in his work entitled "Asiatic Russia" holds that
"except in the case of the United States, no other nation of the world
has before it the clear field for expansion that Russia has in her
Asiatic possessions, and no other nation has more completely at her
command the material and moral resources of modern science and
Christian civilization than she has, if she but continues to use them
rightly." Krahmer's "Russland in Asien" is a detailed history in six
volumes, of which a single volume is devoted to a special phase of
Russian activities in the Far East.

_Trans-Siberian railway._--There are numerous travellers' accounts
including Cary's "The Trans-Siberian route; or, Notes of a journey from
Pekin to New York in 1902;" Lynch's "The path of empire;" Shoemaker's
"The great Siberian railway from St. Petersburg to Pekin;" Simpson's
"Side-lights on Siberia. Some accounts of the great Siberian railroad,
the prisons and the exile systems;" Vladimir's "Russia on the Pacific,
and the Siberian railway" and others in the articles in periodicals
noted on pp. 19-21 of this List. The sumptuous volume printed by the
Russian Ministry of ways of communication, printed in English under the
title "Guide to the Great Siberian railway" is to be specially noted.
The account published by the United States Bureau of statistics in its
Monthly summary of commerce and finance, April, 1899, contains valuable
material.

_Manchuria._--Hosie's "Manchuria: its people, resources and history" is
a good first hand authority. Whigham's "Manchuria and Korea" is a study
of political and economic conditions as well as descriptive.

_History of Japan._--Recent works are Brinkley's "Japan; its history,
arts and literature;" Diosy's "The new Far East;" Griffis's "The
Mikado's empire. 10th ed., including history to beginning of 1903;"
Gulick's "Evolution of the Japanese, social and psychic;" Koch's
"Japan. Geschichte nach japanischen Quellen und ethnographischen
Skizzen;" Murray's "The story of Japan" and Ransome's "Japan in
transition." A history of Japan in restricted compass is given in the
second volume of Helmolt's "The world's history, a survey of man's
record."

The recent _descriptive works_ are:--Brinkley's "Japan; its history,
arts and literature" and the volume he has edited entitled "Japan;
described and illustrated by the Japanese; written by eminent Japanese
authorities and scholars;" Browne's "Japan; the place and the people;"
Brownell's "The heart of Japan;" Chamberlain's "Things Japanese" and
the guide written with W. B. Mason entitled "A handbook for travellers
in Japan;" Dumolard's "Le Japon politique, economique, et social";
Scherer's "Japan today;" Singleton's "Japan as seen and described by
famous writers;" Sladen's "Queer things about Japan;" Gilbert Watson's
"Three rolling stones in Japan" and W. Petrie Watson's "Japan; aspects
& destinies."

_The Japanese navy._--F. T. Jane's "The imperial Japanese navy" is
similar in scope to his book on the Russian navy and is of likewise
timely value.

_Japanese art_ is treated in Anderson's "The pictorial arts of Japan;"
Brinkley's "The art of Japan" and his "Japan; described and illustrated
by the Japanese; written by eminent Japanese authorities and scholars;
with an essay on Japanese art by Kaluzo Okakura;" Okakura's "The ideals
of the East, with special reference to the art of Japan;" and Rein's
"The industries of Japan. Together with an account of its agriculture,
forestry, arts, and commerce."

_Korea._--Hamilton's "Korea" is to be noted as a comprehensive account
giving results of recent observations. Underwood's "Fifteen years among
the top-knots; or, Life in Korea" gives a picture of missionary life in
Korea.

The literature consisting of magazine articles on the present war is
noted under the heading Russo-Japanese relations on pp. 40-48 of this
List.

A selection of titles relating to the _political interests of the
United States_ in the Far East is given on pp. 49-52 of this List. It
includes some works dealing with the first appearance of Americans in
Asiatic countries and the history of their participation in Far Eastern
affairs. In the section devoted to Anglo-Russian relations are noted
works dealing with the Russian advance in Central Asia and its effects
upon English interests.

_History of China._--An extensive work is Boulger's "The history of
China," first published in 1881-1884, and revised editions in 1898 and
1900, respectively. Its chief value lies in its detailed account of
"European progress in China subsequent to the signing of the treaty of
Nankin in 1842, including the Taeping rebellion in all its phases and
Gordon's campaign." The earlier part of his history is drawn mainly
from the Jesuit epitomes of the Chinese annalists. The new edition of
his "Short History" has an additional chapter, written by another hand,
giving a summary account of the reign of Kwang Su, covering the capture
of Pekin.

Douglas's "China", forming a volume of the "Story of the nations
series" gives all that the general reader needs. In Macgowan's "A
history of China from the earliest days down to the present" recourse
has been had to the original authorities. "It is not a compilation
gathered from all sources, but a reproduction from the original of the
Standard History of China." Williams's "The middle kingdom" first
published in 1848, constituted for a long time the principal source of
information for English readers, and in its revised form is still
regarded as a classic. Brinkley's "China; its history, arts and
literature" is of very great value. The _later history of China_ is
dealt with, among others, by Beals, Colquhoun, Favier, Hart, Krausse,
Landor, Leroy-Beaulieu, Lynch, Mitford, Norman, Thomson, Wen Ching and
Wilson.

_China._--_Political and economic conditions_ are discussed in works by
Bard, Beresford, Brandt, Brenier, Colquhoun, Gorst, Krausse,
Leroy-Beaulieu, Nelson, Parker, Parsons, Pinon, and Wilson. _See also_
"Commercial China in 1904" published by the United States Bureau of
statistics.

For the _foreign relations_ of China there are to be noted Cordier's
"Histoire des relations de la Chine avec les puissances occidentales
1860-1900," and Ireland's "China and the powers; chapters in the
history of Chinese intercourse with western nations."

The _social life_ of China can be studied in Douglas's "Society in
China;" Hesse-Wartegg's "China und Japan;" Little's "Intimate China;"
Smith's "Chinese characteristics" and his "Village life in China."

_Travel in China._--Recent works are Bishop's "The Yangtze Valley and
beyond;" Cumming's "Wanderings in China;" Jack's "The back blocks of
China;" Little's "Through the Yang-tse gorges;" Scidmore's "China" and
Thomson's "Through China with a camera."

_Missions in China._--For this subject see works by Barrows, Edkins,
Gundry and Michie.

_Chinese bibliography._--Cordier's "Bibliotheca sinica. Dictionnaire
bibliographique des ouvrages relatifs a l'Empire chinois," is a
monumental work.

A. P. C. GRIFFIN
_Chief Bibliographer_

HERBERT PUTNAM
_Librarian of Congress_
_Washington, D. C., July 1, 1904_




SELECT LIST OF BOOKS (WITH REFERENCES TO PERIODICALS) RELATING TO THE
FAR EAST




RUSSIA: HISTORY, POLITICS, ETC.

(See also Russians Expansion, pp. 12-16 of this list.)


~Anspach~, Alfred. La Russie economique et l'oeuvre de M. de Witte, avec
introduction par Ch. de Lariviere.

_Paris: H. Le Soudier, 1904. (4), xviii, 394 pp. Portrait. 12^o._

     Appendix: La Russie et la Perse au point de vue commercial.
     Fragment d'un discours de M. de Witte.

     Contains chapters on de Witte, railroads, emigration in
     Siberia, the frontier guard, the merchant marine, monetary
     reform, credit, public debt, bridges, etc., showing results
     which de Witte has achieved.


~Brandes~, Georg Morris Cohen. Impressions of Russia. Translated from the
Danish by Samuel C. Eastman.

_New York: T. Y. Crowell & co., [1889]. x, 353 pp. Portrait. 12^o._


~Browning~, Oscar. Peter the Great.

_London: Hutchinson and co., 1898. viii, 347 pp. Portrait. 12^o._


~Brueggen~, Ernst von der. Das heutige Russland; Kulturstudien.

_Leipzig: Veit & comp., 1902. (6), 276 pp. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: Ausseres Wachsthum.--Innere
     Kaempfe.--Finanzen.--Industrie.--Das Zentrum.--Der Adel.--Der
     Bauer.--Kirche und Moral.--Verarmung und
     Hungersnot.--Mittelklassen.--Stadtwesen, Schulen,
     Revolutionaere, Kunst, Litteratur.--Die europaeischen
     Grenzlaender.--Kolonien und Weltmacht.--Die
     Landschaftsverfassung.--Buereaukratie.--Verfassungsfragen.


---- Russia of to-day. From the German, by M. Sandwith.

_London: Digby, Long & co., 1904. vii, 306 pp. 8^o._


~Bujac~, Jean Leopold Emile. L'armee russe, son histoire, son
organisation actuelle.

_Paris: Limoges, H. Charles-Lavauzelle, 1894. 428 pp. 8^o._


~Clarke~, _Sir_ George Sydenham. Russia's sea-power, past and present;
or, The rise of the Russian navy.

_London: J. Murray, 1898. xix, (1), 202 pp. 2 folded maps. 12^o._

     A new edition has been published, and has been ordered by
     the Library.


~[Daniels]on~, Nikola[)i] Frantsovich. Histoire du developpement economique
de la Russie depuis l'affranchissement des serfs, par Nicolas-on.
Traduit de russe par Gg.

_Paris: V. Giard & E. Briere, 1902. vii, 523 pp. Tables. 8^o._


~Delage~, Emile. Chez les Russes; etudes et impressions de voyage
melees. Preface par Georges Montorgueil. 3. ed.

_Paris: Dujarric et cie. 1903. xxiv, 410 pp. 12^o._

     CONTENTS: Choses entrevues: Chemin faisant a travers la
     Pologne,--Choses vues et vecues: A Moscou.--Choses
     decouvertes: Sur le Volga et alentour, oreille tendue et nez
     au vent.--Etudes annexes: Le commerce du vin dans l'Empire
     russe. La propriete industrielle et litteraire devant les
     pratiques russes. Les foires de Nijni-Novgorod de ce temps.


~Deschamps~, Philippe. La Russie au 20^{me} siecle.

_Paris: Guillaumin & cie., 1902. (4), 284, (1) pp. 8^o._


~Drage~, Geoffrey. Russian affairs.

_London: John Murray, 1904. xvi, 738 pp. Folded maps. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: Introduction; Russian ambitions; Agriculture;
     Agrarian development; Famines; Industry; Commerce; Finance;
     Poland, Finland, and the Baltic provinces; Dependencies.
     _A._ Northern Asia: Siberia; Manchuria; _B._ Central Asia;
     Conclusion; Appendices.

     "This is a new and important work on the present internal
     state of Russia, derived from personal acquaintance with the
     country. Political questions and the economic problems
     connected with agriculture, industry, commerce and finance
     in European and Asiatic Russia are exhaustively dealt with,
     M. de Witte's budgets being carefully analysed." _Spectator,
     Mar. 26, '04._


~Foulke~, William Dudley. Slav or Saxon, a study of the growth and
tendencies of Russian civilization. 2d ed., revised.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1899. vii, (1), 141 pp. 12^o.
(Questions of the day, no. 43.)_


---- _Same_. 3d ed. rev. and enl.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1904. ix, (1), 210 pp. 12^o. (Questions
of the day, no. 43.)_

     With an additional chapter on the causes of the war in the
     Far East and the issues involved.


~Golovin~, Konstantin Fedorovich. Russlands Finanzpolitik und die
Aufgaben der Zukunft. Aus dem Russischen von M. Kolossowski.
Vollstaendige deutsche Ausgabe.

_Leipzig: Verlag von Otto Wigand, 1900. (4), 233 pp. 8^o._


~Jane~, Frederick T. The imperial Russian navy; its past, present, and
future. New and revised edition.

_London: W. Thacker & co., 1904. 23, (1), 23-736 pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Portraits. Maps. Plans. Facsimiles. 4^o._

     The author states that in this new edition, he has "only
     laboured to bring the book completely up to date as regards
     _materiel_ and _personnel_, deleting in the former matter
     that, owing to changes in design and so forth, is no longer
     applicable."


~Kovalevski[)i]~, Maksim Maksimovich. Le regime economique de la Russie.

_Paris: V. Giard & E. Briere, 1898. (4), 362, (2) pp. 8^o.
(Bibliotheque sociologique internationale, 14.)_


---- Russian political institutions; the growth and development of
these institutions from the beginnings of Russian history to the
present time.

_Chicago: The University of Chicago press, 1902. ix, 299 pp. Maps.
8^o._


~Kovalevski[)i]~, Vladimir Ivanovich, ed. La Russie a la fin du 19^e
siecle.

_Paris: P. Dupont, 1900. xx, 989, (2) pp. Maps. Tables. Diagrams. 8^o.
(Commission imperiale de Russie a l'Exposition universelle de Paris.)_


~Kupchanko~, Grigori[)i] Ivanovich. Russland in Zahlen. Statistisches
Sammelwerk. Mit einer Eisenbahnkarte.

_Leipzig: O. Wigand, 1902. v, (2), 148 pp. Map. 8^o._

     Anhang (pp. 135-148): 1. Gesetzlich bestimmtes Verhaeltnis
     zwischen den russischen und den metrischen Massen und
     Gewichten. 2. Russische Geldsorten. 3. Passvorschriften. 4.
     Eisenbahnfahrpreise.


~Latimer~, Mary Elizabeth Wormeley. Russia and Turkey in the nineteenth
century.

_Chicago: A. C. McClurg and company, 1893. 413 pp. Portraits. 8^o._


~Leroy-Beaulieu~, Anatole. The empire of the tsars and the Russians.
Translated from the third French edition, with annotations, by Zenaide
A. Ragozin.

_G. P. Putnam's sons, New York, London, 1893-1896. 3 vols. 8^o._

     Part 1. The country and its inhabitants; Part 2. The
     institutions; Part 3. The religion.


~Lodge~, Henry Cabot. Some impressions of Russia.

     (_In his_ A fighting frigate, and other essays and
     addresses, pp. 257-290. New York, 1902. 8^o.)

     "This article was published in Scribner's Magazine for
     April, 1902."


~Machat~, J. Le developpement economique de la Russie.

_Paris: A. Colin, 1902. xvi, 310, (4) pp. Maps. Diagrams. 12^o._

     "Bibliographie": pp. xiii-xvi.


~Miliukov~, Pavel Nikolaevich. Essais sur l'histoire de la civilisation
russe. Traduit du russe par P. Dramas & D. Soskice. Avec une preface de
Lucien Herr.

_Paris: V. Giard & E. Briere, 1901. viii, 295, (2) pp. Maps. Diagrams.
8^o._

     CONTENTS: Introduction--1. ptie. La population--2. ptie.
     L'evolution economique--3. ptie. L'evolution de l'etat--4.
     ptie. La structure sociale--Conclusions--Cartes et
     diagrammes.


~Morfill~, William Richard. A history of Russia from the birth of Peter
the Great to Nicholas II.

_New York: J. Pott & co., 1902. viii, 486 pp. Frontispiece. Maps
(partly folded). 12^o._


---- The story of Russia.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1890. xix, (1), 394 pp. Frontispiece
(portrait). Illustrations. Portraits. Folded maps. 12^o. (The story of
the nations.)_


~Niet~, _pseud._ La Russie d'aujourd'hui. Le tsar.--Les grands-ducs.--Les
ministres.--La societe.--Les finances.--La police.--L'administration.--La
diplomatie, etc.

_Paris: F. Juven, [1902]. (4), 312 pp. 12^o._

     Author's pseudonym, "Niet," at head of title. "Une grande
     partie de cette etude a paru, en fragments publies chaque
     semaine a l'Echo de Paris."

     "Ce livre trouve une actualite brulante dans les evenements
     de notre heure; toutes les phases du grand drame qui
     commence ont ete prevues par Niet, si sincerement, avec une
     documentation si incontestable, qu'on a voulu lire bien des
     noms de diplomates sous l'anonymat de son auteur."


~Palmer~, Francis H. E. Russian life in town and country.

_New York and London: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1901. xi, (2), 320 pp.
Plates. 12^o. (Our European neighbours.)_


~Rambaud~, Alfred Nicolas. Histoire de la Russie depuis les origines
jusqu'a nos jours. 5. ed. rev. et completee jusqu'en 1900.

_Paris: Hachette & cie., 1900. (4), 922, (2) pp. Maps. 12^o. (Historie
universelle.)_

     "Note bibliographique": pp. [897]-914.


---- The history of Russia from the earliest times to 1877. Translated
by Leonora B. Lang, with additional chapters covering the period from
1877 to 1904, by G. Mercer Adam.

_A. L. Burt company, publishers, New York, [1904]. 2 vols.
Frontispieces. Plates. Portraits. 12^o._


~Rambaud~, Alfred Nicolas. A popular history of Russia from the earliest
times to 1880. Translated by L. B. Lang. Edited and enlarged by Nathan
Haskell Dole. Including a history of the Turko-Russian war of 1877-78,
from the best authorities, by the editor.

_Boston: D. Estes and C. E. Lauriat, 1880-1882. 3 vols. Plates.
Portraits. Maps. 8^o._


~Regelsperger~, Gustave. Les Russes en Asie.

     (_In_ Revue universelle, vol. 2, May 15, 1902, pp. 261-266.)


~Russia.~ Apercu statistique des chemins de fer et des voies navigables
de la Russie. Avec annexe de cartes et de tableaux graphiques. Section
de statistique et de cartographie du Ministere des voies de
communication.

_St.-Petersbourg: Impr. du Ministere des voies de communication (J. N.
Kouchnereff & c^{ie}), 1900. (8), 180 pp. 2 folded maps. 4 folded
statistical diagrams. 8^o._

     "Redige pour l'Exposition universelle de 1900 a Paris."


---- Statesman's handbook for Russia. Edited by the Chancery of the
Committee of ministers.

_St. Petersburg: E. Thiele, 1896. 2 vols. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: I. Preface. Unity of the Russian empire. State
     organization. Rights of subjects. State administration.
     Separate branches of state administration. Material
     resources.--II. Spiritual welfare: 1. Ecclesiastical
     institutions. 2. National education. 3. Institutions of the
     Empress Mary. Policy of security. Justice. Local government
     and self government. Appendix: Races inhabiting the Russian
     empire.


---- The industries of Russia, by the Department of trade and
manufactures, Ministry of finance for the World's Columbian exposition
at Chicago. Editor of the English translation, John Martin Crawford.

_St. Petersburg: [Trenke & Fusnot, printers], 1893. 5 vols. in 4. Maps.
Diagrams. 4^o._

     CONTENTS: I-II. Manufactures and trade.--III. Agriculture
     and forestry.--IV. Mining and metallurgy.--V. Siberia and
     the great Siberian railway.


~La Russie~, geographique, ethnologique, historique, administrative,
economique, religieuse, litteraire, artistique, scientifique,
pittoresque, etc. Par MM. L. Delavaud, Girard de Rialle, Ch. Rabot,
Alfred Rambaud, Albert Vandal, Maxime Petit, G. Regelsperger, Ernest
Lehr, Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, Desire Lecroix, Arthur Raffalovich, G.
Lejeal, Louis Leger, E. M. de Voguee, Maurice Tourneux, Maurice Vachon,
Arthur Pougin, J. Grand-Carteret, Michel Delines, M^{me} Lydie
Paschkof, A. Andre, baron de Montalbo, Camille Couderc. 3. ed.

_Paris: Larousse, [1900]. 490 pp. Illustrations. Portraits. Plans. Maps
(partly folded). Folded facsimilies. 8^o._


~Schierbrand~, Wolf von. Russia, her strength and her weakness; a study
of the present condition of the Russian empire, with an analysis of its
resources and a forecast of its future.

_New York and London: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1904. xiv, (2), 304 pp.
Folded maps. 8^o._


~Strannik~, Ivan. La pensee russe contemporaine.

_Paris: A. Colin, 1903. (4), 266, (2) pp. 12^o._

     CONTENTS: Introduction.--L'impuissance de vivre.
     Tchekhov.--L'esprit de vagabondage. Gorki.--Le sentiment de
     la pitie. Korolenko.--Orthodoxie et heterodoxie.
     Tolstoi.--L'esprit sectaire. Les Doukhobors.


~Thompson~, Herbert M. Russian politics.

_New York: H. Holt and company, 1896. xi, (11), 289 pp. Folded maps.
Folded table. 12^o._


~Tikhomirov~, Lev Aleksandrovich. Russia, political and social;
translated from the French by Edward Aveling. 2d ed.

_London: S. Sonnenschein & co., 1892. 2 vols. 8^o. (Library of standard
authors.)_

     CONTENTS: I. The Russian empire and Russia. Russian Russia:
     Germans and Jews. The social classes in Russia: the people;
     the clergy, nobility, bourgeoisie. Economic and industrial
     Russia.--II. The intellectual movement. Political Russia.
     Appendices: A. Statistics of the national revenue. B. The
     term nihilists. C. Subjects forbidden by the censorship. D.
     Partition of the land. E. Works and publications quoted.


~United States.~ _Bureau of statistics._ Commercial Russia in 1904. Area,
population, finances, currency, railways, industry, and agriculture,
and foreign commerce and commerce of the United States with Russia.

_Washington: Government printing office, 1904. iii, (1), 2755-2869 pp.
Folded map. 4^o._

     Reprinted from the Monthly summary of commerce and finance
     for Feb., 1904.


~Waliszewski~, Kazimierz. Peter the Great. Translated from the French by
Lady Mary Loyd.

_New York: D. Appleton & company, 1897. x, 562 pp. Portrait. 8^o._


---- The romance of an empress, Catherine II of Russia. Translated from
the French.

_New York: D. Appleton and company, 1894. viii, 458 pp. Portrait. 8^o._


---- The story of a throne (Catherine II of Russia). From the French.

_London: W. Heinemann, 1895. 2 vols. 8^o._


~Wallace~, D. Mackenzie. Russia.

_New York: Henry Holt and company, 1877. xiii, (1), 620 pp. 2 folded
maps. 8^o._




RUSSIAN EXPANSION


~Aulagnon~, Claudius. La Siberie economique, considere plus specialement
dans sa partie cisbaikalienne. Preface par M. Frederic Passy.

_Paris: Guillaumin et c^{ie}, 1901. xii, 230 pp. Illustrations. Plates.
8^o. (Publication de l'Association des anciens eleves de l'Ecole des
hautes etudes commerciales.)_


~Beveridge~, Albert Jeremiah. The Russian advance.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1903. iii, (5), 485, (1) pp.
Maps. 8^o._

     Appendix: Treaty of Shimonoseki, by which southern Manchuria
     was ceded to Japan; Mikado's rescript withdrawing from
     Manchuria; The (reputed) Cassini convention; The
     Russo-Manchurian railway agreement; Anglo-Russian agreement
     respecting spheres of influence in China; Treaty of
     offensive and defensive alliance between Great Britain and
     Japan; Specimen of the regulations concerning foreign joint
     stock companies operating in Russia.


~Bookwalter~, John Wesley. Siberia and Central Asia.

_Springfield, O.: [New York printed, J. J. Little & co.], 1899. xxxi,
548 pp. Illustrations. 8^o._


~Carol~, Jean. Colonisation russe: les deux routes du Caucase; notes d'un
touriste.

_Paris: Hachette et cie., 1899. xl, 311 pp. Illustrations. Maps. 8^o._


~Chirol~, Valentine. The middle eastern question; or, Some political
problems of Indian defence. With maps, illustrations, and appendices.

_London: J. Murray, 1903. xiv, 512 pp. Plates. Maps. Genealogical
tables. 8^o._

     "Bibliography": pp. 499-500.

     Based on a series of letters written for the Times.
     _Preface._


~De Windt~, Harry. The new Siberia. Being an account of a visit to the
penal island of Sakhalin, and political prison and mines of the
trans-Baikal district, Eastern Siberia. With appendices, map, and
twenty-eight illustrations.

_London: Chapman and Hall, 1896. xiv, 324 pp. Plates. Portraits. Map.
8^o._


~Durrieux~, Alcee. Samarkand, la bien gardee.

_Paris: Plon-Nourrit & cie., 1901. (4), vi, 304, (4) pp. Plates. 12^o._


~Gerrare~, Wirt. Greater Russia. The continental empire of the old world.
With illustrations and a map.

_New York: The Macmillan company, 1903. xiii, (1), 337 pp. Plates.
Folded map. 8^o._


~Hawes~, Charles H. In the uttermost East; being an account of
investigations among the natives and Russian convicts of the island of
Sakhalin, with notes of travel in Korea, Siberia, and Manchuria.

_New York: Charles Scribner's sons, xxx, 478 pp. Plates. Maps. 8^o._


~Hellwald~, Friedrich von. The Russians in Central Asia. A critical
examination down to the present time of the geography and history of
Central Asia. Tr. from the German by Theodore Wirgman.

_Henry S. King & co., [London], 1874. xx, 332 pp. Folded map (colored).
12^o._


~Krafft~, Hugues. A travers le Turkestan Russe; ouvrage illustre de deux
cent-soixante-cinq gravures d'apres les cliches de l'auteur et
contenant une carte en couleurs.

_Paris: Hachette et c^{ie}, 1902. (6), vii, 228, (4) pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Portrait. Folded map. F^o._


~Krahmer~, Gustav. Russland in Asien.

_Leipzig: Zuckschwerdt & co., 1897-1903. 6 vols. Plates. Maps. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: vol. 1. Transkaspien und seine Eisenbahn. O.
     Heyfelder; vol. 2. Russland in Mittel-Asien; vol. 3.
     Sibirien und die grosse sibirische Eisenbahn; vol. 4.
     Russland in Ost-Asien; vol. 5. Das nordoestliche
     Kuestengebiet; vol. 6. Die Beziehungen Russlands zu Persien.


~Krausse~, Alexis. Russia in Asia. A record and a study. 1558-1899.

_London: G. Richards, 1899. 428 pp. Maps. 8^o_.


~Legras~, Jules. En Siberie.

_Paris: Armand Colin & cie., 1899. xvii, 384 pp. Illustrations. Map.
12^o._

     Cover-title: 2. ed.


~Meakin~, Annette M. B. In Russian Turkestan: a garden of Asia and its
people.

_London: George Allen, 1903. xvii, (1), 316 pp. Plates. Map. 12^o._


~Norman~, Henry. All the Russias; travels and studies in contemporary
European Russia, Finland, Siberia, the Caucasus, and Central Asia.

_New York: C. Scribner's sons, 1902. (4), xii, (2), 476 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Maps. 8^o._


~Rambaud~, Alfred Nicolas. The expansion of Russia; problems of the East
and problems of the Far East; with an essay on the Russian people, by
J. Novicow. 2d ed.

_New York: Scott-Thaw company, 1904. (8), 254 pp. 12^o (Contemporary
thought series. II.)_


~Ravenstein~, E. G. The Russians on the Amur; its discovery, conquest,
and colonization, with a description of the country, its inhabitants,
productions, and commercial capabilities; and personal accounts of
Russian travellers.

_London: Truebner and co., 1861. xx, 467 pp. Illustrations. Plates.
Maps. 8^o._


~Reid~, Arnot. From Peking to Petersburg.

_London: E. Arnold, 1899. vi, (2), 300 pp. Frontispiece. Map. 8^o._


~Russia's~ march towards India. By "An Indian officer."

_London: Sampson Low, Marston & company, 1894. 2 vols. Map. 8^o._

     Contains an account of Russia's advance towards India from
     the earliest times up to the present day.


~Semenov~, Petr Petrovich. La Russie extra-europeenne et polaire Siberie,
Caucase, Asie centrale, Extreme-Nord.

_Paris: P. Dupont, 1900. (4) 242 pp. Folded map. 8^o. (Commission
imperiale de Russie a l'Exposition universelle de 1900.)_


~Skrine~, Francis Henry. The expansion of Russia, 1815-1900.

_Cambridge: Cambridge University press, 1903. vi, 386 pp. Maps. 8^o.
(Cambridge historical series.)_


~Skrine~, Francis Henry, _and_ Edward Denison ~Ross~. The heart of Asia. A
history of Russian Turkestan and the Central Asian Khanates.

_London: Methuen & company, 1899. xi, (1), 444 pp. Illustrations. Maps.
8^o._


~Stadling~, Jonas Jonsson. Through Siberia. Ed. by F. H. H. Guillemard.

_Westminster: A. Constable & co., 1901. xvi, 315 pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Map. 8^o._


~Ukhtomski[)i]~, Esper Esperovich, _kniaz'_. Travels in the East of Nicholas
II. emperor of Russia, when cesarewitch, 1890-1891. Written by order of
His Imperial Majesty, and translated from the Russian by R. Goodlet,
edited by Sir G. Birdwood.

_London: A. Constable & co., 1896-1900. 2 vols. Illustrations. Plates.
Portraits. F^o._


~Wright~, George Frederick. Asiatic Russia.

_New York: McClure, Phillips & co., 1902. 2 vols. Plates. Folded maps.
8^o._

     CONTENTS: Physical geography; Russian occupation; Russian
     colonization; Political divisions; Social, economic, and
     political conditions; Natural history; Bibliography.


~Yorck von Wartenburg~, Maximilian, _Graf_. Das Vordringen der russischen
Macht in Asien. 2. Auflage.

_Berlin: E. S. Mittler und Sohn, 1900. 67, (1) pp. Map. 8^o._


RUSSIAN EXPANSION: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1898.~ Dans le Tian Chan Russe. Au tour de l'Issyk Koul. G. Saint-Yves.

_Annales de geographie, vol. 8 (May 15, 1898): 201-215._


~1900.~ Dans le Tian Chan Russe. De L'Issyk Koul au Ferghana. G.
Saint-Yves.

_Annales de geographie, vol. 9 (Mar. 15, 1900): 119-140._


~1900.~ Russia's field for Anglo-Saxon enterprise in Asia. Alexander Hume
Ford.

_Engineering magazine, vol. 19 (June, 1900): 354-368._


~1900.~ Russian Central Asia: countries and peoples. With map. Archibald
R. Colquhoun.

_Society of Arts. Journal, vol. 48 (June 1, 1900): 554-568._


~1900.~ Is Russia to control all of Asia? A. H. Ford.

_Cosmopolitan, vol. 29 (July, 1900): 253-265._


~1900.~ La politique russe en Chine. B. de Zenzinoff.

_Correspondant, vol. 200 (Aug. 25, 1900): 662-669._


~1900.~ The expansion of Russia: problems of the East and problems of the
Far East. Alfred Rambaud.

_International monthly, vol. 2 (Sept., 1900): 211-251; (Oct., 1900):
341-361._


~1900.~ China and Russia. Josiah Quincy.

_North American review, vol. 171 (October, 1900): 528-542._


~1900.~ Russia's foreign policy. A Russian publicist.

_Contemporary review, vol. 78 (Dec, 1900): 776-783._


~1900.~ The spread of Russia. Poultney Bigelow.

_Independent, vol. 52 (Dec. 20, 1900): 3021-3025._


~1901.~ Russia and the "open door." A Russian publicist.

_Contemporary review, vol. 79 (Feb., 1901): 188-194._


~1901.~ Engineering opportunities in the Russian empire. Alexander Hume
Ford.

_Engineering magazine, vol. 21 (April, 1901): 29-42._


~1901.~ Russia's conquest of Asia. John Kimberly Mumford.

_World's work, vol. 2 (May, 1901): 704-719._


~1901.~ Recentes explorations russes en Asie. J. Deniker.

_Geographie, vol. 4 (July, 1901): 21-28._

     1. Le Kamtchatka et le littoral de la mer d'Okhotsk.

     2. Dernieres nouvelles de l'expedition Kozlov 'en Asie
     Centrale.


~1901.~ The colonization of Siberia. R. E. C. Long.

_Forum, vol. 32 (Oct., 1901): 172-189._


~1901.~ Russia as a great power. Sydney Brooks.

_World's work, vol. 2 (Oct., 1901): 1277-1284._


~1902.~ The new California [Siberia]. S. M. Williams.

_Munsey's magazine, vol. 26 (Mar., 1902): 753-764._


~1902.~ The future of Russia. A.-R. B.-de Bilinski.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 52 (Aug., 1902): 201-217._


~1903.~ Russia's quest of the Pacific. Frederic Austin Ogg.

_Chautauquan, vol. 36 (Jan., 1903): 358-369._


~1903.~ The Russianization of Asia. W. C. Jameson Reid.

_Gunton's magazine, vol. 24 (Feb., 1903): 102-106._


~1903.~ Present tendencies of Russian policy. Charles Johnston.

_North American review, vol. 176 (May, 1903): 765-777._


~1903.~ Shall Russia own the earth? A. Maurice Low.

_Public opinion, vol. 34 (May 14, 1903): 615-616._


~1903.~ Les Russes en extreme-orient. Paul Labbe.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 15 (May 15, 1903):
623-639._


~1903.~ La Russie en Chine. Pene-Siefert.

_Revue de geographie, 27. annee (May, 1903): 408-420._


~1903.~ The shadow of Russia in the Far East.

_Gunton's magazine, vol. 25 (Aug., 1903): 116-119._


~1903.~ La preponderance de la Russie en extreme-orient. B. de Zenzinoff.

_Revue politique et litteraire revue bleue, vol. 20 (Aug. 29, 1903):
261-265; (Sept. 5, 1903): 293-297._


~1903.~ The Russian absorption of Asia. Charles W. Barnaby.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Nov., 1903): 4118-4125._


~1904.~ The conquest of Asia by Russia. John Brisben Walker.

_Cosmopolitan, vol. 36 (Feb., 1904): 381-386._


~1904.~ Russland und China bis zum Vertrage von Nertschinsk. Georg
Henning.

_Grenzboten, 63. Jahrgang (Feb. 25, 1904): 441-449; (Mar. 3, 1904):
503-511._


~1904.~ The Slav and his future. Emil Reich.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Mar., 1904): 371-382._

_Eclectic magazine, vol. 142 (June, 1904): 724-733._

_Living age, vol. 241 (April 9, 1904): 65-74._


~1904.~ Vladivostock. Ivan Beschinoff.

_France illustree, 31. annee (Mar. 12, 1904): 171-172._


~1904.~ Russia's commercial expansion: a brief sketch of her enterprising
methods.

_Magazine of commerce, vol. 4 (Mar., 1904): 197-199._


~1904.~ Why Russia has gone eastward. Louis E. Van Norman.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Mar. 12, 1904): 639-643._


~1904.~ Les Russes en Mandchourie. J. L. Croze.

_Vie illustree, 7. annee (Mar. 4, 1904): 358-360._


~1904.~ Russia's civilizing work in Asia. G. Frederick Wright.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (Apr., 1904): 427-432._


~1904.~ The history of Port Arthur. Joseph H. Longford.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 55 (Apr., 1904): 618-629._


~1904.~ L'Asie russe. G. Treffel.

_Revue universelle, vol. 4 (May 15, 1904): 257-262._


~1904.~ Russian emigration to Siberia. Bruno Simmerbach.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 30 (July, 1904): 91-92._




TRANS-SIBERIAN RAILROAD


~Boulangier~, Edgar. Notes de voyage en Siberie; le chemin de fer
trans-siberien et la Chine.

_Paris: Societe d'editions scientifique, 1891. xii, 397, (2) pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Folded maps. 4^o._


~Cary~, Clarence. The Trans-Siberian route; or, Notes of a journey from
Pekin to New York in 1902.

_New York: The Evening Post job printing house, 1902. 53 pp. Plates.
Folded map. 8^o._

     The author was chief correspondent of the Associated Press.


~Colquhoun~, Archibald Ross. The great Trans-Siberian-Manchurian railway.

     (_In his_ Overland to China, pp. 117-150. New York, 1900.
     8^o.)


~Crawford~, John Martin. The great Siberian railway.

     (_In_ United States Consular reports, vol. 45, no. 166,
     July, 1894, pp.425-434. [Map.])


~Dmitrief-Mamonof~, A. J. and A. F. ~Zdsiarsky~, _eds._

_See_ ~Russia~.


~Gourdet~, Paul. Le chemin de fer en Asie centrale jonction du
Transcaspien avec le Transsiberien.

     (_In_ Congres national des societes francaises de
     geographie, xixe session.--Marseille.--Septembre 1898, pp.
     256-274. Marseille, 1899. 8^o.)


~Great Britain.~ _Foreign office._ Russia. Report on the Trans-Siberian
railway. 29 pp. Folded sheet. 8^o.

     (_In_ Great Britain. Foreign office. Diplomatic and consular
     reports. [1900.] Miscellaneous series, no. 533.)

     "Sketches the history of the Siberian railway project and
     its probable influence on Siberian trade and settlement,
     with a section on the resources, etc., of the country."


~Institut colonial international.~ _Bruxelles._ Les chemins de fer aux
colonies et dans les pays neufs.

_Institut colonial international, Bruxelles, 1900. 3 vols. Plans.
Diagrams. 8^o. (Bibliotheque coloniale internationale.)_

     Transsiberien, vol. 2, pp. 721-733.


~Jefferson~, Robert L. Roughing it in Siberia; with some account of the
Trans-Siberian railway, and the gold mining industry of Asiatic Russia.

_London: Sampson Low, Marston & co., 1897. (8), 252 pp. Plates.
Portrait. Map. 12^o._


~Krahmer~, G. Sibirien und die grosse sibirische Eisenbahn.

_Leipzig: Zuckschwerdt & co., 1897. iv, (2), 103 pp. Folded map. 8^o.
(Russland in Asien. Bd. III.)_


~Labbe~, Paul. La situation des provinces traversees par le
Transsiberien.

     (_In_ Societe de geographie commerciale de Paris. Bulletin,
     vol. 23, pp. 514-529. Paris, 1901. 8^o.)


~Lynch~, George. The path of empire.

_London: Duckworth & co., 1903. xix, 257 pp. Plates. Portraits. Folded
map. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: From Kobe to Korea.--The path of empire through
     Korea.--In the land of the morning calm.--Dalny, the
     commercial terminus of the Trans-Siberian railway.--Port
     Arthur, the military terminus of the Trans-Siberian
     railway.--Pekin revisited.--The Japanisation of China.--From
     Pekin to New-Chwang.--Through Manchuria.--The importance of
     Manchuria.--The path of empire through Mongolia.--Lake
     Baikal.--Irkutsk.--People one meets on the way.--From
     Irkutsk to Tomsk.--The express.--The reform of the exile
     system.--Across the Obi basin.--The great trek
     eastward.--Unto Moscow, the heart of Russia.--Where leads
     the Russian path of empire?--Appendix.


~Ruge~, Sophus. Die sibirische Eisenbahn. Vortrag, gehalten in der
Gehe-stiftung zu Dresden am 12. Oktober 1901.

_Dresden: Zahn & Jaen, 1901. 52 pp. 8^o. (Jahrbuch der Gehe-stiftung zu
Dresden. Bd. 8., Hft. 1.)_

     Cover-title: Die transsibirische Eisenbahn.


~Russia.~ Siberia and the Great Siberian railway. Editor of the English
translation, John Martin Crawford.

_St. Petersburg: [Trenke & Fusnot, printers], 1893. xii, 265 pp. Folded
map. 4^o._

     Forms Vol. 5 of "The industries of Russia."


---- Guide to the Great Siberian railway. Published by the Ministry of
ways of communication, edited by A. I. Dmitriev-Mamonov and A. F.
Zdziarski. English translation by Miss L. Kukol-Yasnopolsky, rev. by
John Marshall.

_St. Petersburg: Artistic printing society, 1900. (2), 520 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Portraits. Folded maps. Folded plans. 8^o._


---- Guide du grand chemin de fer trans-siberien. Edite par le
Ministere des voies de communication, sous la redaction de A. I.
Dmitrief-Mamonof et de l'ingenieur A. F. Zdsiarsky, tr. du russe par P.
Tacchella.

_St.-Petersbourg: Societe d'impression artistique, 1900. (4), 572 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Portraits. Folded maps. Folded plans. 8^o._


---- Wegweiser auf der grossen sibirischen Eisenbahn; herausgegeben
unter Redaktion von A. I. Dmitrijew-Mamonow und des Ingenieurs A. F.
Zdziarski. Aus dem Russischen von A. Luetschg.

_St.-Petersburg: Kunstdruckgesellschaft, 1901. (4), 602 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Portraits. Folded maps. 8^o._


~Shoemaker~, Michael Myers. The great Siberian railway from St.
Petersburg to Pekin.

_G. P. Putnam's sons, New York and London, 1903. viii, (2), 243 pp.
Plate. 12^o._


~Simpson~, James Young. Side-lights on Siberia. Some account of the great
Siberian railroad, the prisons and the exile system.

_William Blackwood and sons, Edinburgh and London, 1898. xvi, 383 pp.
Plates. Folded map. 8^o._


~Stahl~, A. F. Entlang der sibirischen Bahn.

     (_In_ Geographische Zeitschrift, vol. 8, pp. 81-92. Leipzig,
     1902. 8^o.)


~United States.~ _Bureau of statistics._ The Russian empire and the
Trans-Siberian railway.

     (_In its_ Monthly summary of commerce and finance, n. s.,
     vol. 6, April, 1899, pp. 2501-2599. Folded map. Washington,
     1899. 4^o.)


~Vladimir~, [_pseud_]. Russia on the Pacific, and the Siberian railway.

_London: Sampson, Low, Marston & co., 1899. xii, 373 pp. Plates. Maps.
8^o._


~Wiedenfeld~, Kurt. Die sibirische Bahn in ihrer wirtschaftlichen
Bedeutung.

_Berlin: Julius Springer, 1900. (4), 202 pp. Map. 8^o._

     "Begins with an historical survey of the Russian occupation
     of Northern Asia; then takes up the history of the
     Trans-Siberian railway from its inception and considers its
     commercial importance and its effect upon the development of
     Siberia, with much statistical information. The sources of
     information are given in footnotes."


TRANS-SIBERIAN RAILWAY: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1891.~ The Siberian railroad.

_Railroad gazette, vol. 23 (July 10, 1891): 476._

     Review of report of Nicolai Woloshinow.


~1893.~ The western section of the Trans-Siberian railroad. Michel
Nicolaevich Ghercevanof.

_Railroad gazette, vol. 25 (Feb. 17, 1893): 132-133._


~1893.~ The Siberian railroad [progress of the enterprise].

_Railroad gazette, vol. 25 (Dec. 8, 1893): 890._


~1894.~ The political and economic importance of the great Siberian
railway. Hermann Schoenfeld.

_Engineering magazine, vol. 7 (July, 1894): 467-473._


~1896.~ The climate along the route of the Trans-Siberian railroad. Frank
Waldo.

_Railroad gazette, vol. 28 (Apr. 10, 1896): 256-257._


~1896.~ The Siberian railroad. Herbert H. D. Peirce.

_Railroad gazette, vol. 28 (Aug. 7, 1896): 553-554._


~1896.~ The Siberian railroad.

_Railroad gazette, vol. 28 (Oct. 23, 1896): 737-738._

     "A list of articles relating to the Siberian railroad which
     have appeared in the 'Railroad gazette.'"


~1896.~ The great Siberian railway.

_Engineer (London), vol. 82 (Nov. 6, 1896): 459._


~1896.~ The Trans-Siberian railway.

_Engineering news, vol. 36 (Nov. 19, 1896): 322-324._


~1897.~ From London to the Far East by railway.

_Engineering, vol. 63 (May 14, 1897): 649-650._


~1897.~ Siberian railway extension in China.

_Engineer (London), vol. 83 (June 4, 1897): 562._


~1897.~ The Manchurian extension of the Trans-Siberian railway. With map.

_Engineering news, vol. 38 (Nov. 11, 1897): 308-309._


~1898.~ La Siberie et le Transsiberien. Le pays et ses habitans. Le
chemin de fer. Pierre Leroy-Beaulieu.

_Revue des deux mondes, vol. 146 (March 15, 1898): 324-358; vol. 148
(Aug. 15, 1898): 808-844._


~1898.~ The Trans-Siberian railway: its new terminus in China. Clarence
Cary.

_Forum, vol. 25 (May, 1898): 285-299._


~1898.~ The Trans-Siberian railway. [Details from the Report of the
Imperial commission to the Tsar.]

_Engineer (London), vol. 85 (June 3, 1898): 519-520; vol. 86 (July 8,
1898): 25-26; (July 29, 1898): 99-100._


~1898.~ Quinquennial report of the Committee for building the Siberian
railroad.

_Railroad gazette, vol 30 (Sept. 16, 1898): 663-664._


~1899.~ The Trans-Siberian railway and the coal resources of Siberia.

_Iron and coal trades review, vol. 58 (Jan. 27, 1899): 151-153._


~1899.~ The Trans-Siberian railway.

_Engineer (London), vol. 87 (Apr. 7, 1899): 331._


~1899.~ The Trans-Siberian railway. William Durban.

_Contemporary review, vol. 76 (Aug., 1899): 261-271._


~1899.~ The Trans-Siberian railroad. Henry Michelsen.

_Scientific American, vol. 95 (Aug. 26, 1899): 136-137._

_Scientific American supplement, vol. 48 (Aug. 26, 1899): 19784-19785._


~1899.~ Russian railway policy in Asia. R. E. C. Long.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 66 (Dec, 1899): 914-925._


~1900.~ Die transsibirische Eisenbahn. Josef Grunzel.

_Deutsche Rundschau fuer Geographie, vol. 23 (1900): 27-31._


~1900.~ Die wirtschaftliche Bedeutung der sibirischen Bahn. Kurt
Wiedenfeld.

_Archiv fuer Eisenbahnen, vol 23 (Mar.-Apr., 1900): 341-397; (May-June,
1900): 693-756; (July-Aug., 1900): 895-943; (Sept.-Oct., 1900):
1095-1124._


~1900.~ The marine department of the Trans-Siberian railroad. Waldon
Fawcett.

_Scientific American, vol. 96 (Mar. 31, 1900): 200._


~1900.~ The Great Siberian railway. With map. M. Mikhailoff.

_North American review, vol. 170 (May, 1900): 593-608._


~1900.~ The opening up of Siberia by the Trans-siberian railway.

_Board of Trade journal, vol. 30 (Aug. 2, 1900): 237-240._

     Report of the British commercial agent at St. Petersburg.
     Taken from Foreign Office, miscellaneous series, 533.


~1900.~ The Trans-Siberian-Manchurian railway. With two maps. Archibald
R. Colquhoun.

_Monthly review, vol. 1 (Nov., 1900): 40-55._


~1900.~ Russia of to-day. II. The great Siberian railway. Henry Norman.

_Scribner's magazine, vol. 28 (Nov., 1900): 515-541._


~1900.~ The great Trans-Siberian-Manchurian railway. With two maps.
Archibald R. Colquhoun.

_Royal united service institution. Journal, vol. 44 (Dec, 1900):
1408-1430._


~1901.~ La Siberie et le grand Transsiberien. Leon Vallee.

_Revue de geographie, vol. 48 (1901): 181-200._


~1901.~ Die wirtschaftliche Bedeutung der sibirischen Eisenbahn.

_Koloniale Zeitschrift, vol. 2 (Jan. 3, 1901): 13-14._


~1901.~ The great Siberian railroad. With map. Arthur Montefiore Brice.

_Manchester geographical society. Journal, vol. 17 (Jan.-March, 1901):
37-45._


~1901.~ Trade and the Siberian railway. With map. A. Kinloch.

_Monthly review, vol. 2 (Mar., 1901): 60-71._


~1901.~ The progress of the Siberian railway.

_Scientific American supplement, vol. 51 (Mar. 9, 1901): 21059-21060._


~1901.~ From Peking to St. Petersburg by rail. Alfred Stead.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 24 (Dec., 1901): 682-685._


~1902.~ From Japan to Europe by the Trans-Siberian route. H. A. Bonar.

_Royal united service institution. Journal, vol. 46 (Jan., 1902):
18-38._


~1902.~ The great Siberian railroad. Arthur M. Brice.

_Cassell's magazine, n. s., vol. 24 (Feb., 1902): 357-364._


~1903.~ Dalny, a fiat-city. Clarence Cary.

_Scribner's magazine, vol. 33 (Apr., 1903): 482-493._


~1903.~ The Trans-Siberian railway.

_Geographical journal, vol. 21 (May, 1903): 553._


~1903.~ The great Russian railway across Asia. J. M. Maclean.

_Magazine of commerce, vol. 2 (May, 1903): 281-283._


~1903.~ Execution complete du chemin de fer transsiberien. F. Le Beschu.

_Monde illustre, vol. 93 (Aug. 29, 1903): 204-206._


~1903.~ Transsiberien-Transmandchourien. Andre Brisse.

_Revue de geographie, 27. annee (Aug., 1903): 97-111; (Sept., 1903):
215-228._


~1903.~ La Siberie et le transsiberien. S. Litman.

_Annales des sciences politiques, vol. 18 (Sept. 15, 1903): 573-589._


~1903.~ America's part in the completion of the Trans-Siberian railway.
Alexander Hume Ford.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 31 (Sept. 5, 1903): 19-20._

_Pacific monthly, vol. 10 (Dec, 1903): 380-382._


~1904.~ En route pour Wladivostock: croquis du Transsiberien. A.
Debibert.

_Correspondant, vol. 214 (Feb. 25, 1904): 714-724._


~1904.~ The cost of the Siberian railroad.

_Railroad gazette, vol. 36 (Mar. 4, 1904): 161._


~1904.~ De Moscou a Port-Arthur et Vladivostock. Clavedy.

_Vie illustree, 7. annee (Mar. 18, 1904): 388-393._


~1904.~ The great Siberian railway. James W. Davidson.

_Century, vol. 67 (Apr., 1904): 940-950._


~1904.~ An engineer's views of the Trans-Siberian. L. Lodian.

_Harper's weekly, vol. 48 (Apr. 9, 1904): 548-549, 563._


~1904.~ Military aspects of the Trans-Siberian railway.

_Scientific American, vol. 90 (Apr. 16, 1904): 308-309._


~1904.~ The Siberian railway in war.

_World to-day, vol. 6 (May, 1904): 607-615._

     A series of illustrations with descriptive accounts.




TIBET


~Berard~, Victor. Lord Curzon et le Tibet.

     (_In_ Revue de Paris, 11. annee, vol. 1, Feb. 15, 1904; pp.
     881-894; 11. annee, vol. 2, March 1, 1904, pp. 197-224.)


~Bower~, Hamilton. Diary of a journey across Tibet.

_London: Rivington, Percival and co., 1894. xvi, 309 pp. Plates. Folded
map. Folded diagram. 8^o._


~Chirol~, Valentine. The middle eastern question; or, Some political
problems of Indian defence.

_London: J. Murray, 1903. xiv, 512 pp. Plates. Maps. Genealogical
tables. 8^o._

     "Bibliography": pp. 499-500.

     Based on a series of letters written for the Times.
     _Preface._

     "The north-east frontier of India," pp. 350-363; "The
     question of Tibet," pp. 364-377; Conventions relating to
     Tibet, pp. 467-476.


~Deasy~, Henry Hugh Peter. In Tibet and Chinese Turkestan; being the
record of three years' exploration.

_New York: Longmans, Green & co., 1901. xvi, 420 pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Portrait. Map. 8^o._


~Desgodins~, C. H. La mission du Thibet de 1855 a 1870, comprenant
l'expose des affaires religieuses, et divers documents sur ce pays,
accompagnee d'une carte du Thibet d'apres les lettres de M. l'abbe
Desgodins, missionnaire apostolique. Par C.-H. Desgodins.

_Verdun: Ch. Laurent, 1872. (2), iv, 419 pp. Folded map. 8^o._


~Freshfield~, Douglas W. Round Kangchenjunga; a narrative of mountain
travel and exploration.

_London: E. Arnold, 1903. xvi, 373 pp. Plates. Maps. 4^o._

     Includes some comment on the present political situation on
     the Tibetan frontier and on the events that led up to it.


~Great Britain.~ _Foreign office._ East India (Tibet). Papers relating to
Tibet. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by command of His
Majesty.

_London: Printed for His Majesty's stationery office, 1904. x, [2]-314
pp. Folded map. F^o. [Cd. 1920.]_

     Dates cover Oct. 21, 1889-Jan. 30, 1904.


~Hedin~, Sven Anders. Central Asia and Tibet towards the holy city of
Lassa.

_London: Hurst and Blackett, limited; New York: C. Scribner's sons,
1903. 2 vols. Illustrations. Plates. Portraits. Folded maps. 8^o._

     "Translated by Mr. J. T. Bealby."--Pref.


~Landor~, Arnold Henry Savage. In the forbidden land; an account of a
journey into Tibet, capture by the Tibetan-Lamas and soldiers,
imprisonment, torture, and ultimate release. With the government
inquiry and report and other official documents.

_New York and London: Harper & bros., 1899, [pub. 1898]. 2 vols.
Illustrations. Plates. Portraits. Map. 8^o._


~Rijnhart~, Susie Carson. With the Tibetans in tent and temple; narrative
of four years' residence on the Tibetan border, and of a journey into
the far interior.

_Chicago, New York, [etc.]: F. H. Revell co., 1901. (4), 400 pp.
Plates. Portraits. Map. 8^o._


~Rockhill~, William Woodville. Diary of a journey through Mongolia and
Tibet in 1891 and 1892.

_Washington: Published by the Smithsonian Institution, 1894. xx, (2),
413 pp. Plates. Folded map. 8^o._


---- The land of the lamas; notes of a journey through China, Mongolia
and Tibet.

_New York: The Century co., 1891. viii, (2), 399 pp. Frontispiece.
Illustrations. Maps. 8^o._


~Sarachchandra D[=a]sa.~ Journey to Lhasa and central Tibet. Ed. by the Hon.
W. W. Rockhill.

_London: John Murray, 1902. x, (4), 285 pp. Illustrations. Plates.
Portrait. Maps. Plans. 8^o._

     Published by the Royal geographical society.


~Wellby~, M. S. Through unknown Tibet.

_London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1898. xiv, 440 pp. Illustrations. Portraits.
Maps. 8^o._

     "This handsome volume gives a plain, straightforward
     narrative of the journey of Captain Wellby and Lieutenant
     Malcolm across Tibet and Northern China, an account of the
     geographical results of which was communicated to the [Royal
     Geographical] Society, and will appear in the Journal. It is
     well illustrated, and has a series of maps of the route on
     the large scale of 16 miles to an inch."


TIBET: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1903.~ In the heart of the forbidden country; or, Lhasa revealed.
Archibald R. Colquhoun.

_Cornhill magazine, vol. 87 (Jan., 1903): 39-52._


~1904.~ Marco Polo and his followers in Central Asia. Archibald R.
Colquhoun.

_Quarterly review, vol. 199 (Apr., 1904): 553-575._


~1904.~ Central Asia and Tibet.

_Scottish geographical magazine, vol. 20 (Apr., 1904): 202-212._


~1904.~ Great Britain and Thibet: the Asian crisis. E. John Solano.

_Blackwood's Edinburgh magazine, vol. 175 (May, 1904): 710-730._


~1904.~ The solution of the Tibetan problem. Alexandre Ular.

_Contemporary review, vol. 85 (May, 1904): 640-648._


~1904.~ Turkestan and a corner of Tibet. Oscar T. Crosby.

_Geographical journal, vol. 23 (June, 1904): 705-722._


~1904.~ The British mission to Tibet. Sir Walter Lawrence.

_North American review, vol. 178 (June, 1904): 869-881._


~1904.~ Tibet. Russia and England on the international chessboard. Edwin
Maxey.

_Arena, vol. 32 (July, 1904): 28-31._


~1904.~ The forbidden land: the march of civilization into Thibet. W. C.
Jameson Reid.

_Booklovers' magazine, vol. 4 (July, 1904): 17-28._




MANCHURIA

(Articles on Manchuria are likewise to be found in the United States
Consular Reports.)


~Colquhoun~, Archibald Ross. Overland to China.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1900. xi, (1), 465 pp. Plates.
Folded maps. 8^o._

     "The great Trans-Siberian-Manchurian railway," pp. 117-149.

     "Manchuria," pp. 188-254.


~Dowding~, H. H. The Russian campaign in Manchuria, 1900. With a map.

     (_In_ United service institution of India. Journal, vol. 30,
     July, 1901, pp. 213-236. Simla.)


~Enselme~, Hippolyte Marie Joseph Antoine. A travers la Mandchourie; le
chemin de fer de l'Est chinois d'apres la mission du capitaine H. de
Bouillane de Lacoste et du capitaine Enselme. Preface du comte G. du
Chaylard.

_Paris: J. Rueff, 1903. ix, 202 pp. Frontispiece. Illustrations. Plans.
Double map. 12^o._


~Fraser~, John Foster. The real Siberia, together with an account of a
dash through Manchuria.

_Cassell and company, London, [etc.], 1902. xvi, 279 pp. Plates.
Portrait. 12^o._


~Great Britain.~ _Foreign office._ China. No. 2 (1901). Despatch from His
Majesty's ambassador at St. Petersburgh respecting the Russo-Chinese
agreement as to Manchuria. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by
command of His Majesty. March 1901.

_London: Printed for His Majesty's stationery office, [1901]. 3 pp.
F^o. [Cd. 439.]_


---- ---- China. No. 2 (1904). Correspondence respecting the Russian
occupation of Manchuria and Newchwang. Presented to both Houses of
Parliament by command of His Majesty. February 1904.

_London: Printed for His Majesty's stationery office, [1904]. xi, (1),
98 pp. F^o. [Cd. 1936.]_


~Hosie~, Alexander. Manchuria: its people, resources and history.

_Methuen & co., London, 1901. xi, (1), 293 pp. Illustrations. Plates.
Map. 8^o._


~James~, Henry Evan Murchison. The Long White Mountain; or, A journey in
Manchuria, with some account of the history, people, administration and
religion of that country.

_London: Longmans, Green and co., 1888. xxiii, (1), 502 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Map. 8^o._


~Parker~, Edward Harper. Russia's sphere of influence; or, A thousand
years of Manchuria.

     (_In_ The Imperial and Asiatic quarterly review, 3d ser.,
     vol. 9, Apr., 1900, pp. 287-313.)


~Raffalovich~, Arthur. Description de la Mandchourie.

     (_In_ Societe de geographie commerciale de Paris. Bulletin,
     vol. 19, pp. 822-830. Paris, 1897. 8^o.)

     An analysis of the work on Manchuria, issued by the Russian
     Ministry of Finance.


~Ross~, John. Mission methods in Manchuria.

_Edinburgh: Anderson & Ferrier, 1903. 252 pp. 8^o._


~Turley~, Robert T. Through the Hun Kiang gorges; or, Notes on a tour in
"No mans land," Manchuria. With map.

     (_In_ The Geographical journal, vol. 14, Sept., 1899, pp.
     292-302.)

     Descriptive notes on this map by G. F. Browne are given in
     the Geographical journal, June, 1900.


~Weale~, B. L. P. Manchu and Muscovite. Letters from Manchuria written
during autumn of 1903. Historical sketch entitled 'Prologue to the
crisis.'

_New York: The Macmillan company, 1904. 572 pp. 8^o._


~Whigham~, H. J. Manchuria and Korea.

_London: Isbister and company, 1904. (6), 245 pp. Plates. Map. 8^o._

     "Mr. Whigham's description of the growth of Dalny, the
     commercial terminus of the Siberian railway, which bids fair
     before long to become a second San Francisco, of the huge
     army which has already been distributed throughout
     Manchuria, and of the various arrangements in progress for
     the elimination of Chinese jurisdiction, shows clearly
     enough that Russia has committed herself too deeply to her
     gigantic scheme of territorial and commercial expansion ever
     to retrace her steps.... Mr. Whigham has much to say upon
     economic and trade matters in the Far East that merits
     careful attention. As a critic of British policy he is
     somewhat of a firebrand and does not seem to make sufficient
     allowance for the wide issues that have to be considered in
     dealing with a very complex question."--_Saturday Review,
     May 7, 1904, p. 594._


~Younghusband~, Francis Edward. Among the Celestials. A narrative of
travels in Manchuria, across the Gobi desert, through the Himalayas to
India. Abridged from "The heart of a continent."

_London: John Murray, 1898. vii, (5), 261 pp. Plates. Folded map. 8^o._


---- The heart of a continent: a narrative of travels in Manchuria,
across the Gobi desert, through the Himalayas, the Pamirs, and Chitral,
1884-1894.

_London: John Murray, 1896. xvii, (3), 409 pp. Plates. Portrait. Maps.
8^o._


~Zabel~, Rudolf. Durch die Mandschurei und Sibirien. Reisen und Studien.
2. durch ein Personal-und Sachregister verm. Auflage.

_Leipzig: G. Wigand, 1903. xii, 324 pp. Illustrations. Portrait. 8^o._

     "Nachweis einiger Werke ueber Sibirien": pp. 312-314.


MANCHURIA: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1898.~ The Russians and Manchuria. E. H. Parker.

_China review, vol. 23 (1898): 143-153._


~1899.~ The Manchurian railway.

_Engineering, vol. 68 (Sept. 1, 1899): 273._


~1900.~ Railways, rivers, and strategic towns in Manchuria.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 11 (Aug., 1900): 326-327._


~1901.~ Micawberism in Manchuria. E. J. Dillon.

_Contemporary review, vol. 79 (May, 1901): 649-663._


~1901.~ The Russians in Manchuria. Petr A. Kropotkin.

_Forum, vol. 31 (May, 1901): 267-274._


~1901.~ Trade-routes in Manchuria. John Ross.

_Scottish geographical magazine, vol. 17 (June, 1901): 303-310._


~1901.~ Manchuria in transformation. Archibald R. Colquhoun.

_Monthly review, vol. 5 (Oct., 1901): 58-72._


~1902.~ Muscovite designs on Manchuria. L. Miner.

_North American review, vol. 174 (Mar., 1902): 315-328._


~1902.~ Some facts about Port Arthur. By Sniper.

_United service magazine, vol. 146 (Apr. 1902): 13-22._


~1903.~ Die wirtschaftlichen Verhaeltnisse der Mandschurei. v. Kleist.

_Asien, vol. 2 (Jan., 1903): 65-66._


~1903.~ Russian rights in Mantchuria. George Frederick Wright.

_Nation, vol. 76 (May 21, 1903): 411-413._


~1903.~ Japan and Manchuria.

_Speaker, n. s., vol. 8 (May 2, 1903): 111-112._


~1903.~ Russia in Manchuria.

_Spectator, vol. 90 (May 16, 1903): 768._


~1903.~ American interests in Manchuria.

_American exporter, vol. 52 (June, 1903): 34._


~1903.~ Eastern Siberia and Manchuria. George Frederick Wright.

_Chautauquan, vol. 37 (June, 1903): 245-262._


~1903.~ Russia and Manchuria. E. J. Dillon.

_Contemporary review, vol. 83 (June, 1903): 884-894._


~1903.~ The mischief in Manchuria. Wirt Gerrare.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 73 (June, 1903): 1051-1059._


~1903.~ Conquest by bank and railways, with examples from Russia in
Manchuria. Alfred Stead.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 53 (June, 1903): 936-949._


~1903.~ The Manchurian outlook.

_American exporter, vol. 52 (July, 1903): 9._


~1903.~ Our Manchurian trade. American pioneer [Sergey Friede] talks of
Russia's performances and intentions in that region.

_American exporter, vol. 52 (July, 1903): 15._


~1903.~ Russia and Manchuria.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 28 (July, 1903): 87-88._


~1903.~ The reopened door.

_Nation, vol. 77 (July 23, 1903): 65-66._


~1903.~ The Chinese eastern (Manchurian) railway. Alfred Stead.

_Page's magazine, vol. 3 (July, 1903): 21-28._


~1903.~ Russia, Manchuria and Mongolia. Alexandre Ular.

_Contemporary review, vol. 84 (Aug., 1903): 189-208._


~1903.~ The Manchurian peril. E. R. Thompson.

_New liberal review, vol. 6 (Aug., 1903): 72-81._


~1903.~ Au Japon et en Mandchourie. Souvenirs de l'an dernier. Paul
Labbe.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 16 (Aug. 1, 1903):
198-220._


~1903.~ Transsiberien-Transmandchourien. Andre Brisse.

_Revue de geographie, 27e annee (Aug., 1903): 97-111; (Sept., 1903):
215-228._


~1903.~ Mandchourie et Coree. Robert de Caix.

_Comite de l'Asie francaise. Bulletin mensuel, 3. annee (Sept., 1903):
362-363._


~1903.~ The Russification of Manchuria. Alexander Hume Ford.

_Era magazine, vol. 12 (Sept., 1903): 199-210._


~1904.~ Les Russes en Mandchourie. B. de Zenzinoff.

_A travers le monde, vol. 10 (Feb. 13, 1904): 49-52._


~1904.~ En Mandchourie: les Khoungouses. Francis Mury.

_Correspondant, vol. 214 (Mar. 25, 1904): 1009-1024._


~1904.~ The political and commercial situation in Manchuria. H. Fulford
Bush.

_Empire review, vol. 7 (Mar., 1904): 97-108._


~1904.~ British interests in Manchuria.

_Magazine of commerce, vol. 4 (Mar., 1904): 176._


~1904.~ Russian development of Manchuria. Henry B. Miller.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 15 (Mar., 1904): 113-127._


~1904.~ Lumbering in Manchuria. Henry B. Miller.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 15 (Mar., 1904): 131-132._


~1904.~ La Mandchourie. Paul Barre.

_Revue francaise de l'etranger et des colonies et exploration, vol. 29
(Mar., 1904): 155-165._


~1904.~ Conditions in Manchuria. Henry B. Miller.

_Scientific American supplement, vol. 57 (Mar. 12, 1904): 23574-23575._


~1904.~ Russia's work in Manchuria. Sergei Iulitch Witte.

_Harper's weekly, vol. 48 (Apr. 9, 1904): 544-545._


~1904.~ A visit to the Yalu region and Central Manchuria. Robert T.
Turley.

_Royal geographical society. Journal, vol. 23 (Apr., 1904): 473-481._


~1904.~ Russia in Manchuria,--a Russian statement [by M. Khoritz].

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 602-604._


~1904.~ Populations de la Mandchourie et de la Coree. Francis Mury.

_Revue de geographie, vol. 54 (May 1, 1904): 134-143._


~1904.~ Notes on Manchuria. Henry B. Miller.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 15 (June, 1904): 261-262._


~1904.~ Manchuria. James W. Davidson.

_Century magazine, vol. 68 (July, 1904): 398-411._




JAPAN


~Anderson~, William. The pictorial arts of Japan. With a brief historical
sketch of the associated arts and some remarks upon the pictorial art
of the Chinese and Koreans.

_Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & co., 1886. xx, 276, (16) pp. Plates. F^o._


~Bacon~, Alice Mabel. Japanese girls & women. Rev. and enl. ed., with
illustrations by Keish[=u] Takenouchi.

_Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and company, 1902. xiv, 337,
(1) pp. Plates (partly colored). 8^o._


---- A Japanese interior.

_Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and company, 1893. xix, (1),
267 pp. 12^o._


~Bishop~, Isabella L. Bird. Unbeaten tracks in Japan; an account of
travels on horseback in the interior, including visits to the
aborigines of Yezo and the shrines of Nikko and Ise.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1881. 2 vols. Frontispieces. Map. 8^o._


~Brinkley~, Frank. The art of Japan.

_Boston: J. B. Millet co., [1901]. 2 vols. Illustrations (partly
colored). F^o._

     CONTENTS: vol. 1. Pictorial art.--vol. 2. Applied art.


---- Japan; its history, arts and literature. [Library ed.]

_Boston and Tokyo: J. B. Millet co., [1901-1902]. 8 vols. Plates
(partly colored). 8^o. (Oriental series.)_

     "Captain Brinkley, who is qualified for the task by a
     residence of more than thirty years in Japan, and by a
     knowledge of its people and politics almost unique among
     Englishmen, has opportunely given us the most beautiful,
     fascinating, and authoritative work on that country, and its
     vast, unwieldy neighbour of China, which has yet been
     written in English." _Spectator, May 7, 1904, p. 733._


----, _ed._ Japan; described and illustrated by the Japanese; written
by eminent Japanese authorities and scholars.

_Boston: J. B. Millet company, [1897-1898]. v, 382 pp. Illustrations.
Colored plates. F^o._


---- Japan; described and illustrated by the Japanese; written by
eminent Japanese authorities and scholars; with an essay on Japanese
art by Kakuzo Okakura.

_Boston: J. B. Millet company, [^{c}1897-1898]. 10 vols. Colored
illustrations. Colored plates. F^o._


~Browne~, George Waldo. Japan; the place and the people; with an
introduction by the Hon. Kogoro Takahira.

_Boston: D. Estes & company, [1904]. 438 pp. Illustrations. Plates
(partly colored). Map. 8^o._

     Published in 1901 in his "The Far East and the new America,"
     vol. 2 (in part) and vol. 3.


~Brownell~, Clarence Ludlow. The heart of Japan; glimpses of life and
nature far from the travellers' track in the land of the rising sun.

_New York: McClure, Phillips & co., 1903. (8), 307 pp. Plates. 12^o._

     Published in 1902 by Methuen & co., London.


~Chamberlain~, Basil Hall. Things Japanese; being notes on various
subjects connected with Japan for the use of travellers and others. 4th
ed., rev. & enl.

_London: J. Murray; Yokohama: [etc.], Kelly & Walsh, 1902. vi, (2), 545
pp. Folded map. 8^o._

     Notes arranged by subject, alphabetically.


~Chamberlain~, Basil Hall, and W. B. ~Mason~. A handbook for travellers in
Japan, including the whole empire from Yezo to Formosa. 7th ed., rev.

_London: J. Murray; [etc., etc.], 1903. ix, (1), 586, (2) pp.
Illustrations. Folded plates. Maps (partly folded). Plans (partly
folded). 12^o._


~Conder~, Josiah. Domestic architecture in Japan.

     (_In_ Royal institute of British architects. Transactions,
     n. s., vol. 3, pp. 103-127. Illustrations. Plates. Plans.
     London. 1887. 4^o.)


~Curtis~, William Eleroy. The Yankees of the East; sketches of modern
Japan.

_New York: Stone & Kimball, 1896. 2 vols. Plates. Portraits. 12^o._


~Dennys~, Nicholas B., _ed._ The treaty ports of China and Japan. A
complete guide to the open ports of those countries, together with
Peking, Yedo, Hongkong, and Macao. Forming a guide book & vade mecum
for travellers, merchants, and residents in general.

_London: Truebner and co., 1867. viii, (2), 668, (2), xlviii, (2), 26
pp. Maps. Plans. 8^o._


~Diosy~, Arthur. The new Far East. With illustrations from special
designs by Kubota Beisen, of Tokyo, and a reproduction of a cartoon
designed by H. M. the German Emperor and a specially-drawn map. 3d ed.

_London: Cassell and co., 1900. xx, 374 pp. Plates. Maps. 8^o._

     "This is a brilliantly written history of New Japan,
     containing much instructive information on the affairs of
     the Far East."


~Dumolard~, Henry. Le Japon politique, economique, et social.

_Paris: A. Colin, 1903. viii, 342, (2) pp. 12^o._

     Appendice.--I. Constitution japonaise du 11 fevrier 1889.
     II. Projet de loi ouvriere: pp. 331-342.


~Fraser~, Mary Crawford. Letters from Japan. A record of modern life in
the island empire.

_New York & London: The Macmillan company, 1899. 2 vols. Illustrations.
8^o._


~Great Britain.~ _Foreign office._ Report on the railways of Japan (with
plans). Presented to both Houses of Parliament by command of Her
Majesty, March, 1896. (2), 29 pp. Plates. Folded maps. Diagram. 8^o.

     (_In_ Great Britain. Foreign office. Diplomatic and consular
     reports. 1896. Miscellaneous series, no. 390.)


~Griffis~, William Elliot. Matthew Calbraith Perry, a typical American
naval officer.

_Boston: Cupples and Hurd, 1887. xvi, 459 pp. Frontispiece (portrait).
Illustrations. 12^o._

     Japan, pp. 270-374.


---- The Mikado's empire. 10th ed., with six supplementary chapters,
including history to beginning of 1903.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1904. 2 vols. Illustrations.
Plates. Portraits. Map. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: v. 1. Book I. History of Japan from 660 B. C. to
     1872 A. D.--v. 2. Book II. Personal experiences,
     observations, and studies in Japan. 1870-1875. Book III.
     Supplementary chapters, including history to the beginning
     of 1903.


~Gulick~, Sidney Lewis. Evolution of the Japanese, social and psychic.

_New York, London [etc.]: F. H. Revell company, [1903]. vi, 457 pp.
8^o._


~Hearn~, Lafcadio. Glimpses of unfamiliar Japan.

_Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and company, 1894. 2 vols.
8^o._


----"Out of the East;" reveries and studies in new Japan.

_Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and company, 1895. (6), 341 pp.
12^o._


~Helmolt~, H. F. The world's history, a survey of man's record. Vol. II.
Oceania, Eastern Asia, and the Indian ocean.

_London: William Heinemann, 1904. x, (2), 642 pp. Plates (partly
colored). Portraits. Facsimile. Maps. 4^o._

     Japan, pp. 1-56.


~Hertslet~, _Sir_ Edward. Treaties and tariffs regulating the trade
between Great Britain and foreign nations: and extracts of treaties
between foreign powers, containing most-favoured-nation clauses
applicable to Great Britain. Japan. In force on the 1st April, 1879.

_London: Butterworths, 1879. iv, 288, (1) pp. 8^o._


~Inagaki~, Manjiro. Japan and the Pacific, and a Japanese view of the
Eastern question.

_New York: Scribner and Welford, 1890. 265 pp. Maps. 8^o._


~Jane~, Frederick T. The imperial Japanese navy.

_London: W. Thacker & co., 1904. xv, (1), 410 pp. Plates. Portraits.
Map. 4^o._


~Koch~, W. Japan. Geschichte nach japanischen Quellen und ethnographische
Skizzen.

_Dresden: Verlag von Wilhelm Baensch, 1904. (4), v, (3), 410 pp. Folded
sheet. 8^o._


~Lowell~, Percival. The soul of the Far East [Japan].

_Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin & co., 1888. 226 pp. 16^o._


~Mitford~, Algernon Bertram Freeman. Tales of old Japan.

_London and New York: Macmillan and co., 1893. xii, 383 pp. Plates.
12^o._

     CONTENTS: The forty-seven ronins.--The loves of Gompachi and
     Komurasaki.--Kazuma's revenge.--A story of the Otokodate of
     Yedo.--The wonderful adventures of Funakoshi Jiuyemon.--The
     Eta maiden and the Hatamoto.--Fairy tales.--The ghost of
     Sakura.--How Tajima Shume was tormented by a devil of his
     own creation.--Concerning certain superstitions.--Japanese
     sermons.--Appendices: An account of the Hara-Kiri. The
     marriage ceremony. The birth and rearing of children.
     Funeral rites.


~Morris~, J. Advance Japan: a nation thoroughly in earnest.

_London: W. H. Allen & co., 1895. xix, (1), 443 pp. Plates (woodcuts).
8^o._


---- What will Japan do? A forecast.

_London: Lawrence and Bullen, 1898. xii, 190 pp. Folded map. 12^o._


~Morse~, Edward S. Japanese homes and their surroundings. With
illustrations by the author.

_Boston: Ticknor and company, 1886. xxxiii, (1), 372 pp. Illustrations.
4^o._


~Murray~, David. The story of Japan.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons; London: T. F. Unwin, 1894. x, 431 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Maps. 12^o. (The story of the nations, v. 38.)_


~Norman~, Henry. The real Japan. Studies of contemporary Japanese
manners, morals, administration, and politics. 2d ed.

_London: T. F. Unwin, 1892. 364 pp. Plates. 8^o._


~Okakura~, Kakasu. The ideals of the East, with special reference to the
art of Japan.

_London: J. Murray, 1903. xxii, 244 pp. 12^o._


~Papinot~, E. Dictionnaire japonais-francais des noms principaux de
l'histoire et de la geographie du Japon; suivi de 17 appendices sur les
empereurs, sh[=o]gun, neng[=o], sectes bouddhistes, provinces, departements,
mesures, etc.

_Hongkong: Impr. de Nazareth, 1899. vii, 297 pp. 12^o._


~Perry~, Matthew Calbraith. The Americans in Japan: an abridgement of the
government narrative by Robert Tomes.

_New York & London: D. Appleton & co., 1857. viii, 415 pp.
Frontispiece. Illustrations. 12^o._


---- Narrative of the expedition of an American squadron to the China
seas and Japan, performed in the years 1852, 1853, and 1854, under the
command of Commodore M. C. Perry, United States navy, by order of the
government of the United States, comp. from the original notes and
journals of Commodore Perry and his officers, at his request, and under
his supervision, by Francis L. Hawks.

_New York, London: D. Appleton & company, 1857. xvii, (1), 537 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. Portraits. Maps (partly folded). Folded
fascsimiles. 8^o._


---- Narrative of the expedition of an American squadron ... comp....
by F. L. Hawks.

_New York: D. Appleton and co.; London: Truebner & co., 1857. vii, 624
pp. Illustrations. Plates. Maps. 4^o._

     This ed. contains only the material in v. 1 of the
     government ed.


~Ransome~, Stafford. Japan in transition: a comparative study of the
progress, policy, and methods of the Japanese since their war with
China.

_New York: Harper & brothers, 1899. (2), xv, (1), 261 pp. Plates.
Portraits. Maps. 8^o._


~Rein~, Johann Justus. The industries of Japan. Together with an account
of its agriculture, forestry, arts, and commerce. From Travels and
researches undertaken at the cost of the Prussian government.

_London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1889. xii, 570 pp. Illustrations. Plates
(partly colored). Maps. 8^o._

     A translation of v. 2 of his "Japan, nach Reisen und
     Studien," published in 1886.


---- Japan: travels and researches undertaken at the cost of the
Prussian government. Translated from the German.

_New York: A. C. Armstrong and son, 1884. x, (2), 543 pp. Plates
(partly phototype). Maps (partly folded). Plans. 8^o._


~Scherer~, James Augustin Brown. Japan today.

_Philadelphia and London: J. B. Lippincott company, 1904. 323 pp.
Plates. 12^o._

     The author was for many years a teacher of English at Saga,
     Japan.


~Singleton~, Esther, _ed. and tr._ Japan as seen and described by famous
writers.

_New York: Dodd, Mead and company, 1904. xii, 372 pp. Plates. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: Pt. 1. The country and the race.--Pt. 2. History
     and religion.--Pt. 3. Places and monuments.--Pt. 4. Manners
     and customs.--Pt. 5. Arts and crafts.--Pt. 6. Modern Japan.


~Sladen~, Douglas. Queer things about Japan.

_London: Anthony Treherne & co., 1904. xxxv, (1), 442, (1) pp. Plates
(partly colored). 8^o._

     "Illustrations by the celebrated Hokusai, never before
     reproduced in England."


~United States.~ _Bureau of statistics._ Commercial Japan in 1904. Area,
population, production, railways, telegraphs, and transportation
routes, and foreign commerce of United States with Japan.

_Washington: Government printing office, 1904. iii, (1), 2873-3017 pp.
Folded map. 4^o._

     Cover-title.

     Reprinted from Monthly summary of commerce and finance for
     Feb., 1904.


~Watson~, Gilbert. Three rolling stones in Japan. 3d impression.

_London: E. Arnold, 1904. xi, 315 pp. Plates. 8^o._


~Watson~, W. Petrie. Japan; aspects & destinies.

_London: G. Richards, 1904. xiii, (1), 336 pp. Plates. Folded maps.
8^o._


JAPAN: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1897.~ Le developpement economique du Japon depuis la guerre contre la
Chine. J. Franconie.

_Societe de geographie commerciale du Havre. Bulletin, 14. annee
(1897): 109-117; 131-138; 214-223._

     Extract from "Annales de l'Ecole libre des sciences
     politiques."


~1898.~ "Japan--A forecast." J. Morris.

_Imperial and Asiatic quarterly review, 3d series, vol. 5 (Apr., 1898):
309-320._


~1899.~ The awakening of an island empire. (Japan.) R. W. Grant.

_Anglo-American magazine, vol. 2 (Sept., 1899): 269-277._


~1899.~ The commercial development of Japan. O. P. Austin.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 10 (Sept., 1899): 329-337._


~1899.~ Commercial Japan. O. P. Austin.

_Forum, vol. 28 (Oct., 1899): 146-159._


~1900.~ A Japanese view of Ransome's Japan in transition. A. Kinnosuke.

_Critic, vol. 36 (May, 1900): 454-459._


~1900.~ Misunderstood Japan. Y. Ozaki.

_North American review, vol. 171 (October, 1900): 566-576._


~1900.~ The industrial revolution in Japan. Count Okuma.

_North American review, vol. 171 (Nov., 1900): 677-691._


~1901.~ Japan in transition. J. C. C. Newton.

_Review of missions, vol. 22 (Aug., 1901): 100-108._


~1902.~ Les finances du Japon. Raphael-Georges Levy.

_Annales des sciences politiques, vol. 17 (July, 1902): 444-472._


~1903.~ The position of Japan in the Far East. Kogoro Takahira.

_American Asiatic association. Journal, vol. 3 (Apr., 1903): 86-88._


~1903.~ Japan's position in the Far East. Alfred Stead.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 74 (Aug. 1, 1903): 288-302._


~1904.~ The Japan of 1903. J. H. De Forest.

_Independent, vol. 56 (Jan. 21, 1904): 127-130._


~1904.~ The religious awakening in Japan. Kiichi Kaneko.

_Missionary review, vol. 27 (Jan., 1904): 41-42._


~1904.~ Japanischer Nationalcharakter. Karl Rathgen.

_Die Nation (Berlin), vol. 21 (Jan. 16, 1904): 244-245._


~1904.~ Die Arbeiterbewegung im modernen Japan. Gustav Eckstein.

_Die Neue Zeit, 22. Jahrgang (Jan. 16-Feb. 20, 1904): 494-665._


~1904.~ Le Japon industriel. Francis Marre.

_Correspondant, vol. 214 (Feb. 25, 1904): 654-662._


~1904.~ The financial and economic situation in Japan. W. Petrie Watson.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Feb., 1904): 211-232._


~1904.~ Japan and her people. Charles H. Brent.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Feb. 20, 1904): 449-453._


~1904.~ Le panmongolisme japonais. Alexandre Ular.

_La Revue, vol. 48 (Feb. 15, 1904): 413-443._


~1904.~ L'Europeanisation du Japon. Felicien Challaye.

_Revue de Paris, 11. annee, vol. 1, pt. 1 (Feb. 1, 1904): 648-672._


~1904.~ Our [Japan's] ambition. S. Shimada.

_Sun trade journal, vol. 10 (Feb., 1904): 18-21._


~1904.~ Au Japon: religions d'hier et d'aujourd'hui. Ch. Desfontaines.

_A travers le monde, vol. 10 (Mar. 26, 1904): 97-100._


~1904.~ Scenes le la vie japonaise. Pierre Loti. [Julien Viaud.]

_Annales politiques et litteraires, 22. annee (Mar. 27, 1904):
195-196_.


~1904.~ The hour of the pink ticket in Japan. Frederick Palmer.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Mar. 12, 1904): 10-12, 25-28._


~1904.~ The psychology of militant Japan. E. H. Vickers.

_Nation, vol. 78 (Mar. 3, 1904): 165-166._


~1904.~ Le Japon et l'etranger d'apres un consul russe. P. Camena
d'Almeida.

_Revue commerciale, 22. annee (Mar. 19, 1904): 3._


~1904.~ Le Japon industriel. J. P. Armand Hahn.

_Revue d'economie politique, vol. 18 (Mar., 1904): 230-249._


~1904.~ Le Japon et ses ressources dans la guerre actuelle. Pierre
Leroy-Beaulieu.

_Revue des deux mondes, 5. periode, vol. 20 (Mar. 15, 1904): 389-419._


~1904.~ Every day life in Japan. Onoto Watanna. [_Mrs._ W. E. Babcock.]

_Harper's weekly, vol. 48 (Apr. 2, 1904): 500-502, 527, 528._


~1904.~ Japan's financial position. O. Eltzbacher.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 55 (Apr., 1904): 543-554._


~1904.~ L'expansion japonaise. Henri Cordier.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Apr. 1, 1904):
473-476._


~1904.~ Okoubo Tosimitsi et les origines du Japon actuel. Louis Farges.

_Revue universelle, vol. 4 (Apr. 1, 1904): 189-190._


~1904.~ The rise of modern Japan. Jihei Hashiguchi.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4626-4646._


~1904.~ The genius of Japan. Alexander Tison.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4699-4701._


~1904.~ Fifty years of Japan. Adachi Kinnosuke.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 553-557._


~1904.~ What the people read in Japan.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 577-578._


~1904.~ Japan's new gospel of civilization. Harold Bolce.

_Booklovers' magazine, vol. 3 (June, 1904): 723-742._


~1904.~ Marquis Ito, the Japanese statesman. John W. Foster.

_International quarterly, vol. 9 (June, 1904): 261-273._


~1904.~ First impressions of Japan. George Kennan.

_Outlook, vol. 77 (June 11, 1904): 355-360._


~1904.~ The little brown men of Nippon. Joaquin Miller.

_Arena, vol. 32 (July, 1904): 18-21._


~1904.~ The magna charta of Japan. Kentaro Kaneko.

_Century magazine, vol. 68 (July, 1904): 484-487._




KOREA


~Allen~, H. N. Korean tales; being a collection of stories translated
from the Korean folk lore, together with introductory chapters
descriptive of Korea.

_New York & London: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1889. (4), 193 pp. 12^o._


~Bishop~, Isabella L. Bird. Korea and her neighbors; a narrative of
travel, with an account of the recent vicissitudes and present position
of the country.

_New York, [etc.]: F. H. Revell company, 1898. (2), 480 pp.
Illustrations. Plates. 8^o._


~Blakeney~, William. On the coasts of Cathay and Cipango forty years ago.
A record of surveying service in the China, Yellow and Japan seas and
on the seaboard of Korea and Manchuria.

_London: Elliot Stock, 1902. xx, 353 pp. Plates. Folded maps. 8^o._


~Campbell~, Charles W. A journey through North Korea to the Ch'ang-pai
Shan.

     (_In_ Royal geographical society. Proceedings, vol. 14,
     March, 1892, pp. 141-161. Folded map. London, 1892. 8^o.)


~Carles~, William Richard. Life in Corea.

_London: Macmillan and co., 1888. xiv, 317 pp. Illustrations. Plates.
Folded map. 8^o._


~Cavendish~, Alfred Edward J. Korea and the sacred white mountain; being
a brief account of a journey in Korea in 1891; together with an account
of an ascent of the white mountain, by Captain H. E. Goold-Adams.

_London: George Philip & son, 1894. 224 pp. Illustrations. Plates
(partly colored). Folded maps. 8^o._


~Corea.~

     (_In_ Australasian association for the advancement of
     science. Report of the sixth meeting held at Brisbane,
     Queensland, January, 1895, pp. 483-532. Plates (partly
     colored). Maps. Sydney, [1896]. 8^o.)

     CONTENTS: 1. General paper on Corea, by Christopher Thomas
     Gardner; 2. Notes of travels in Corea, by J. S. Gale; 3.
     Land tenure and land tax, by J. H. Hunt; 4. Corean custom of
     taboo, by G. H. Jones; Notes on Corean agriculture,
     industries, and social institutions of Corea, by M. N.
     Trollope; Seven notes on Corea (Corean rivers and their
     navigability; Different kinds of and rotation of crops, &c.,
     &c.), by L. O. Warner; Fauna of Corea, from "Korea and the
     sacred white mountain;" Constitution and government, by C.
     T. Gardner.


~Frazar~, Everett. Korea, and her relations to China, Japan and the
United States. A paper read before the New England society, of Orange,
New Jersey, in Music hall, November 15th, 1883.

_Orange, N. J.: Chronicle book and job printing office, 1884. 52 pp.
8^o._


~Gale~, James S. Korean sketches.

_New York, [etc.]: Fleming H. Revell company, 1898. 256 pp. Plates.
Portraits. 12^o._


~Gifford~, Daniel L. Every-day life in Korea; a collection of studies and
stories.

_Chicago, [etc.]: F. H. Revell company, [1898]. 231 pp. Plates. Folded
map. 12^o._


~Gilmore~, George W. Korea from its capital: with a chapter on missions.

_Philadelphia: Presbyterian board of publication and sabbath-school
work, [1892]. 328 pp. Plates. 12^o._


~Griffis~, William Elliot. Corea, the hermit nation. I.--Ancient and
mediaeval history. II.--Political and social Corea. III.--Modern and
recent history. 6th ed., revised and enlarged, with additional chapter
on Corea in 1897.

_New York: C. Scribner's sons, 1897. xxxi, (3), 492 pp. Frontispiece.
Illustrations. Maps. 8^o._


---- Corea, without and within: chapters on Corean history, manners and
religion, with Hendrick [sic] Hamel's narrative of captivity and
travels in Corea, annotated.

_Philadelphia: Presbyterian board of publication, [1885]. 315 pp.
Plates. Portraits. Map. 12^o._


~Hamilton~, Angus. Korea, with a newly prepared map and numerous
illustrations.

_New York: C. Scribner's sons, 1904. xlii, 315 pp. Illustrations. Map
in pocket. 4^o._


The ~Korea~ review. [v. 1-3.] Edited by H. B. Hulbert.

_Seoul, Korea, 1901-1903. 3 vols. 8^o._

     In course of publication.


The ~Korean~ repository.

_[Seoul]: 1895-1898. 4 vols. Plates (partly folded). 8^o._

     Library has [vols. 2-3] 1895-1896; vol. 4, 1897; vol. 5,
     1898.


~Koto~, Bundjiro, _and_ S. ~Kanazawa.~ A catalogue of the Romanized
geographical names of Korea.

_[Tokio]: Published by the university of T[=o]ky[=o], [1903]. (4), vi, 90, 88
pp. 12^o._

     Pt. 1. Index of the Romanized names; Pt. 2. Index to the
     names of Chinese characters.


~Landor~, A. Henry Savage. Corea or Cho-sen, the land of the morning
calm.

_London: William Heinemann, 1895. xiii, (3), 304 pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Portraits. 8^o._


~Lowell~, Percival. Chosoen, the land of the morning calm; a sketch of
Korea.

_Boston: Ticknor and company, 1886. x, 412 pp. Illustrations. Plates
(photogravures). Folded maps. 4^o._


~Miln~, Louise Jordan. Quaint Korea.

_London: Osgood, McIlvaine & co., 1895. viii, 306 pp. 12^o._


~Oppert~, Ernest. A forbidden land: voyages to the Corea. With an account
of its geography, history, productions, and commercial capabilities,
&c., &c.

_London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880. xix, (1),
349, (2) pp. Illustrations. Plates. Folded charts. 8^o._


~Underwood~, _Mrs._ Lillias Horton. Fifteen years among the top-knots;
or, Life in Korea. With introduction by Frank F. Ellinwood.

_Boston, New York, [etc.]: American tract society, [1904]. xviii, 271
pp. Plates. Portraits. 8^o._


~United States.~ _Bureau of statistics._ Commercial Korea in 1904. Area,
population, production, railways, telegraphs, and transportation
routes, and foreign commerce, and commerce of United States with Korea.

_Washington: Government printing office, 1904. iii, (1), 2449-2482 pp.
Maps. 4^o._

     Cover-title.

     Reprinted from the Monthly summary of commerce and finance
     for Jan., 1904.


~Villetard de Laguerie~, R. La Coree, independante, russe, ou japonaise.

_Paris: Hachette et c^{ie}, 1898. viii, 304 pp. Illustrations (incl.
portraits). 12^o._


~Whigham~, H. J. Manchuria and Korea.

_London: Isbister and company, 1904. (6), 245 pp. Plates. Map. 8^o._


KOREA: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1897.~ Railroads in Korea. J. Henry Dye.

_Railroad gazette, vol. 29 (March 12, 1897): 185, 188-189._


~1898.~ The first railway in Korea.

_Engineering news, vol. 40 (Sept. 11, 1898): 133-134._


~1900.~ A travers la Coree. Marcel Monnier.

_La geographie, vol. 1 (Jan., 1900): 35-49._


~1900.~ Korea--the hermit nation. Harrie Webster.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 11 (April, 1900): 145-155._


~1900.~ Korea, the pearl of the Orient: traditional, historical,
descriptive. Charlotte M. Salwey.

_Imperial and Asiatic quarterly review, 3d series, vol. 10 (July,
1900): 154-167._


~1903.~ The question of Korea. Alfred Stead.

_Fortnightly, n. s., vol. 74 (Nov., 1903): 846-863._

_Living age, vol. 239 (Dec., 1903): 705-718._


~1903.~ The Korean question: Russia and Japan.

_Harper's weekly, vol. 47 (Nov. 28, 1903): 1893-1894._


~1903.~ Situation economique de la Coree. Robert Doucet.

_Monde economique, 13. annee (Nov. 21, 1903): 647-650._


~1904.~ The crisis in the Far East: views and experiences in Korea. Helen
Gregory-Flesher.

_Harper's weekly, vol. 48 (Jan. 30, 1904): 166-168._


~1904.~ La Coree et le conflit Russo-Japonais. F. Le Beschu.

_Monde illustre, vol. 94 (Jan. 30, 1904): 84-86._


~1904.~ Walking through Korea. T. Philip Terry.

_Outing, vol. 43 (Jan., 1904): 433-440._


~1904.~ La Coree d'apres de nouvelles publications. P. Camena d'Almeida.

_Revue commerciale, 22. annee (Jan. 23, 1904): 3-4._


~1904.~ La Coree. Victor Berard.

_Revue de Paris, 11. annee (Jan. 15, 1904): 423-448._


~1904.~ Situation politique et economique actuelle de la Coree. B. de
Zenzinoff.

_A travers le monde, vol. 10 (Feb. 20, 1904): 61-62._


~1904.~ A travers la Coree. Jean de Pange.

_A travers le monde, vol. 10 (Feb. 27, 1904): 65-68; (Mar. 5, 1904):
73-76; (Mar. 12, 1904): 81-84._


~1904.~ Korea as the prize of war. J. Sloat Fassett.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (Feb., 1904): 167-175._


~1904.~ La Coree: son gouvernement: ses moeurs: ses legends. J. H. Rosny.

_Annales politiques el litteraires, 22. annee (Feb. 14, 1904): 99-101._


~1904.~ La Coree: le pays: caractere des habitants: arts et manufactures:
gouvernement: le catholicisme en Coree. A.-A. Fauvel.

_Correspondant, vol. 214 (Feb. 10, 1904): 446-473._


~1904.~ Korea: the bone of eastern contention.

_Current literature, vol. 36 (Feb., 1904): 158-163._


~1904.~ Yi-Hyeung empereur de Coree. Maxime de Merilhan.

_France illustree, 31. annee (Feb. 20, 1904): 140-141._


~1904.~ Seoul et les Coreens. Li-Tuyen.

_France illustree, 31. annee (Feb. 20, 1904): 141-142._


~1904.~ The fate of Korea.

_Harper's weekly, vol. 48 (Feb. 20, 1904): 269-270._


~1904.~ An ambition of Japan. A. M. Latter.

_Independent review, vol. 2 (Feb., 1904): 117-123._

_Living age, vol. 240 (Mar. 12, 1904): 663-667._


~1904.~ Current notes on international law: Korea. G. G. Phillimore.

_Law magazine review, vol. 29 (Feb., 1904): 216-217._


~1904.~ Some facts about Korea.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 15 (Feb., 1904): 78._


~1904.~ Japanese relations with Korea. Joseph H. Longford.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 55 (Feb., 1904): 207-218._

_Living age, vol. 240 (Mar. 5, 1904): 577-587._

_Eclectic magazine, vol. 142 (Apr., 1904): 540-550._


~1904.~ Korea, the cockpit of the East.

_Review of reviews (London), vol. 29 (Feb., 1904): 176-181._


~1904.~ La Coree. Villetard de Laguerie.

_Revue des deux mondes, 5. periode, vol. 19 (Feb. 1, 1904): 682-696._


~1904.~ La Coree. Matignon.

_Societe des etudes coloniales et maritimes. Bulletin, 29. annee (Feb.
29, 1904): 57-59._


~1904.~ La Coree & les puissances etrangeres. Maurice Courant.

_Annales des sciences politiques, vol. 19 (Mar. 15, 1904): 253-267._


~1904.~ La Coree monastique. Jean de Nettancourt-Vaubecourt.

_Monde illustre, vol. 94 (Mar. 12, 1904): 234-235._


~1904.~ Kim the Korean. William Elliot Griffis.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Mar. 5, 1904): 543-549._


~1904.~ Japan and Korea.

_Pilot, vol. 9 (Mar. 5, 1904): 214-215._


~1904.~ The Japanese in Korea.

_Pilot, vol. 9 (Mar. 26, 1904): 281-282._


~1904.~ Korean headdresses in the National museum. Foster H. Jenings.

_Scientific American supplement, vol. 57 (Mar. 26, 1904): 23608-23609;
(Apr. 2, 1904): 23624-23626._


~1904.~ Korea and the Far East (with maps).

_Scottish geographical magazine, vol. 20 (Mar., 1904): 157-158._


~1904.~ Un voyage en Coree. A. Hagen.

_Tour du monde, vol. 10 (Mar. 19, 1904): 133-144; (Mar. 26, 1904):
145-156._


~1904.~ About Korea. C. T. Collyer.

_Royal geographical society. Journal, vol. 23 (April, 1904): 481-492._


~1904.~ Korea and the Koreans.

_World's work, (London) vol. 3 (Apr., 1904): 445-452._


~1904.~ Unhappy Korea. Arthur Judson Brown.

_Century magazine, vol. 68 (May, 1904): 147-150._


~1904.~ Korea, the bone of contention. Homer B. Hulbert.

_Century magazine, vol. 68 (May, 1904): 151-154._


~1904.~ The actual situation of Korea. W. F. Sands.

_Messenger, vol. 41 (May, 1904): 491-496._


~1904.~ Falsehood and truth about Korea missionaries. Arthur Judson
Brown.

_Missionary review, vol. 27 (May, 1904): 332-336._


~1904.~ Korea: its history and prospects. Walter C. Hillier.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (June 1, 1904): 946-954._


~1904.~ Korea, Japan, and Russia. von Zepelin.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 30 (July, 1904): 93-94._




RUSSO-JAPANESE RELATIONS


~Lawrence~, Thomas J. War and neutrality in the Far East.

_London: Macmillan & co., 1904. 240 pp. 12^o._


~Japan.~ _Imperial diet._ Translation. Correspondence regarding the
negotiations between Japan and Russia. (1903-1904.) Presented to the
Imperial diet, March, 1904.

_[Washington, D. C.: Gibson brothers, 1904.] xii, 59 pp. 8^o._


RUSSO-JAPANESE RELATIONS: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1903.~ Russia and Japan.

_Gunton's magazine, vol. 25 (July, 1903): 16-19._


~1903.~ Russia and the nations. W. M. Ivins, jr.

_World's work, vol. 6 (July, 1903): 3642-3646._


~1903.~ The cloud in the Far East.

_Macmillan's magazine, vol. 88 (Sept., 1903): 354-362._


~1903.~ The far eastern problem.

_Gunton's magazine, vol. 25 (Oct., 1903): 312-317._


~1903.~ The storm-cloud in the Far East. Charles Johnston.

_Independent, vol. 55 (Oct. 15, 1903): 2446-2448._


~1903.~ Russia and Japan.

_Blackwood's Edinburgh magazine, vol. 174 (Nov., 1903): 585-600._


~1903.~ La Russie et le Japon.

_Comite de l'Asie francaise. Bulletin mensuel, 3. annee (Nov., 1903):
484-486._


~1903.~ The Far East. E. J. Dillon.

_Contemporary review, vol. 84 (Dec, 1903): 885-899._


~1903.~ Japan and Russia.

_Nation, vol. 77 (Dec. 31, 1903): 519-520._


~1903.~ Russia and Japan.

_Spectator, vol. 91 (Dec. 26, 1903): 1116._


~1903-1904.~ Asia in transition. W. C. Jameson Reid.

_Gunton's magazine, vol. 25 (Dec., 1903): 485-494; vol. 26 (Jan.,
1904): 29-37; (Feb., 1904): 118-128._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan: a grave situation. Albert Shaw.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (Jan., 1904): 4-8._


~1904.~ The Russo-Japanese crisis.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Jan. 9, 1904): 7-8._


~1904.~ The Russian and Japanese naval situation. French E. Chadwick.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Jan. 16, 1904): 14-15._


~1904.~ Admiral Alexieff. William R. Stewart.

_Cosmopolitan, vol. 36 (Jan., 1904): 374-375._


~1904.~ The far eastern problem. Alfred Stead.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Jan., 1904): 137-142._


~1904.~ Russia's movements in the Far East. A. Maurice Low.

_Forum, vol. 35 (Jan., 1904): 336-343._


~1904.~ The Russo-Japanese imbroglio. Muhammad Barakatullah.

_Forum, vol. 35 (Jan., 1904): 458-470._


~1904.~ The complications of an eastern war.

_Independent, vol. 56 (Jan. 7, 1904): 45-46._


~1904.~ Russes et Japonais en extreme orient. F. Le Beschu.

_Monde illustre, vol. 94 (Jan. 16, 1904): 48._


~1904.~ La Russie et le Japon. Michel Mery.

_Mouvement geographique, 21. annee (Jan. 10, 1904): cols. 20-23._


~1904.~ The Russian and Japanese forces.

_Nation, vol. 78 (Jan. 14, 1904): 25-26._


~1904.~ Der russisch-japanische Konflikt. M. Beer.

_Neue Zeit, 22. Jahrgang (Jan. 2, 1904): 427-433._


~1904.~ The Russo-Japanese peril and its bearing on Anglo-French
relations. Frederic Lees.

_New liberal review, vol. 6 (Jan., 1904): 711-721._


~1904.~ The "yellow peril" bogey. Demetrius C. Boulger.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 55 (Jan., 1904): 30-39._

_Living age, vol. 240 (Feb. 6, 1904): 321-329._


~1904.~ Japan and Russia.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Jan. 9, 1904): 102-104._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan face to face.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Jan. 16, 1904): 161-165._


~1904.~ Japan and Russia.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Jan. 23, 1904): 193-195._


~1904.~ La crise russo-japonaise. Robert de Caix.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Jan. 16, 1904):
81-94._


~1904.~ La politique des grandes puissances en extreme-orient. Jean de La
Peyre.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Jan. 16, 1904):
113-131._


~1904.~ Etiquette and the East.

_Saturday review, vol. 97 (Jan. 23, 1904): 101-102._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan.

_Spectator, vol. 92 (Jan. 16, 1904): 78._


~1904.~ The far-eastern crisis.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (Feb., 1904): 131-136._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan: the naval outlook. Active List.

_Blackwood's Edinburgh magazine, vol. 175 (Feb., 1904): 275-293._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan. John A. Ewan.

_Canadian magazine, vol. 22 (Feb., 1904): 385-389._


~1904.~ The war fleets of Japan and Russia. Archibald S. Hurd.

_Cassier's magazine, vol. 25 (Feb., 1904): 287-318._


~1904.~ Appreciations of conditions in the Russo-Japanese conflict.
Alfred T. Mahan.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Feb. 20, 1904): 7-8._


~1904.~ Russia's transportation problem in Siberia. Chase S. Osborn.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Feb. 20, 1904): 11._


~1904.~ The complete readiness of Japan. Arthur May Knapp.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Feb. 20, 1904): extra p. 2._


~1904.~ The theatre of war. Cyrus C. Adams.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Feb. 20, 1904): extra p. 6._


~1904.~ On the eve of war in Japan. Arthur May Knapp.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Feb. 27, 1904): 10._


~1904.~ A nation calm and self-contained. Frederick Palmer.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Feb. 27, 1904): 11-12._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise et la politique de la France. Robert de
Caix.

_Comite de l'Afrique francaise. Bulletin, 14. annee (Feb., 1904):
43-44._


~1904.~ The Far East. E. J. Dillon.

_Contemporary review, vol. 85 (Feb., 1904): 281-289._

     "The Corean question is vital to Japan."


~1904.~ Les eventualites d'extreme-orient. I. Le Japon. II. Les
perspective actuelles. Paul Leroy-Beaulieu.

_Economiste francais, 32. annee, vol. 1 (Feb. 6, 1904): 169-171; (Feb.
13, 1904): 205-208._


~1904.~ La guerre en extreme-orient et les bourses europeennes. Paul
Leroy-Beaulieu.

_Economiste francais, 32. annee, vol. 1 (Feb. 20, 1904): 237-239._


~1904.~ Les evenements d'orient et d'extreme-orient et les bourses
europeennes: necessite d'une periode de recueillement. Paul
Leroy-Beaulieu.

_Economiste francais, 32. annee, vol. 1 (Feb. 27, 1904): 273-275._


~1904.~ First principles in the Far East. Calchas.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Feb., 1904): 194-210._


~1904.~ Russland und Japan. Karl Schultz.

_Grenzboten, 63. Jahrgang (Feb. 11, 1904): 313-326._


~1904.~ Some considerations of the far eastern crisis. Colgate Baker.

_Independent, vol. 56 (Feb. 4, 1904): 239-241._


~1904.~ Some lessons of the Japanese torpedo attack. Park Benjamin.

_Independent, vol. 56 (Feb. 18, 1904): 353-356._


~1904.~ Circumstances in the Far East. A. J. Herbertson.

_Independent review, vol. 2 (Feb., 1904): 107-116._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japanaise. F. Le Beschu.

_Monde illustre, vol. 94 (Feb. 20, 1904): 152._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise et ses consequences. Ambroise Rendu.

_Moniteur industriel, 31. annee (Feb. 20, 1904): 113-114._


~1904.~ The crisis in the Far East. Robert Machray.

_Monthly review, vol. 14 (Feb., 1904): 27-42._


~1904.~ The eastern crisis and its origin. E. H. Vickers.

_Nation, vol. 78 (Feb. 11, 1904): 105-106._


~1904.~ Japanese and Russian finances.

_Nation, vol. 78 (Feb. 25, 1904): 143-144._


~1904.~ Der Kriege. P. Nathan.

_Nation (Berlin), 21. Jahrgang (Feb. 13, 1904): 307-308._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan. By the Bystander.

_New liberal review, vol. 7 (Feb., 1904): 62-68; (April, 1904):
335-340._


~1904.~ The far eastern situation. Edwin Maxey.

_Overland monthly, n. s., vol. 43 (Feb., 1904): 110-114._


~1904.~ The Russo-Japanese conflict.

_Public opinion, vol. 36 (Feb. 18, 1904): 201-203; (Feb. 25, 1904):
233-234._


~1904.~ Europe and the war.

_Public opinion (London), vol. 85 (Feb. 26, 1904): 253-257._


~1904.~ La France et la guerre. Robert de Caix.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Feb. 15, 1904):
225-232._


~1904.~ Le reveil de l'Asie et le mouvement pan-asiatique. Argus.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Feb. 15, 1904):
266-271._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Feb. 15, 1904):
272-282._


~1904.~ The railways at the seat of war.

_Railway world, vol. 48 (Feb. 20, 1904): 199-200._


~1904.~ Les interets francais en extreme-orient. Henri Lorin.

_Revue commerciale, 22. annee (Feb. 13, 1904): 3._


~1904.~ Les finances comparees de la Russie et du Japon.

_Revue de statistique, vol. 7 (Feb. 14, 1904): 50-55._


~1904.~ La lutte pour le Pacifique. Rene Pinon.

_Revue des deux mondes, 5. periode, vol. 19 (Feb. 15, 1904): 772-807._


~1904.~ [La guerre en extreme-orient]. Francis Charmes.

_Revue des deux mondes, 5. periode, vol. 19 (Feb. 15, 1904): 947-958._


~1904.~ Marines russe et japonaise. C. Cilvanet.

_Revue francaise, vol. 29 (Feb., 1904): 97-111._


~1904.~ Le conflit russo-japanais. Alexandre Charlot.

_Revue generale; vol. 79 (Feb., 1904): 330-342._


~1904.~ La guerre fatale. B. de Zenzinoff.

_Revue politique et litteraire, 5. ser., vol. 1 (Feb. 20, 1904):
237-241._


~1904.~ Britain and the far eastern question.

_Westminster review, vol. 161 (Feb., 1904): 117-119._


~1904.~ The conflict in the Far East. Alfred Stead.

_World's work (London), vol. 3 (Feb., 1904): 240-244._


~1904.~ Russia, Japan, and who else? Edwin Maxey.

_Albany law journal, vol. 66 (Mar., 1904): 71-73._


~1904.~ L'armee japonaise. B.

_Annales des sciences politiques, vol. 19 (Mar. 15, 1904): 236-252._


~1904.~ The opening of the war. Active List.

_Blackwood's Edinburgh magazine, vol. 175 (Mar., 1904): 438-448._


~1904.~ Causes de la guerre russo-japonaise. Comte de Fontaine de
Resbecq.

_Carnet, vol. 19 (Mar., 1904): 371-373._


~1904.~ Economic changes in Asia. Arthur Judson Brown.

_Century magazine, vol. 67 (Mar., 1904): 732-737._


~1904.~ The making of the Japanese soldier. Durham White Stevens.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Mar. 5, 1904): 7-8._


~1904.~ Russia calls out her Baltic fleet. Cyrus C. Adams.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Mar. 5, 1904): extra p. 13._


~1904.~ The battle of Port Arthur. James F. J. Archibald.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 32 (Mar. 26, 1904): 7._


~1904.~ Japan and Russia. E. J. Dillon.

_Contemporary review, vol. 85 (Mar., 1904): 305-322._

     "Mr. Dillon's knowledge of Russia is so extensive that his
     article on Japan and Russia in the current _Contemporary_
     claims special attention. The object of his paper is to fix
     the responsibility of the war. Dismissing the Russian people
     and the professional diplomats, he comes to the conclusion
     that the appointment of Admiral Alexeieff as Viceroy of the
     Far East was a huge blunder, and that the supersession of
     wiser and more cautious statesmen by a zealous but
     inexperienced sailor precipitated the crisis."--_Spectator,
     Mar. 5, 1904: 376._


~1904.~ Ce que coutera la guerre russo-japonaise pour une campagne de six
mois d'apres des documents inedits.

_Correspondant, vol. 214 (Mar. 25, 1904): 1025-1041._


~1904.~ The war and the powers. Calchas.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Mar. 1, 1904): 415-430._

_Living age, vol. 241 (Apr. 2, 1904): 1-13._

     "'Calchas' sums up the results of the war strategically, and
     points out what he believes to have been Russia's best
     course when she found herself attacked and
     unprepared."--_Spectator, Mar. 5, 1904: 377._


~1904.~ The war in the Far East. Alfred Stead.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Mar. 1, 1904): 431-444._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise. Ardouin-Dumazet et Paul Fontin.

_France de demain, n. s., vol. 1 (Mar. 5, 1904): 3-19._


~1904.~ Leaders in the Far eastern conflict.

_Independent, vol. 56 (Mar. 31, 1904): 701-708._


~1904.~ Along the Yalu river. Margherita Arlina Hamm.

_Independent, vol. 56 (Mar. 31, 1904): 709-714._


~1904.~ Russia's plan to exhaust her foe.

_Literary digest, vol. 28 (Mar. 12, 1904): 374-376._


~1904.~ A plain statement about Russia and Japan. Frederick McCormick.

_Metropolitan magazine, vol. 19 (Mar., 1904): 883-889._


~1904.~ Manchuria and Korea.

_National geographic magazine, vol. 15 (March, 1904): 128-129._

     Accompanying is a war map of Manchuria and Korea, 36 by 42
     inches.


~1904.~ The collapse of Russia in the Far East. Ignotus.

_National review, vol. 43 (Mar., 1904): 29-34._


~1904.~ Some French opinions on the Russo-Japanese conflict. Frederic
Lees.

_New liberal review, vol. 7 (Mar., 1904): 181-189._


~1904.~ Why Japan resists Russia. Kogoro Takahira.

_North American review, vol. 178 (Mar., 1904): 321-327._


~1904.~ England and the war. Sydney Brooks.

_North American review, vol. 178 (Mar., 1904): 328-337._


~1904.~ What defeat would mean to Russia. Wanda Ian-Ruban.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Mar. 19, 1904): 687-694._


~1904.~ La situation en extreme-orient: les faits et les perspectives.
Robert de Caix.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Mar. 1, 1904):
305-311._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise et ses lecons. Jean de La Peyre.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Mar. 1, 1904):
321-336; (Mar. 16, 1904): 407-418; (Apr. 1, 1904): 489-501._


~1904.~ Port-Arthur. H. T.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Mar. 1, 1904):
337-340._


~1904.~ The struggle over Korea. Robert E. Speer.

_Record of Christian work, vol. 23 (Mar., 1904): 155-159._


~1904.~ Russo-Japanese war: an authoritative statement of both sides of
the case. I. The Japanese case. II. The Russian case.

_Review of reviews (London), vol. 29 (Mar., 1904): 231-239._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise.

_Revue de geographie, 28. annee (Mar. 1, 1904): 65-69._


~1904.~ Le conflit russo-japonais. Francis Mury.

_Revue de geographie, 28. annee (Mar. 1, 1904): 70-77._


~1904.~ L'attaque de Port-Arthur--8 fevrier 1904. Lieutenant X.

_Revue de Paris, 11. annee, vol. 2, (Mar. 15, 1904): 1-14._


~1904.~ Obligation juridique de la declaration de guerre. H. Ebren.

_Revue generale de droit international public, 11. annee (Mar.-Apr.,
1904): 133-148._


~1904.~ Les hostilites sans declaration de guerre. A propos de la guerre
russo-japonaise. F. de Martens.

_Revue generale de droit international public, 11. annee (Mar.-Apr.,
1904): 148-150._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise et l'alliance franco-russe. Jean
Jaures.

_Revue socialiste, vol. 39 (Mar., 1904): 305-316._


~1904.~ Le conflit russo-japonais. C. Beguin.

_Revue universelle, vol. 4 (March 1, 1904): 121-124._


~1904.~ Vladisvostock, Port Arthur, Tchemoulpo.

_Revue universelle, vol. 4 (March 1, 1904): 125-126._


~1904.~ The war in the Far East. P. Kropotkin.

_Speaker, vol. 9 (Mar. 5, 1904): 544-546._

_Living age, vol. 241 (Apr. 9, 1904): 121-126._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise: l'attaque et la defense des cotes.
Gaston Jougla.

_Vie illustree, 7. annee (Mar. 11, 1904): 372-377._


~1904.~ Korea, Japan, and Russia. Robert E. Speer.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Mar., 1904): 4514-4525._


~1904.~ The war--and after. Henry Norman.

_World's work (London), vol. 3 (Mar., 1904): 323-329._


~1904.~ The struggle for the Pacific.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (Apr., 1904): 484-485._

     Review of, La lutte pour la Pacifique by Rene Pinon.


~1904.~ Japan is prepared for a long war. Frederick Palmer.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 33 (Apr. 9, 1904): 6-7._


~1904.~ Appreciation of conditions in the Russo-Japanese conflict. Alfred
T. Mahan.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 33 (Apr. 30, 1904): 10-13._


~1904.~ Japan and Russia [Russia's prospects of success]. E. J. Dillon.

_Contemporary review, vol. 85 (Apr., 1904): 577-591._


~1904.~ The beginning in the Far East. David Hannay.

_Cornhill magazine, vol. 16 (Apr., 1904): 523-535._


~1904.~ Russia and the war. Oedipus.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Apr., 1904): 547-560._


~1904~. Port Arthur--Its strategic value. Angus Hamilton.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (Apr., 1904): 662-669._


~1904.~ Les Cosaques. Kto-to.

_France de demain, n. s., vol. 1 (Apr. 20, 1904): 205-213._


~1904.~ The case for Japan. D. W. Stevens.

_Frank Leslie's popular monthly, vol. 57 (Apr., 1904): 690-696._


~1904.~ The war and the two civilisations. A. M. Latter.

_Independent review, vol. 2 (April, 1904): 348-359._


~1904.~ The destiny of the Far East. Alexander Hume Ford.

_Munsey's magazine, vol. 31 (Apr., 1904): 1-11._


~1904.~ New stars rise above the Pacific. Peter Mac Queen.

_National magazine (Boston), vol. 20 (Apr., 1904): 79-82._


~1904.~ Sea power and strategy. T. Miller Maguire.

_National review, vol. 43 (April, 1904): 263-274._


~1904.~ Russia's charge against Japan. Sir F. Maurice.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 55 (Apr., 1904): 676-684._


~1904.~ The causes of the Russo-Japanese war. Frank Brinkley.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Apr. 16, 1904): 921-927._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan.

_Quarterly review, vol. 199 (Apr., 1904): 576-610._


~1904.~ La croix-rouge en Russie et au Japon. Maurice Buret.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (Apr. 1, 1904):
502-509._


~1904.~ Tchemoulpo et Vladivostock. Lieutenant X.

_Revue de Paris, 11. annee, vol. 2 (Apr., 1904): 650-668._


~1904.~ La revolte de l'Asie. Victor Berard.

_Revue de Paris, 11. annee, vol. 2 (April 15, 1904): 867-890; 11.
annee, vol. 3 (May 15, 1904): 409-448._


~1904.~ The naval situation in the East.

_Saturday review, vol. 97 (Apr. 23, 1904): 513-514._


~1904.~ The war and the chances of intervention.

_Spectator, vol. 92 (Apr. 30, 1904): 685-686._


~1904.~ What Japan is fighting for. Kogoro Takahira.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4620-4622._


~1904.~ The cost of war to Russia and Japan. Frank A. Vanderlip.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4647-4650._


~1904.~ Stories of Russian and Japanese soldiers.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4658-4675._


~1904.~ The rebound on Russia. Gilson Willets.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4683-4698._


~1904.~ The cause of the war. John Foord.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4705-4709._


~1904.~ What Russia fights for. Edwin Winthrop Dayton.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4710-4712._


~1904.~ Will Russia use the North-east passage? Frederick T. Jane.

_World's work (London), vol. 3 (Apr., 1904): 433-435._


~1904.~ Vice-admiral Togo: a type of the Japanese fighting man. Hirata
Tatsuo.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 551-552._


~1904.~ Japan on the American attitude.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 578-580._


~1904.~ The effect of the war on the international affairs of Russia.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 580-581._


~1904.~ Climatic features of the field of the Russo-Japanese war. Frank
Waldo.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 582-584._


~1904.~ If Japan should win. Harold Bolce.

_Booklovers' magazine, vol. 3 (May, 1904): 579-598._


~1904.~ Torpedo craft _vs._ battleships. Alfred T. Mahan.

_Collier's weekly, vol. 33 (May 21, 1904): 16-17._


~1904.~ Japan, Russia, France. Ivanovich.

_Contemporary review, vol. 85 (May, 1904): 668-685._


~1904.~ Problems of the Far East. Alfred Stead.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (May, 1904): 817-829._


~1904.~ Some questions of international law arising from the
Russo-Japanese war. Amos S. Hershey.

_Green bag, vol. 16 (May-July, 1904): 306, 375, 452._


~1904.~ Russia and Japan. Frank Brinkley.

_National review, vol. 43 (May, 1904): 393-405._


~1904.~ Russia in the Far East. A statement to the "North American
review." Comte Cassini.

_North American review, vol. 178 (May, 1904): 681-689._


~1904.~ Japan and Korea: why, in the light of history, Japan is fighting
for Korea. Colgate Baker.

_Pearson's magazine, vol. 11 (May, 1904): 470-478._


~1904.~ La crise d'extreme-orient. Paul Doumer.

_Revue economique internationale, vol. 1 (May, 1904): 573-597._


~1904.~ La guerre russo-japonaise et ses lecons. Jean de La Peyre.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, vol. 17 (May 1, 1904): 664-674;
(May 16, 1904): 725-735._


~1904.~ The position of Russia. Henry Norman.

_World's work (London), vol. 3 (May, 1904): 529-532._


~1904.~ Russian finance: the gold reserve. Henry Norman.

_World's work (London), vol. 3 (May, 1904): 532-535._


~1904.~ Some of the issues of the Russo-Japanese conflict. K. Asakawa.

_Yale review, vol. 13 (May, 1904): 16-50._


~1904.~ International aspects of the Russo-Japanese war. T. Baty.

_Albany law journal, vol. 66 (June, 1904): 189-190._


~1904.~ A question of staying power: the comparative resources of Russia
and Japan. N. T. Bacon.

_Booklovers' magazine, vol. 3 (June, 1904): 743-748._


~1904.~ Japan's object-lessons in naval warfare. Excubitor.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (June 1, 1904): 931-945._


~1904.~ The war in the Far East. Alfred Stead.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (June I, 1904): 955-965._


~1904.~ The conflict of new world-forces in the Far East. Valentine
Chirol.

_National review, vol. 43 (June, 1904): 578-596._


~1904.~ The Russo-Japanese war and European opinion.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 30 (July, 1904): 87-90._


~1904.~ Japan at war. E. Emerson.

_Contemporary review, vol. 86 (July, 1904): 6-17._


~1904.~ The war: Korea and Russia. Alfred Stead.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 76 (July, 1904): 90-102._


~1904.~ International questions and the present war.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 56 (July, 1904): 142-151._


~1904.~ The course of the war. Henry Norman.

_World's work, vol. 4 (July, 1904): 109-112._




FAR EAST: AMERICAN RELATIONS


~Adams~, Brooks. America's economic supremacy.

_New York: The Macmillan company, 1900. 222 pp. 12^o._

     CONTENTS: The Spanish war and the equilibrium of the world;
     The new struggle for life among nations; England's decadence
     in the West Indies; Natural selection in literature; The
     decay of England; Russia's interest in China.


---- The new empire.

_New York: The Macmillan company, 1902. xxxvi, (2), 243 pp. Folded
maps. 12^o._


~American academy of political and social science.~ The foreign policy of
the United States: political and commercial. Addresses and discussions
at the annual meeting, April 7-8, 1899.

_Philadelphia: American academy of political and social science, 1899.
(4), 216 pp. 8^o._

     The commercial relations of the United States with the Far
     East, by Worthington Chauncey Ford, pp. 107-130.

     The commercial relations of the United States with the Far
     East, by Robert T Hill; with a discussion by John Foord, Dr.
     W. P. Wilson, Prof. E. R. Johnson, pp. 131-160.

     The political relations of the United States with the Far
     East, by John Bassett Moore, pp. 163-167.

     China's relations with the West, by Wu Ting-fang, pp.
     168-176.

     The political relations of the United States with the
     European powers in the Far East, by Lindley Miller Keasbey,
     pp. 177-183.

     The real menace of Russian aggression, by Frederick Wells
     Williams, pp. 184-197.


~Bancroft~, Hubert Howe. The new Pacific.

_New York: The Bancroft company, 1900. iv, (2), 738 pp. Map. 8^o._


~Beresford~, _Lord_ Charles. China and the powers.

     (_In_ The Crisis in China, pp. 169-185. New York, 1900.
     12^o.)


~Beveridge~, Albert Jeremiah. The Russian advance.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1903. iii, (5), 485, (1) pp.
Maps. 8^o._

     American needs in the Orient, pp. 173-186.

     American progress in the Far East, pp. 187-207.

     Russian opinions of American institutions, pp. 385-400.

     Appendix: Treaty of Shimonoseki, by which southern Manchuria
     was ceded to Japan. Mikado's rescript withdrawing from
     Manchuria. The (reputed) Cassini convention. The
     Russo-Manchurian railway agreement. Anglo-Russian agreement
     respecting spheres of influence in China. Treaty of
     offensive and defensive alliance between Great Britain and
     Japan. Specimen of the regulations concerning foreign joint
     stock companies operating in Russia.


~Boulger~, Demetrius C. America's share in a partition of China.

     (_In_ The Crisis in China, pp. 215-235. New York, 1900.
     12^o.)


~Callahan~, James Morton. American relations in the Pacific and the Far
East, 1784-1900.

_Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins press, 1901. 177 pp. 8^o. (Johns Hopkins
university studies in historical and political science, series xix nos.
1-3.)_


~Colquhoun~, Archibald Ross. Greater America.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1904. ix, (3), 435, (1) pp.
Frontispiece (portrait). Maps. Diagrams. 8^o._


---- The Far Eastern crisis.

     (_In_ The Crisis in China, pp. 109-134. New York, 1900.
     12^o.)


---- The mastery of the Pacific.

_New York, London: The Macmillan co., 1902. xvi, 440 pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Maps. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: Introduction.--The United States in the
     Pacific.--Great Britain in the Pacific.--The Dutch in the
     Pacific.--Japan in the Pacific.--Other powers in the
     Pacific.--Conclusion.


~Conant~, Charles A. The United States in the Orient. The nature of the
economic problem.

_New York: Houghton, Mifflin & co., 1900. (2), x, 237 pp. 8^o._


~Dilke~, _Sir_ Charles W. The American policy in China.

     (_In_ The Crisis in China, pp. 265-271. New York, 1900.
     12^o.)


~Foster~, John W. American diplomacy in the Orient.

_Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and company, 1903. xiv, 498 pp.
8^o._

     CONTENTS: Early European relations; America's first
     intercourse; The first Chinese treaties; Independent Hawaii;
     The opening of Japan; The transformation of Japan; The
     crumbling wall of China; Chinese immigration and exclusion;
     Korea and its neighbors; The enfranchisement of Japan; The
     annexation of Hawaii; The Samoan complication; The Spanish
     war: its results. Appendix: Protocol between China and the
     treaty powers, Sept. 7, 1901; The emigration treaty between
     China and the United States, 1894; Treaty between the United
     States and Japan, 1894; Joint resolution for annexing the
     Hawaiian islands, 1898; The Samoan treaty between the United
     States, Germany, and Great Britain, 1899; Protocol between
     the United States and Spain, August 12, 1898; Treaty of
     peace between the United States and Spain, 1898.


~Griffis~, William Elliot. America in the East; a glance at our history,
prospects, problems, and duties in the Pacific Ocean.

_New York: A. S. Barnes & co., 1899. x, (2), 244 pp. Plates. Portraits.
12^o._


~Nitobe~, Inazo Ota. The intercourse between the United States and Japan:
an historical sketch.

_Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins press, 1891. ix, 198 pp. 8^o. (Johns
Hopkins university studies in historical and political science. Extra
vol. viii.)_


~Potter~, Henry Codman. The East of to-day and to-morrow.

_New York: The Century co., 1902. (8), 190 pp. 12^o._

     CONTENTS: Chinese traits and western blunders.--The problem
     of the Philippines.--Impressions of Japan.--Impressions of
     India.--Impressions of the Hawaiian Islands.--India: its
     people and its religions.


~Reinsch~, Paul Samuel. World politics at the end of the nineteenth
century; as influenced by the oriental situation.

_New York & London: The Macmillan co., 1900. xviii, 366 pp. Map. 12^o.
(The citizen's library.)_

     CONTENTS: National imperialism; The opening of China; The
     consequences of the opening of China in world politics;
     German imperial politics; Some considerations on the
     position of the United States as a factor in oriental
     politics.


~Waldstein~, Charles. The expansion of Western ideals and the world's
peace.

_John Lane, New York and London, 1899. 194 pp. 16^o._


~Wilson~, James H. America's interests in China.

     (_In_ The Crisis in China, pp. 239-261. New York, 1900.
     12^o.)


~Wu Ting-fang.~ Mutual helpfulness between China and the United States.

     (_In_ The Crisis in China, pp. 189-211. New York, 1900.
     12^o.)


FAR EAST: AMERICAN RELATIONS: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS


~1898.~ American competition with British trade in Japan.

_Board of trade journal, vol. 25 (July, 1898): 43-45._


~1898.~ Our policy in China. Mark B. Dunnell.

_North American review, vol. 167 (Oct., 1898): 393-409._


~1898.~ Eastward expansion of the United States. A. R. Colquhoun.

_Harper's new monthly magazine, vol. 97 (Nov., 1898): 932-938._


~1898-1899.~ America in the Far East. W. E. Griffis.

_Outlook, vol. 60 (Nov. 26, 1898): 761-766; (Dec. 10, 1898): 902-907;
(Dec. 24, 1898): 1004-1011; (Dec. 31, 1898): 1051-1057; vol. 61 (Jan.
14, 1899): 110-113._


~1899.~ American interests in the Far East. John Foord.

_Anglo-American magazine, vol. 1 (Jan., 1899): 1-14._


~1899.~ The commercial future. The new struggle for life among nations.
Brooks Adams.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 65 (Feb., 1899): 274-283._


~1899.~ The new struggle for life among nations. Brooks Adams.

_McClure's magazine, vol. 12 (Apr., 1899): 558-564._


~1899.~ The commercial relations of the United States with the Far East.
Worthington Chauncey Ford.

_American academy of political and social science. Annals, Supplement
to May, 1899: 107-160._


~1899.~ American policy in the Far East. J. M. King, jr.

_Anglo-American magazine, vol. 1 (May, 1899): 432-439._


~1899.~ Relation of the United States to Asiatic politics. J. B. Moore.

_Independent, vol. 51 (May 4, 1899): 1206._


~1899.~ Shall the United States unite with England or Russia.

_Independent, vol. 51 (July 13, 1899): 1895._


~1899.~ The paramount power of the Pacific. John Barrett.

_North American review, vol. 169 (Aug., 1899): 165-179._


~1899.~ America, England, and Germany as allies for the open door. John
Barrett.

_Engineering magazine, vol. 17 (Sept., 1899): 893-902._


~1899.~ America and England in the East. Sir Charles W. Dilke.

_North American review, vol. 169 (Oct., 1899): 558-563._


~1901.~ American interests in the Orient. Charles A. Conant.

_International monthly, vol. 3 (Feb., 1901): 117-133._


~1903.~ The status of the United States in the Orient. John Barrett.

_Independent, vol. 55 (Apr. 23, 1903): 952-953._


~1903.~ The Asiatic problem and its relation to the United States. W. C.
Jameson Reid.

_Political science quarterly, vol. 18 (June, 1903): 181-196._


~1903.~ The reopened door.

_Nation, vol. 77 (July 23, 1903): 65-66._


~1903-1904.~ Japan and the United States: a proposed economic alliance.
Kentaro Kaneko.

_International quarterly, vol. 8 (Dec.-Mar., 1903-1904): 399-404._


~1904.~ American interests in Asia.

_Outlook, vol. 76 (Jan. 23, 1904): 205-206._


~1904.~ Pourquoi les sympathies des Etats-Unis vont au Japon.

_A travers le monde, vol. 10 (Mar. 12, 1904): 86-87._


~1904.~ America's opportunity in the East. Harold Bolce.

_Booklovers' magazine, vol. 3 (Mar., 1904): 287-309._


~1904.~ The coming conflict from an American standpoint. Hugo Erickson.

_Overland monthly, n. s., vol. 43 (Mar., 1904): 204-206._


~1904.~ The coming of the Russian ships in 1863. Rush C. Hawkins.

_North American review, vol. 178 (Apr., 1904): 539-544._


~1904.~ Russia: our friend in need. John S. Cooper.

_Saturday evening post, vol. 176 (April 9, 1904): 1-2._


~1904.~ Our trade in the war zone. O. P. Austin.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4650-4654._


~1904.~ The victory of our eastern diplomacy.

_World's work, vol. 7 (Apr., 1904): 4675-4679._


~1904.~ Japan on the American attitude. A. K.

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 29 (May, 1904): 578-580._


~1904.~ Russia and ourselves.

_Outlook, vol. 13 (May 7, 1904): 345._


~1904.~ England and Russia in our civil war, and the war between Russia
and Japan. Henry Clews.

_North American review, vol. 178 (June, 1904): 812-819._




FAR EAST: EUROPEAN RELATIONS


~Boulger~, Demetrius C. Central Asian questions. Essays on Afghanistan,
China, and Central Asia.

_London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1885. xvi, 457 pp. Portrait. Maps. 8^o._


~Brandt~, Max August Scipio von. Dreiunddreissig Jahre in Ost-Asien.
Erinnerungen eines deutschen Diplomaten.

_Leipzig: G. Wigand, 1901. 3 vols. Portraits. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: Bd. 1. Die preussische Expedition nach Ost-Asien.
     Japan, China, Siam. 1860-1862. Zurueck nach Japan. 1862.--Bd.
     2. Japan. 1863-1875. 1866. In und durch Amerika. 1871.
     1872.--Bd. 3. China. 1875 bis 1893.


---- Die Zukunft Ostasiens; ein Beitrag zur Geschichte und zum
Verstaendnis der ostasiatischen Frage. 3., umgearb. und verm. Auflage.

_Stuttgart: Strecker & Schroeder, 1903. iv, 118 pp. 8^o._


~Busley~, C. Der Kampf um den ostasiatischen Handel.

_Berlin: Verlag von Dietrich Reimer, 1897. 195-244 pp. Folded map.
Tables. 8^o. (Deutsche Kolonial-Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen, 1896-97.
Heft 6.)_


~Chirol~, Valentine. The Far Eastern question.

_London: Macmillan and co., 1896. viii, (4), 196 pp. Plates. Folded
maps. 8^o._


~Curzon~, George Nathaniel, _1st baron_. Problems of the Far East;
Japan-Korea-China. New and revised edition. [4th ed.]

_Westminster: A. Constable & co., 1896. xxiv, 444 pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Portraits. Maps. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: The Far East: Japan; The evolution of modern
     Japan; Japan and the powers; 1. Treaty between Great Britain
     and Japan (July, 1894); 2. Protocol. Korea: Life and travel
     in Korea; The capital and court of Korea; Political and
     commercial symptoms in Korea; The political future of Korea.
     China: The country and capital of China; China and the
     powers; The so-called awakening of China; Monasticism in
     China. The prospect: After the war; The destinies of the Far
     East; Great Britain in the Far East. Appendix: 1. Treaty ...
     between Japan and China. 2. Imperial rescript (May, 1895).


~Dennys~, Nicholas B., _ed._ The treaty ports of China and Japan. A
complete guide to the open ports of those countries.

_London: Truebner, 1867. viii, (2), 668, (2), xxvi pp. Maps. Plans.
8^o._


~Krausse~, Alexis. The Far East: its history and its question.

_London: Richards, 1900. xiv, (2), 372 pp. Maps. Plans. 8^o._

     "The Far East" is, as far as some three or four hundred
     pages permit, a complete account of the history of the
     Oriental Asiatic world in its relations with Western
     civilization, with an examination of the existing factors in
     the Far Eastern question, and a statement of the evidence
     bearing upon the subject.

     The appendices to the book are particularly useful for
     reference, as they include a chronology of the history of
     the Far East, the text of the more important treaties and
     conventions, and furnish a bibliography of authorities on
     the Far East.


~La Barre de Nanteuil~, Amaury de, _baron_. L'Orient et l'Europe depuis
le XVII^e siecle jusqu'aujourd'hui. Ouvrage contenant des cartes de
l'Orient aux principales epoques de son histoire.

_Firmin-Didot et cie, Paris, [1898]. xx, 251 pp. Folded maps. 8^o._


~Leroy-Beaulieu~, Pierre. La renovation de l'Asie (Siberie, Chine,
Japon).

_Paris: Armand Colin et c^{ie}, 1900. xxvii, (1), 482 pp. 12^o._

     "L'ouvrage de M. Pierre Leroy-Beaulieu, 'La renovation de
     l'Asie (Siberie, Chine, Japon),' a eu un grand succes. Les
     pages ou le jeune voyageur a juge avec tant de clairvoyance
     les pays d'Extreme-Orient, qu'il a etudies sur place, ont
     fait, uon seulement en France, mais a l'etranger, la plus
     vive impression. En trois mois la premiere edition de cet
     ouvrage a ete epuisee; la deuxieme vient de paraitre, avec
     une nouvelle preface, chez l'editeur Colin.... En meme
     temps, l'on en prepare une traduction anglaise et une
     traduction allemande."--_L'Economiste francais._

     "M. Leroy-Beaulieu, in his interesting work, 'La renovation
     de l'Asie,' deals with the Japanese question at some length.
     His book is doubly interesting because it is the first
     serious contribution to the discussion of the Far Eastern
     question by a French writer, and because, like Mr.
     Colquhoun's book, it regards the Chinese problem not as an
     isolated fact, but as part of a vast evolution."


---- _Same._

_Paris: A. Colin, 1901. xxix, 482 pp. 12^o._

     "La plus grande partie du present ouvrage a paru durant les
     deux dernieres annees sous forme d'articles publies dans la
     Revue des deux mondes, et de correspondances adressees a
     l'Economiste francais."


---- The awakening of the East: Siberia, Japan, China. [Translated by
Richard Davey.] With a preface by Henry Norman.

_New York: McClure, 1900. xxvii, (1), 298, (1) pp. 12^o._


---- _Same._

_London: W. Heinemann, 1900. xxvii, (1), 299 pp. 12^o._


~Mahan~, Alfred T. The problem of Asia and its effect upon international
policies.

_Boston: Little, Brown and company, 1900. xxvi, 233 pp. Folded map.
12^o._


~Norman~, Henry. Asia. The peoples and politics of the Far East. Travels
and studies in the British, French, Spanish and Portuguese colonies,
Siberia, China, Japan, Korea, Siam and Malaya. [Fifth impression.]

_London: T. F. Unwin, 1900. xvi, 608 pp. Frontispiece (colored).
Plates. Portraits. Folded maps. 8^o._

     China, pp. 195-322; Korea, pp. 323-374; Japan, pp. 375-406;
     Siam, pp. 407-522; Malaya, pp. 523-588.


~Pouvourville~, Albert de. La question d'extreme-orient. Avec une preface
par Gabriel Hanotaux.

_Paris: A. Pedone, 1900. xii, 274 pp. 8^o. (Etudes coloniales, vol.
5.)_


~Reclus~, Elisee. La Chine et la diplomatie europeenne.

_Paris: Editeurs de l'Humanite nouvelle, 1900. 16 pp. 8^o._

     "Thinks that the alliance against China, beyond capturing
     Pekin, will accomplish no good; is inimical to Russia.
     Thinks Russian advance has been checked to the advantage of
     the world."


~Reid~, Gilbert. The powers and the partition of China.

     (_In_ The Crisis in China, pp. 35-50. New York, 1900. 12^o.)


~Siebold~, Alexander, _Freiherr_ von. Japan's accession to the comity of
nations. Translated from the German with an introduction by Charles
Lowe.

_London: K. Paul, Trench, Truebner & co., 1901. xiii, 119, (1) pp.
12^o._

     Appendix: Treaty of commerce and navigation between Great
     Britain and Japan. 1894.

     "The substance of this little work ... has already appeared
     in the form of a series of articles in the magazine
     Ost-Asien" (Berlin, 1899).--_Preface._


~Smith~, D. Warres. European settlements in the Far East; China, Japan,
Corea, Indo-China, Straits Settlements, Malay states, Siam,
Netherlands, India, Borneo, the Philippines, etc.

_London: S. Low, Marston & co., 1900. xiii, 331 pp. Illustrations.
Plates. Map. 8^o._


~Speer~, Robert E. Missions and politics in Asia. Studies of the spirit
of the Eastern peoples, the present making of history in Asia, and the
part therein of Christian missions.

_New York: Fleming H. Revell company, 1898. 271 pp. 12^o. (Students'
lectures on missions, Princeton theological seminary, 1898.)_


~Townsend~, Meredith. Asia and Europe; studies presenting the conclusions
formed by the author in a long life devoted to the subject of the
relations between Asia and Europe.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons; London: A. Constable & co., 1901. xii,
388 pp. 8^o._

     Papers originally published in the Contemporary review, the
     National review, and the Spectator.

     "The conclusions of the author concerning the possible
     influence of the West Europeans upon Asia are absolutely
     pessimistic and--quite correct.... Where our author is
     entirely right is when he proves by so many illustrations
     that up to the present time the Europeans have had no
     influence upon the mind of the populations of
     Asia."--_Kropotkin in The Speaker, March 19, 1904, page
     600._


~Walton~, Joseph. China and the present crisis. With notes on a visit to
Japan and Korea.

_London: Sampson Low, Marston & company, 1900. viii, 319 pp. Folded
map. 12^o._

     "Mr. Walton has only recently returned from an eight months'
     journey in the Far East; he had interviews with many of
     those who figure so prominently in the present crisis, and
     his work will be found as interesting as it is opportune."




ANGLO-RUSSIAN RELATIONS


~Berard~, Victor, _i. e._, Eugene Victor. Questions exterieures
(1901-1902). Creances et routes turques. Panama. La Tripolitaine.
L'alliance anglo-japonaise. La guerre sud-africaine. La royaute
espagnole. L'Angleterre et la paix.

_Paris: A. Colin, 1902. vii, 321, (1) pp. 12^o._

     Reprinted from the Revue de Paris.


~Boulger~, Demetrius C. England and Russia in Central Asia. With two maps
and appendices (one map being the latest Russian official map of
Central Asia).

_London: W. H. Allen & co., 1879. 2 vols. Maps. 8^o._


~Chirol~, Valentine. The middle eastern question; or, Some political
problems of Indian defence. With maps, illustrations, and appendices.

_London: J. Murray, 1903. xiv, 512 pp. Plates. Maps. Genealogical
table. 8^o._

     "Bibliography": pp. 499-500.

     Based on a series of letters written for the Times.
     _Preface._


~Cobbold~, Ralph P. Innermost Asia: travel and sport in the Pamirs.

_London: Heinemann, 1900. xviii, 354 pp. Illustrations. Portrait. Maps.
8^o._

     Contains a bibliography of innermost Asia. p. 346.

     "In Mr. Cobbold's opinion, the destiny of Afghanistan is to
     be absorbed and to be divided between the rival empires,
     though, if the reigning Ameer is succeeded by a son of his
     own mold, the inevitable crisis will be deferred. To sum up
     his political survey, what chiefly struck him in his travels
     in innermost Asia was 'the barbarous insistence of the
     Russian Government system, the brilliant success which
     invariably attends Russian aims, and the puerile weakness of
     the British Government in the protecting of the country's
     interests.'"


~Colquhoun~, Archibald Ross. English policy in the Far East. Being the
Times special correspondence.

_London: Field & Tuer, The Leadenhall press, 1885. 32 pp. 8^o._


---- Russia against India, the struggle for Asia.

_London and New York: Harper & bros., 1900. vii, (2), 246 pp. Maps.
12^o._


~Curzon~, George Nathaniel Curzon, _1st baron_. Persia and the Persian
question.

_London and New York: Longmans, Green & co., 1892. 2 vols.
Illustrations. Plates. Maps. 8^o._


---- Russia in Central Asia in 1889, and the Anglo-Russian question.
With appendices, maps, illustrations, and an index.

_London and New York: Longmans, Green, and co., 1889. xxiii, (1), 477
pp. Illustrations. Plates. Folded maps. 8^o._

     "Bibliography of Central Asia": pp. 440-468.

     "The nucleus of this book--less than one-third of its
     present dimensions--appeared in the shape of a series of
     articles, entitled 'Russia in Central Asia,' which [were]
     contributed to the (Manchester Courier) and other ...
     newspapers, in ... November and December, 1888, and January,
     1889."--_Preface._


~Lebedev~, V. T. Russes et Anglais en Asie centrale. Vers l'Inde.
Esquisse militaire statistique et strategique. Projet de campagne
russe. Traduit du russe par le capitaine du genie brevete Cazalas.

_Paris: Chapelot, 1900. 251 pp. Map. 12^o._


~Popowski~, Jozef. The rival powers in Central Asia; or, The struggle
between England and Russia in the East. Tr. from the German of Josef
Popowski by Arthur Baring Brabrant, and ed. by Charles E. D. Black.
With a map of the north-western frontier of India, showing the Pamir
region and part of Afghanistan.

_Westminster: A. Constable and company, 1893. xxii, 235 pp. 8^o._

     The map mentioned in the title is lacking in this copy.

     German original published anonymously.


~Rees~, J. D. Russia, India and the Persian gulf; with speeches by Sir
Charles W. Dilke, Sir George Birdwood, and H. F. B. Lynch.

_London: Harrison & sons, 1903. 39 pp. 8^o._

     Cover-title.

     Reprinted from the Asiatic quarterly review for April, 1903.


~Russia's~ march towards India by 'an Indian officer.'

_London: S. Low, Marston & co., 1894. 2 vols. Folded map. 8^o._


~Stuart~, Donald. The struggle for Persia.

_Methuen & co., London, 1902. x, 268 pp. Portrait. Folded map. 12^o._


~Vambery~, Armin. Central Asia and the Anglo-Russian frontier question: a
series of political papers by Arminius Vambery. Tr. by F. E. Bunnett.

_London: Smith, Elder, & co., 1874. viii, 385 pp. 12^o._

     First published in "Unsere Zeit," 1867-1873.


~Whigham~, H. J. The Persian problem; an examination of the rival
positions of Russia and Great Britain in Persia, with some account of
the Persian Gulf and the Bagdad railway.

_London: Isbister and company, 1903. xvi, 424 pp. Plates. Maps. 8^o._

     "The substance of a series of articles written for the
     Morning post."--_Introd._

     CONTENTS: Introduction.--French intrigues at Maskat.--The
     pearl islands of the Gulf.--Cruising on the Persian
     coast.--Shall we give Russia Bunder Abbas?--Visit to the
     pirate coast.--The importance of Koweit.--Persian rule in
     the delta of the Shat-al-Arab.--The position of Turkey in
     the Gulf.--The commerce of the Gulf.--The politics of the
     Gulf.--By the waters of Babylon.--On the Euphrates.--The
     sacred cities of the Shiahs.--Bagdad.--The passage of the
     Taurus.--The Bagdad railway.--The oil fields of
     Persia.--Kermanshah.--Persian carpets.--Routes in Western
     Persia.--Teheran.--Great Britain versus Russia.--Russia's
     policy.--Wanted--a British policy in Persia.--On the Russian
     road.--Russia's advance on Persia via the Caucausus.


ANGLO-RUSSIAN RELATIONS: ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS.


~1898.~ Anglo-Russian duel in the Far East.

_Public opinion, vol. 24 (March 17, 1898): 332._


~1898.~ The policy of playing dog in the manger. (Russia and England in
China.)

_Spectator, vol. 80 (March 12, 1898): 364._


~1898.~ England and Russia in China.

_Spectator, vol. 80 (Apr. 30, 1898): 612._


~1898.~ Russia and England in China.

_Saturday review, vol. 85 (May 7, 1898): 610-611._


~1898.~ Russia and Mr. Chamberlain's long spoon. (China.) W. T. Stead.

_Contemporary review, vol. 73 (June, 1898): 761-777._


~1898.~ Our policy in the Far East. William Des Voeux.

_Contemporary review, vol. 73 (June, 1898): 795-802._


~1898.~ Splendid isolation or what? Henry M. Stanley.

_Nineteenth century, vol. 43 (June, 1898): 869-878._

_Living age, vol. 218 (July 9, 1898): 67-73._

_Eclectic magazine, vol. 131 (Aug., 1898): 234-240._


~1898.~ England and Russia. (China.)

_Independent, vol. 50 (Aug. 11, 1898): 427-428._


~1898.~ England and Russia.

_Outlook, vol. 59 (Aug. 13, 1898): 901-902._


~1898.~ England and Russia. Charles Frederick Hamilton.

_Canadian magazine, vol. 11 (Sept., 1898): 444-447._


~1898.~ England and Russia in the Far East. Geoffrey Drage.

_Forum, vol. 26 (Oct., 1898): 129-135._


~1898.~ China, England, and Russia.

_Imperial and Asiatic quarterly review, 3d series, vol. 6 (Oct., 1898):
300-317._


~1899.~ Russia and England in China. Paul S. Reinsch.

_Arena, vol. 21 (Jan., 1899): 75-84._


~1899.~ Is it Russia versus England?

_American monthly review of reviews, vol. 19 (Apr., 1899): 401-403._


~1899.~ England and Russia.

_Independent, vol. 51 (May 11, 1899): 1315-1316._


~1899.~ Russia and England in China.

_Outlook, vol. 62 (May 13, 1899): 100-101._


~1899.~ The Anglo-Russian agreement.

_Public opinion, vol. 26 (May 25, 1899): 650._


~1899.~ The coming struggle for Persia. R. Popham Lobb.

_Imperial and Asiatic quarterly review, 3d series, vol. 8 (Oct., 1899):
284-313._


~1900.~ Lettre d'extreme-orient: Le Japon, l'Angleterre et la Russie.
Jean de Cuers de Cogolin.

_Questions diplomatiques et coloniales, 4. annee (Feb. 1, 1900):
139-142._


~1900.~ British and Russian diplomacy. By a diplomat.

_North American review, vol. 170 (June, 1900): 871-883._


~1900.~ Antagonism of England and Russia. Demetrius C. Boulger.

_North American review, vol. 170 (June, 1900): 884-896._


~1900.~ Afghanistan: the key to India. Archibald R. Colquhoun.

_Imperial and Asiatic quarterly review, 3d series, vol. 10 (July,
1900): 25-36._


~1900.~ A plea for peace--An Anglo-Russian alliance. J. W. Gambier.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 68 (Dec, 1900): 998-1008._


~1901.~ L'etat actuel des rapports anglo-russes dans l'Asie centrale. G.
Saint-Yves. With maps.

_Comite de l'Asie francaise. Bulletin, vol. 1 (1901): 99-105._


~1901.~ England and Russia. J. Novicow.

_Contemporary review, vol. 79 (Jan., 1901): 49-56._


~1901.~ Great Britain and Russia. A. Rustem Bey de Bilinski.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 50 (Nov., 1901): 723-736._


~1902.~ Les rivalites internationales en Perse et dans le golfe Persique.
Jean Imbart de la Tour.

_Revue de geographie, 26. annee (Dec, 1902): 491-501._


~1903.~ English and Russian politics in the East. Ali Haydar Midhat.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 53 (Jan., 1903): 67-78._


~1903.~ England, Russia, and Germany.

_Saturday review, vol. 95 (Jan. 10, 1903): 37-38._


~1903.~ England and Russia in the politics of Europe: the eastern
question. Frederic Austin Ogg.

_Chautauquan, vol. 36 (Feb., 1903): 463-474._

     Bibliography, p. 474.


~1903.~ The lion and the bear in the Far East. Frederic Austin Ogg.

_Chautauquan, vol. 37 (Apr., 1903): 14-25._


~1903.~ The relations of Great Britain with Russia. Scrutator.

_Spectator, vol. 90 (May 16, 1903): 776-777._


~1903.~ The Latin rapprochement and Anglo-Russian relations. "Calchas."

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 73 (June, 1903): 953-970._


~1903.~ The government of Asiatics by England and Russia. F. H. Skrine.

_East and west, vol. 2 (Oct., 1903): 1145-1155._


~1904.~ British sympathies in the Far East.

_Spectator, vol. 92 (Jan. 2, 1904): 5._


~1904.~ England, Russia, and Manchuria.

_Public opinion (London), vol. 85 (Feb. 19, 1904): 224._


~1904.~ Russia, Japan, and ourselves. C. A. W. Pownall.

_Nineteenth century and after, vol. 55 (Mar., 1904): 368-374._


~1904.~ India's dual problem. Sir Walter Lawrence.

_National review, vol. 43 (April, 1904): 245-262._


~1904.~ Can we trust Russia? Coloniensis.

_Fortnightly review, n. s., vol. 75 (May, 1904): 754-764._

~1904.~ The obstacles to an Anglo-Russian convention. An unpublished
chapter of diplomatic history. E. J. Dillon.

_Contemporary review, vol. 85 (June, 1904): 800-828._


~1904.~ The crisis in Thibet. E. John Solano.

_National review, vol. 43 (July, 1904): 823-846._


~1904.~ The English in Tibet: a Russian view. Prince Esper Oukhtomsky.

_North American review, vol. 179 (July, 1904): 24-29._




CHINA


~Ball~, James Dyer. Things Chinese; being notes on various subjects
connected with China. 3d ed. revised and enlarged.

_London: S. Low, Marston, and co., 1900. (6), 666, xxv, pp. 8^o._


~Bard~, E. Les Chinois chez eux. 2. ed.

_Paris: A. Colin, 1900. (4), 360 pp. Plates. 12^o._

     "The author, a merchant in China, describes more especially
     agriculture, finances, money, and other economic aspects."


~Barrows~, John Henry. The Christian conquest of Asia. Studies and
personal observations of Oriental religions.

_New York: Charles Scribner's sons, 1899. xvii, (1), 258 pp. 12^o.
(Morse lectures of 1898.)_

     Chapter VII: Confucianism and the awakening of China.

     Chapter VIII: Success of Asiatic missions; America's
     responsibility to the Orient.


~Beals~, Zephaniah Charles. China and the Boxers. A short history on the
Boxer outbreak, with two chapters on the sufferings of the missionaries
and a closing one on the outlook.

_New York: M. E. Munson, [1901]. 158 pp. Illustrations. Portrait.
12^o._


~Beresford~, _Lord_ Charles. The break-up of China. With an account of
its present commerce, currency, waterways, armies, railways, politics,
and future prospects.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1899. xxii, 491 pp. Portraits.
Folded maps. 8^o._


~Bishop~, Isabella L. Bird. The Yangtze Valley and beyond. An account of
journeys in China, chiefly in the province of Sze Chuan and among the
Man-tze of the Soms territory.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1900. 2 vols. Portrait. Plates. Map.
8^o._

     Reviewed in "Spectator," January, 1900, under title "Spheres
     of influence in China."


~Boulger~, Demetrius C. The history of China. New and revised edition.

_London: W. Thacker & co., 1898. 2 vols. Portraits. Maps. 8^o._


---- _Same._ A new edition, revised and brought up to date. Containing
chapters on the recent concessions to the European powers.

_London: W. Thacker & co., 1900. 2 vols. Portraits. Maps. 8^o._


---- A short history of China. An account for the general reader of an
ancient empire and people. A new edition, with an additional chapter
continuing the history from 1890 to date.

_London: Gibbings & company, 1900. (6), 436 pp. 8^o._

     Pp. 356-373 contain "How China is governed."

     The "Reign of Kwangsu, 1890-1900," (pp. 374a-374l) said to
     be written "by a competent authority."


~Brandt~, M. von. Industrielle und Eisenbahn-Unternehmungen in China. Mit
einer Kartenakizze.

_Berlin: Reimer, 1899. 121-140 pp. 8^o. (Deutsche
Kolonial-Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen, 1898-99. Heft 4.)_


~Brenier~, Henri. La mission lyonnaise d'exploration commerciale en
Chine, 1895-97. Avec cartes, plans, et gravures d'apres les documents
rapportes par la mission.

_Lyons: A. Rey et cie, 1898. (6), xxxvi, 386, 473 pp. Illustrations.
Folded maps. F^o._

     CONTENTS: 1^{re} partie. Recits de voyages. 2^{me} partie.
     Rapports commerciaux et notes diverses.

     "Of all the commercial missions to which the immediate
     prospect of the development of the resources of China by
     modern methods has recently given rise, the most fully
     equipped and that with the most extensive and elaborate
     programme is that organized by the Chamber of Commerce of
     Lyons, and the report published by the director of this
     mission, Mr. Henri Brenier, is of corresponding interest and
     value."


~Bretschneider~, E. History of European botanical discoveries in China.

_London: S. Low, Marston & co., 1898. 2 vols. 4^o._

     "Dr. Bretschneider's present _magnum opus_ is by no means a
     mere botanical work, as its name would seem to imply, but
     also a magnificent political and geographical record of all
     that Europeans have ever done in China from Marco Polo down
     to Mr. G. M. H. Playfair, and there is hardly any subject
     connected with the Far East but what accurate light is shed
     upon it by the dates, data, itineraries, geographical and
     biographical details, commercial notes, and other
     information furnished by the industrious and scrupulously
     painstaking author, than whom there is no one in the
     sinological field more worthy of absolute confidence."


~Brinkley~, Frank. China; its history, arts, and literature. [Library
ed.]

_Boston and Tokyo: J. B. Millet company, [1902]. 4 vols. Plates (partly
colored). Folded map. 8^o. (Oriental series, v. 9-12.)_


~Chang-Chih-tung.~ China's only hope. An appeal by her greatest viceroy.
Translated from the Chinese edition by Samuel I. Woodbridge.
Introduction by Griffith John.

_New York, etc.: F. H. Revell company, 1900. (2), 151 pp. Portrait.
12^o._


~La Chine.~ Expansion des grands puissances en extreme-orient
(1895-1898).

_Paris: R. Chapelot & cie., 1899. viii, 223 pp. Folded map. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: 1. Geographie economique de la Chine; Description
     economique des provinces chinoises; Statistique economique
     de la Chine.

     2. Rapports de la Chine avec les grandes puissances de 1894
     a 1898; L'Europe au traite de Simonosaki; Les premiers
     progres de la Russie en Chine et en Coree; L'intervention de
     l'Allemagne a Kiao-tcheou; Les consequences de l'occupation
     de Kiao-tcheou; Le role de la France.

     3. L'exploitation du marche chinois; Les concessions
     obtenues par les etrangers en Chine; L'exploitation
     economique de la Chine; La penetration des provinces
     meridionales par l'Indo-Chine francaise; Conclusion: Le
     partage eventuel de l'empire chinois. With folded map: carte
     economique de la Chine.


~Colquhoun~, Archibald Ross. China in transformation.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1898. ix, (1), 382 pp. Plate.
Folded maps. Diagrams. 8^o._


---- Overland to China.

_New York and London: Harper & brothers, 1900. xi, (1), 464 pp. Plates.
Portrait. Colored maps. 8^o._


---- The problem in China and British policy.

_London: P. S. King, 1900. 50 pp. Map. 12^o._


~Cordier~, Henri. Histoire des relations de la Chine avec les puissances
occidentales 1860-1900.

_Paris: F. Alcan, 1901-1902. 3 vols. 8^o._

     [Vol. 1.] L'Empereur T'Oung Tche (1861-1875).

     [Vol. 2.] L'Empereur Kouang-Siu, Premiere partie:
     (1875-1887).

     [Vol. 3.] L'Empereur Kouang-Siu, Deuxieme partie:
     (1888-1902).


The ~Crisis~ in China. Reprinted by permission from the North American
review.

_New York & London: Harper & bros., 1900. v, 271 pp. Plates. Portraits.
Maps. 12^o._

     CONTENTS: Smyth, G. B. Causes of the antiforeign feeling in
     China.--Reid, G. The powers and the partition of
     China.--Johnston, C. The struggle for reform in
     China.--Barrett, J. Political possibilities in
     China.--Lewis, R. E. The gathering of the storm.--Colquhoun,
     A. R. The Far Eastern crisis.--Mikhailoff, M. The great
     Siberian railway.--Beresford, Lord C. China and the
     powers.--Wu Ting-fang. Mutual helpfulness between China and
     the United States.--Boulger, D. C. America's share in a
     partition of China.--Wilson, J. H. America's interests in
     China.--Dilke, Sir C. W. The American policy in China.


~Cumming~, Constance F. Gordon-. Wanderings in China. Illustrated by the
author.

_William Blackwood and sons, Edinburgh and London, 1900. vi, (2), 528
pp. Plates (photogravures). Folded map. 8^o._


~Douglas~, Robert K. China. Revised and enlarged. With many illustrations
and an index.

_Chicago, New York: The Werner company, 1895. 604 pp. Plates
(woodcuts). 12^o._


---- China.

_New York: G. P. Putnam's sons, 1901. (2), xv, 474 pp. Illustrations.
Portraits. Folded map. 8^o. (The Story of the nations.)_


---- Li Hung Chang.

_London: Bliss, Sands and Foster, 1895. 251 pp. Portraits. 12^o.
(Public men of to-day.)_


---- Society in China.

_London: A. D. Innes & co., 1894. xvi, 415 pp. Plates. 8^o._


---- _Same._ Popular ed.

_London: A. D. Innes & co., 1895. xii, 434 pp. 12^o._


~Edkins~, Joseph. Religion in China; containing a brief account of the
three religions of the Chinese. Revised edition.

_London: K. Paul, Trench, Truebner & co., 1893. xx, 260 pp. 8^o.
(Truebner's oriental series.)_


~Favier~, Alphonse. Peking. Histoire et description. Ouvrage orne de 524
gravures anciennes et nouvelles, reproduites ou executees par des
artistes chinois d'apres les plus precieux documents.

_Bruxelles: Desclee de Brouwer et cie, 1900. 416 pp. Sm. 4^o._


~Giles~, Herbert Allen. A Chinese biographical dictionary.

_Leyden: E. J. Brice, 1897 [1898]. xii, 1022 pp. 8^o._


~Glass~, J. G. H. Report on the concessions of the Pekin Syndicate,
limited, in the provinces of Shansi and Hoonan, China, with estimates
of cost of railways and other works necessary for their development.

_Pekin, 1899. 174 pp. Map. 4^o._

     "A comprehensive report on the resources of the territories
     for the commercial exploitation of which the Pekin Syndicate
     has obtained a concession from the Chinese government."


~Gorst~, Harold E. China: on the economic resources of China, and the
present political and commercial conditions of the country.

_London: Sands & co., 1899. xx, 300 pp. Illustrations. Map. 8^o. (The
Imperial interest library, edited by H. Hendry.)_

     "Mr. Gorst has produced a very readable book, and has
     certainly succeeded in showing up very clearly some of the
     chief points in the political problems which present
     themselves to us, now that up-to-date events have altered
     the bearings of the general outlook in the Far East."


~Great Britain.~ _Foreign office._ China. No. 3 (1903). Report by Acting
Consul Litton on a journey in north-west Yuennan. Presented to both
Houses of Parliament by command of His Majesty. November 1903.

_London: Printed for His Majesty's Stationery office, [1903]. (2), 23
pp. Maps. F^o. [Cd. 1836.]_


---- ---- China. No. 1 (1904). Report by C. W. Campbell, His Majesty's
consul at Wuchow, on a journey in Mongolia. Presented to both Houses of
Parliament by command of His Majesty. January 1904.

_London: Printed for His Majesty's stationery office, [1904]. 43 pp.
Folded map. F^o. [Cd. 1874.]_


~Gundry~, R. S. China present and past. Foreign intercourse, progress and
resources, the missionary question, etc.

_London: Chapman & Hall, 1895. xxxi, (1), 414 pp. Map. 8^o._


_Hart_, _Sir_ Robert, _1st bart._ "These from the land of Sinim."
Essays on the Chinese question. With appendices.

_London: Chapman & Hall, 1901. (8), 254 pp. 8^o._


~Helmolt~, H. F. The world's history, a survey of man's record. Vol. II.
Oceania, Eastern Asia, and the Indian Ocean.

_London: William Heinemann, 1904. x, (2), 642 pp. Plates (partly
colored). Portraits. Facsimile. Maps. 4^o._

     China, pp. 56-114.


~Hertslet~, _Sir_ Edward. Treaties and tariffs regulating the trade
between Great Britain and foreign nations: and extracts of treaties
between foreign powers, containing most favoured-nation clauses
applicable to Great Britain. China. In force on the 1st January, 1877.

_London: Butterworths, 1877. iv, 251 pp. 8^o._


---- Treaties between Great Britain and China, and between China and
foreign powers. In force on the 1st January, 1896.

_London: Harrison & sons, 1896. 2 vols. 8^o._

     Not now in the Library of Congress, but has been ordered.


~Hesse-Wartegg~, Ernst von. China und Japan. Erlebnisse, Studien,
Beobachtungen auf einer Reise um die Welt.

_Leipzig: J. J. Weber, 1897. viii, 508 pp. Illustrations. Plates. Map.
8^o._


---- _Same._ 2te vermehrte Auflage.

_Leipzig: J. J. Weber, 1900. x, 658 pp. Illustrations. Plates. Map.
8^o._


---- Schantung und Deutsch-China. Von Kiautschou ins heilige Land von
China und vom Jangtsekiang nach Peking im Jahre 1898.

_Leipzig: J. J. Weber, 1898. vii, 294 pp. Illustrations. Plates. Maps.
8^o._


~Holcombe~, Chester. The real Chinese question.

_New York: Dodd, Mead & company, 1900. xx, 386 pp. 8^o._

     "An endeavor to consider the subject from a Chinese
     standpoint."


~Howorth~, Henry H. History of the Mongols from the 9th to the 19th
century.

_London: Longmans, Green and co., 1876-1888. 3 parts in 4 volumes.
Folded maps. 8^o._

     Part I. The Mongols proper and the Kalmuks. Part II. The
     so-called Tartars of Russia and Central Asia. Part III. The
     Mongols of Persia.


~Ireland~, Alleyne. China and the powers; chapters in the history of
Chinese intercourse with western nations.

_Boston: Privately printed for L. Maynard [by G. H. Ellis co.], 1902.
x, 140 pp. Tables. 8^o._

     CONTENTS: The Chinese problem.--Early western intercourse
     with China, B. C. 1000-A. D. 1600.--The United States and
     China.--England and China.--Russia and China.--Appendices:
     Comparative tables, showing an analysis of Chinese trade
     from 1880 to 1899, inclusive.

     "The chapters contained in this volume were originally
     written to form part of a larger work, which ... was to have
     contained chapters on China's relations with France,
     Germany, and Japan.... Owing to ill-health, Mr. Ireland was
     compelled to abandon this work.... One hundred and fifty
     copies are ... being printed for private sale, after which
     printing the plates will be destroyed."


~Jack~, R. Logan. The back blocks of China; a narrative of experiences
among the Chinese, Sifans, Lolos, Tibetans, Shans and Kachins, between
Shanghai and the Irrawadi.

_London: E. Arnold, 1904. xxii, 269 pp. Plates. Folded maps. 8^o._


~Krausse~, Alexis. China in decay. A handbook to the Far Eastern
question.

_London: Chapman & Hall, 1898. ix, 400 pp. Illustrations. Maps. 8^o._


---- China in decay. The story of a disappearing empire. 3d ed.

_London: Chapman & Hall, 1900. xiv, (2), 418 pp. Plates. Portraits.
Maps. 8^o._

     "The present issue of 'China in Decay' has been thoroughly
     overhauled and revised, and contains a considerable amount
     of added matter. It includes a record of the recent events
     in China down to the reported fall of the legations, and
     will be found to contain all that is requisite to insure a
     complete understanding of the present crisis in China."


---- The story of the Chinese crisis. Specially prepared map and a plan
of Peking.

_London: Cassell, 1900. vi, (2), 237, (1) pp. Map. Plan. 12^o._

     "Summarizes the history of European political relations with
     China. Closes with the capture of Peking by the allies, with
     discussion of the future of China."


~Landor~, Arnold Henry Savage. China and the allies.

_New York: C. Scribner's sons, 1901. 2 vols. Illustrations. Plates
(partly colored). Maps. 8^o._


~Lansdell~, Henry. Chinese Central Asia; a ride to Little Tibet.

_London: S. Low, Marston, & company, 1893. 2 vols. Illustrations
(including portraits). Plates. Folded maps. 8^o._

     "This book is intended to be a companion and a complement to
     my Russian Central Asia."--_Preface._

     Appendices: A. Some of the specimens of fauna collected by
     Dr. Lansdell in Central Asia. B. Bibliography of Chinese
     Central Asia.

     "List of authors, with reference numbers to their works in
     the foregoing bibliography": pp. 477-480.


~Lansdell~, Henry. Russian Central Asia, including Kuldja, Bokhara, Khiva
and Merv.

_London: S. Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1885. 2 vols.
Illustrations (including portraits, plan). Plates. Folded maps. 8^o._

     Appendices: A. The fauna of Russian Turkistan. B. The flora
     of Russian Turkistan. C. Bibliography of Russian Central
     Asia.

     "List of authors, with reference numbers to their works in
     the foregoing bibliography: pp. 681-684.

     "These volumes may be considered as a record of the
     completion of the philanthropic object that originally
     prompted my first visit to Asiatic Russia as detailed in the
     work entitled 'Through Siberia.'"--_Preface._


~Letters~ from a Chinese official; being an eastern view of western
civilization.

_New York: McClure, Phillips & co., 1903. xiv, 75 pp. 12^o._

     "The author, who holds a brief for the Chinese, states his
     case with ability and with an appearance of justice. But by
     ignoring all that there is to be said to their detriment,
     and laying emphasis on the weak side of the Western
     position, he has drawn an unreal and misleading picture. He
     professes to be a Chinaman. This may be set aside. There is
     only one Chinaman who could write such a book, the present
     Chinese Minister at the Court of St. James, but it is not in
     his vein."--_Athenaeum, Nov. 30, 1901, p. 734._


~Little~, Archibald John. Through the Yang-tse gorges; or, Trade and
travel in Western China. 3d and rev. ed.

_London: Sampson Low, Marston, & co., 1898. xxiv, 315 pp. Plate. Map.
8^o._


~Little~, Alicia H. N. B. Intimate China. The Chinese as I have seen
them. By Mrs. Archibald Little.

_London: Hutchinson & co., 1899. xv, (1), 615 pp. Illustrations. L.
8^o._


---- Li Hung-chang, his life and times. By Mrs. Archibald Little.

_London [etc.]: Cassell & company, [1904]. viii, 356 pp. Portraits.
Folded map. 8^o._


~Lynch~, George. The war of the civilizations, being the record of a
"foreign devil's" experiences with the allies in China.

_Longmans, Green, and co., London, 1901. xx, 319 pp. Plates. Portraits.
8^o._


~Lyons~, _France_. _Chambre de commerce._

_See_ ~Brenier~, H.


~Macgowan~, J. A history of China from the earliest days down to the
present.

_London: K. Paul, Trench, Truebner and co., 1897. ix, (1), 622 pp.
Folded map. 8^o._


~Michie~, Alexander. China and Christianity.

_Boston: Knight and Millet, 1900. xiv, (2), 232 pp. 12^o._


---- The Englishman in China in the Victorian era, as illustrated in
the life of Sir Rutherford Alcock, many years consul and minister in
China and Japan.

_London: Blackwood, 1900. 2 vols. Plates. Portraits. Folded map. 8^o._


~Mitford~, Algernon Bertram Freeman. The attache at Peking.

_London: Macmillan & co., 1900. lviii, 386 pp. Plan. 8^o._


~Parker~, Edward Harper. China, her history, diplomacy, and commerce,
from the earliest times to the present day.

_London, J. Murray, 1901. xx, 332 pp. Portrait. Maps. 8^o._


---- China, past and present.

_London: Chapman & Hall, 1903. xi, (1), 424 pp. Folded map. 8^o._


---- John Chinaman and a few others.

_London: John Murray, 1901. xx, 380 pp. Plates. Portraits. 8^o._


~Parsons~, William Barclay. An American engineer in China.

_New York: McClure, Phillips & co., 1900. 321 pp. Illustrations. Map.
12^o._


~Pinon~, Rene, _and_ Jean de ~Marcillac~. La Chine qui s'ouvre. Ouvrage ...
augmente d'appendices et de documents.

_Paris: Perrin & c^{ie}, 1900. xi, (1), 306 pp. Maps. 12^o._

     CONTENTS: La guerre sino-japonaise et la penetration
     etrangere en Chine de 1894 a 1897; L'affaire de Kiao-tcheou
     et le protectorat religieux en Chine; La France et la
     question d'extreme-orient en 1900.

     Appendices: 1. Les chemins de fer en Chine. 2. La question
     de la concession francaise a Chang-hai. 3. L'extension de
     Hong-Kong; Documents; Cartes et plans.

     Reprint of articles from the "Revue des deux mondes" and the
     "Revue des questiones diplomatiques et
     coloniales."--_Preface._


~Poole~, Stanley Lane-. The life of Sir Harry Parkes.

_London and New York: Macmillan & co., 1894. 2 vols. Portrait. Folded
maps. Plan. 8^o._


~Reclus~, Elisee _and_ Onesime ~Reclus~. L'empire du milieu; le climat, le
sol, les races, la richesse de la chine.

_Paris: Hachetts et c^{ie}, 1902. (6), 667 pp. Frontispiece. Maps.
8^o._


~Scidmore~, Eliza Ruhamah. China. The long-lived empire.

_New York: The Century co., 1900. xiii, (3), 459 pp. Plates
(photogravures). 12^o._


~Smith~, Arthur H. China in convulsion.

_New York, Chicago, [etc.]: F. H. Revell co., 1901. 2 vols. Plates,
Portraits. Maps. 8^o._

     Paged continuously.


---- Chinese characteristics. 2d ed., rev.

_New York, Chicago, [etc.]: F. H. Revell co., [1894]. 342 pp. Plates.
8^o._


---- _Same._ 5th ed., rev.

_Edinburgh and London: Oliphant, Anderson and Ferrier, 1900. 342 pp.
Illustrations. 8^o._


---- Village life in China; a study in sociology.

_New York, Chicago, [etc.]: F. H. Revell company, [1899]. 360 pp.
Plates. 8^o._

     "It is a great mistake to approach the Chinese in an insular
     and contemptuous frame of mind, and it is a relief to one
     who can not altogether forego his belief in a future for
     China to take up such a book as that by Arthur H. Smith, and
     to trace in 'Village Life in China' the sympathetic touch of
     the writer of 'Chinese Characteristics,' the most brilliant
     book ever written on that subject."


~Thomson~, H. C. China and the powers. A narrative of the outbreak of
1900.

_Longmans, Green, and co., London, New York, 1902. xii, 285 pp. Plates.
Maps. 8^o._


~Thomson~, John. Through China with a camera.

_Westminster: A. Constable & co., 1898. xiv, 284 pp. Plates
(photogravures). 8^o._


~United States.~ _Bureau of statistics._ Commercial China in 1904. Area,
population, production, railways, telegraphs, and transportation
routes, and foreign commerce and commerce of United States with China.

_Washington: Government printing office, 1904. iv, 2325-2446 pp. Folded
map. 4^o._

     Cover-title.

     Reprinted from the Monthly summary of commerce and finance
     for Jan., 1904.


~Wen Ching.~ The Chinese crisis from within. Edited by G. M. Reith.

_London: Grant Richards, 1901. xvi, 354, (1) pp. 8^o._


~Wildman~, Rounsevelle. China's open door: a sketch of Chinese life and
history; with an introduction by C. Denby.

_Boston: Lothrop publishing company, [1900]. xvi, 318 pp. Portrait.
Plates. 12^o._

     "Writing from the modern American point of view, Mr. Wildman
     could hardly fail to treat quite fully of the commercial and
     economic problems of the Far East. His residence at Hongkong
     as the official representative of the United States has
     afforded him many opportunities for accurate judgment on
     these subjects."


~Williams~, Samuel Wells. A history of China, being the historical
chapters from "The Middle Kingdom;" with a concluding chapter narrating
recent events.

_New York: Charles Scribner's sons, 1897. xiv, 474 pp. Plan. 8^o._


---- The middle kingdom, a survey of the geography, government,
literature, social life, arts and history of the Chinese empire and its
inhabitants. Revised edition, with illustrations and a new map of the
empire.

_New York: Charles Scribner's sons, 1883. 2 vols. Plates. Map. 8^o._


~Wilson~, James Harrison. China. Travels and investigations in the
"Middle Kingdom"--a study of its civilization and possibilities.
Together with an account of the ... Boxer war, the relief of the
legations, and the re-establishment of the peace. 3d edition, revised
throughout, enlarged, and reset.

_New York: D. Appleton and company, 1901. xxxvii, (1), 429 pp. Folded
maps. Portrait. 12^o._




AUTHOR INDEX


                 Page

Adam, G. Mercer, 9

Adams, Brooks, 49, 51

Adams, Cyrus C, 42, 44

Adams, H. E. Goold-, 35

Ali Haydar Midhat. _See_ Midhat, Ali Haydar.

Allen, H. N, 35

American academy of political and social science, 49

Anderson, William, 28

Andre, A, 10

Anspach, Alfred, 7

Archibald, James F. J, 44

Ardouin-Dumazet, 44

Argus, _pseud_, 43

Asakawa, K, 48

Aulagnon, Claudius, 12

Austin, O. P, 32, 52

Aveling, Edward, 11


Babcock, _Mrs._ Winifred (Eaton), 33

Bacon, Alice Mabel, 28

Bacon, N. T, 48

Baker, Colgate, 42, 48

Ball, James Dyer, 60

Bancroft, Hubert Howe, 49

Barakatullah, Muhammad, 41

Bard, E, 60

Barnaby, Charles W, 15

Barre, Paul, 27

Barrett, John, 51, 52, 62

Barrows, John Henry, 60

Baty, T, 48

Bealby, J. T, 22

Beals, Zephaniah Charles, 60

Beer, M, 41

Beguin, C, 46

Benjamin, Park, 42

Berard, Victor, _i. e._, Eugene Victor, 22, 37, 47, 56

Beresford, _Lord_ Charles, 49, 60, 62

Beschinoff, Ivan, 16

Beveridge, Albert Jeremiah, 12, 49

Bigelow, Poultney, 14

Bilinski, A. Rustem Bey de, 15, 59

Birdwood, _Sir_ George, 14, 57

Bishop, Isabella L. Bird, 28, 35, 60

Black, Charles E. D, 57

Blakeney, William, 35

Bolce, Harold, 34, 47, 52

Bonar, H. A, 21

Bookwalter, John Wesley, 12

Boulangier, Edgar, 17

Boulger, Demetrius C, 41, 49, 53, 56, 58, 60, 62

Bower, Hamilton, 22

Brabrant, Arthur Baring, 57

Brandes, Georg Morris Cohen, 7

Brandt, Max August Scipio von, 53, 61

Brenier, Henri, 61

Brent, Charles H, 33

Bretschneider, E, 61

Brice, Arthur Montefiore, 21

Brinkley, Frank, 28, 47, 48, 61

Brisse, Andre, 21, 27

Brooks, Sydney, 15, 45

Brown, Arthur Judson, 39, 44

Browne, George Waldo, 28

Brownell, Clarence Ludlow, 28

Browning, Oscar, 7

Brueggen, Ernst von der, 7

Bujac, Jean Leopold Emile, 7

Bunnett, F. E, 57

Buret, Maurice, 47

Bush, H. Fulford, 27

Busley, C, 53

The Bystander, _pseud_, 43


Caix, Robert de, 27, 41, 42, 43, 45

Calchas, _pseud_, 42, 44, 59

Callahan, James Morton, 49

Camena d'Almeida, P, 33, 37

Campbell, Charles W, 35, 63

Carles, William Richard, 35

Carol, Jean, 12

Cary, Clarence, 17, 20, 21

Cassini, Arthur, _graf_, 48

Cavendish, Alfred Edward J, 35

Cazalas, 56

Chadwick, French E, 41

Challaye, Felicien, 33

Chamberlain, Basil Hall, 29

Chang-Chih-tung, 61

Charlot, Alexandre, 43

Charmes, Francis, 43

Chirol, Valentine, 12, 22, 48, 53, 56

Cilvanet, C, 43

Clarke, _Sir_ George Sydenham, 7

Clavedy, 21

Clews, Henry, 52

Cobbold, Ralph P, 56

Collyer, C. T, 39

Coloniensis, _pseud_, 59

Colquhoun, Archibald Ross, 14, 17, 20, 23, 24, 26, 50, 51, 56, 58, 61, 62

Conant, Charles A, 50, 51

Conder, Josiah, 29

Cooper, John S, 52

Cordier, Henri, 33, 62

Couderc, Camille, 10

Courant, Maurice, 38

Crawford, John Martin, 10, 17, 18

Crosby, Oscar T, 23

Croze, J. L, 16

Cuers de Cogolin, Jean de, 58

Cumming, Constance F. Gordon-, 62

Curtis, William Eleroy, 29

Curzon, George Nathaniel, _1st baron_, 53, 56


Danielson, Nikola[)i] Frantsovich, 7

Davey, Richard, 54

Davidson, James W, 21, 27

Dayton, Edwin Winthrop, 47

Deasy, Henry Hugh Peter, 22

Debibert, A, 21

De Forest, J. H, 33

Delage, Emile, 7

Delavaud, L, 10

Delines, Michel, 10

Denby, C, 67

Deniker, J, 15

Dennys, Nicholas B, 29, 53

Deschamps, Philippe, 8

Desfontaines, C, 33

Desgodins, C. H, 22

Des Voeux, William, 57

De Windt, Harry, 12

Dilke, _Sir_ Charles W, 50, 51, 57, 62

Dillon, E. J, 25, 26, 40, 42, 44, 46, 59

Diosy, Arthur, 29

A Diplomat, _pseud_, 58

Dmitrief-Mamonof, A. J, 18

Dole, Nathan Haskell, 10

Doucet, Robert, 37

Douglas, Robert K, 62

Doumer, Paul, 48

Dowding, H. H, 24

Drage, Geoffrey, 8, 58

Dramas, P, 9

Du Chaylard, G, 24

Dumolard, Henry, 29

Dunnell, Mark B, 51

Durban, William, 20

Durrieux, Alcee, 12

Dye, J. Henry, 37


Eastman, Samuel C, 7

Ebren, H, 45

Eckstein, Gustav, 33

Edkins, Joseph, 62

Ellinwood, Frank F, 36

Eltzbacher, O, 33

Emerson, E, 48

Enselme, Hippolyte Marie Joseph Antoine, 24

Erickson, Hugo, 52

Ewan, John A, 42

Excubitor, _pseud_, 48


Farges, Louis, 33

Fassett, J. Sloat, 38

Fauvel, A. A, 38

Favier, Alphonse, 62

Fawcett, Waldon, 20

Flesher, Helen Gregory-, 37

Fontaine de Resbecq, _Comte_ de, 44

Fontin, Paul, 44

Foord, John, 47, 49, 51

Ford, Alexander Hume, 14, 21, 27, 46

Ford, Worthington Chauncey, 49, 51

Foster, John W, 34, 50

Foulke, William Dudley, 8

Franconie, J, 32

Fraser, John Foster, 24

Fraser, Mary Crawford, 29

Frazar, Everett, 35

Freshfield, Douglas W, 22


Gale, James S, 35

Gambier, J. W, 58

Gardner, Christopher Thomas, 35

Gerrare, Wirt, 12, 26

Ghercevanof, Michel Nicolaevich, 19

Gifford, Daniel L, 36

Giles, Herbert Allen, 62

Gilmore, George W, 36

Girard de Rialle, 10

Glass, J. G. H, 62

Golovin, Konstantin Fedorovich, 8

Goodlet, R, 14

Gorst, Harold E, 63

Gourdet, Paul, 17

Grand-Carteret, J., 10

Grant, R. W., 32

Great Britain. _Foreign office_, 17, 22, 24, 29, 63

Griffis, William Elliot, 29, 36, 38, 50, 51

Grunzel, Josef, 20

Guillemard, F. H. H, 14

Gulick, Sidney Lewis, 30

Gundry, R. S, 63


Hagen, A, 39

Hahn, J. P. Armand, 33

Hamilton, Angus, 36, 46

Hamilton, Charles Frederick, 58

Hamm, Margherita Arlina, 44

Hannay, David, 46

Hanotaux, Gabriel, 54

Hart, _Sir_ Robert, _1st bart_, 63

Hashiguchi, Jihei, 34

Hawes, Charles H, 12

Hawkins, Rush C, 52

Hawks, Francis L, 31

Hearn, Lafcadio, 30

Hedin, Sven Anders, 22

Hellwald, Friedrich von, 12

Helmolt, H. F, 30, 63

Henning, Georg, 15

Herbertson, A. J, 42

Herr, Lucien, 9

Hershey, Amos S, 48

Hertslet, _Sir_ Edward, 30, 63

Hesse-Wartegg, Ernst von, 63

Heyfelder, O, 13

Hill, Robert T, 49

Hillier, Walter C, 39

Holcombe, Chester, 63

Hosie, Alexander, 24

Howorth, Henry H, 64

Hulbert, H. B, 36, 39

Hunt, J. H, 35

Hurd, Archibald S, 42


Ian-Ruban, Wanda, 45

Ignotus, _pseud_, 45

Imbart de la Tour, Jean, 59

Inagaki, Manjiro, 30

'An Indian Officer,' _pseud_, 13, 57

Institut colonial international, 17

Ireland, Alleyne, 64

Ivanovich, _pseud_, 47

Ivins, W. M., _jr_, 40


Jack, R. Logan, 64

James, Henry Evan Murchison, 24

Jane, Frederick T, 8, 30, 47

Japan. _Imperial diet_, 40

Jaures, Jean, 46

Jefferson, Robert L, 17

Jenings, Foster H, 39

John, Griffith, 61

Johnson, Emory R, 49

Johnston, Charles, 15, 40, 62

Jones, G. H, 35

Jougla, Gaston, 46


K., A, 52

Kanazawa, S, 36

Kaneko, Kentaro, 34, 52

Kaneko, Kiichi, 33

Keasbey, Lindley Miller, 49

Khoritz, 27

Kennan, George, 34

King, J. M., _jr_, 51

Kinloch, A, 21

Kinnosuke, Adachi, 32, 34

Kleist, von, 26

Knapp, Arthur May, 42

Koch, W, 30

Kolossowski, M, 8

Koto, Bundjiro, 36

Kovalevski[)i], Maksim Maksimovich, 8

Kovalevski[)i], Vladimir Ivanovich, 8

Krafft, Hugues, 13

Krahmer, Gustav, 13, 17

Krausse, Alexis, 13, 53, 64

Kropotkin, Petr A, 25, 46

Kto-to, 46

Kukol-Yasnopolsky, L, 18

Kupchanko, Grigori[)i] Ivanovich, 8


La Barre de Nanteuil, Amaury de, _baron_, 54

Labbe, Paul, 15, 17, 26

Lacoste, H. de Bouillane de, 24

Laguerie, Villetard de, 38

Landor, Arnold Henry Savage, 22, 36, 64

Lang, Leonora B, 9, 10

Lansdell, Henry, 64, 65

La Peyre, Jean de, 41, 45, 48

Lariviere, C. de, 7

Latimer, Mary Elizabeth Wormeley, 9

Latter, A. M, 38, 46

Lawrence, Thomas J, 40

Lawrence, _Sir_ Walter, 23, 59

Lebedev, V. T, 56

Le Beschu, F, 21, 37, 41, 43

Lecroix, Desire, 10

Lees, Frederic, 41, 45

Leger, Louis, 10

Legras, Jules, 13

Lehr, Ernest, 10

Lejeal, G, 10

Leroy-Beaulieu, Anatole, 9, 10

Leroy-Beaulieu, Paul, 42

Leroy-Beaulieu, Pierre, 19, 33, 54

Levy, Raphael Georges, 32

Lewis, R. E, 62

Litman, S, 21

Little, Alicia H. N. B, 65

Little, Archibald John, 65

Little, _Mrs._ Archibald. _See_ Little, Alicia H. N. B.

Li-Tuyen, 38

Lobb, R. Popham, 58

Lodge, Henry Cabot, 9

Lodian, L, 21

Long, R. E. C, 15, 20

Longford, Joseph H, 16, 38

Lorin, Henri, 43

Loti, Pierre. _See_ Viaud, Julien.

Low, A. Maurice, 15, 41

Lowe, Charles, 54

Lowell, Percival, 30, 36

Loyd, _Lady_ Mary, 11

Luetschg, A, 18

Lynch, George, 18, 65

Lynch, H. F. B, 57

Lyons, _France_. _See_ Brenier, H.


McCormick, Frederick, 45

Macgowan, J, 65

Machat, J, 9

Machray, Robert, 43

Maclean, J. M, 21

MacQueen, Peter, 46

Maguire, T. Miller, 46

Mahan, Alfred T, 42, 46, 47, 54

Marcillac, Jean de, 66

Marre, Francis, 33

Marshall, John, 18

Martens, F. de, 45

Mason, W. B, 29

Matignon, 38

Maurice, _Sir_ F, 46

Maxey, Edwin, 23, 43, 44

Meakin, Annette M. B, 13

Merilhan, Maxime de, 38

Mery, Michel, 41

Michelsen, Henry, 20

Michie, Alexander, 65

Midhat, Ali Haydar, 59

Mikhailoff, M, 20, 62

Miliukov, Pavel Nikolaevich, 9

Miller, Henry B, 27

Miller, Joaquin, 34

Miln, Louise Jordan, 36

Miner, L, 26

Mitford, Algernon Bertram Freeman, 30, 65

Monnier, Marcel, 37

Montalbo, _Baron_ de, 10

Montorgueil, Georges, 7

Moore, John Bassett, 49, 51

Morfill, William Richard,

Morris, J, 30, 32

Morse, Edward S, 30

Mumford, John Kimberly, 15

Murray, David, 30

Mury, Francis, 27, 45


Nathan, P, 43

Nettancourt-Vaubecourt, Jean de, 38

Newton, J. C. C, 32

Niet, _pseud_, 9

Nitobe, Inazo Ota, 50

Norman, Henry, 13, 20, 31, 46, 48, 54

Novicow, J, 13, 58

Oedipus, _pseud_, 46

Ogg, Frederic Austin, 15, 59

Okakura, Kakasu, 28, 31

Okuma, _Count_, 32

Onoto Watanna. _See_ Babcock, _Mrs._ Winnifred (Eaton).

Oppert, Ernest, 36

Osborn, Chase S, 42

Oukhtomsky, _Prince_ Esper. _See_ Ukhtomski[)i], Esper Esperovich, _kniaz'_.

Ozaki, Y, 32


Palmer, Francis H. E, 9

Palmer, Frederick, 33, 42, 46

Pange, Jean de, 38

Papinot, E, 31

Parker, Edward Harper, 24, 25, 66

Parsons, William Barclay, 66

Paschkof, Lydie, 10

Passy, Frederic, 12

Peirce, Herbert H. D, 19

Pene-Siefert, 15

Perry, Matthew Calbraith, 31

Petit, Maxime, 10

Peyre, Jean de la. _See_ La Peyre, Jean de.

Phillimore, G. G, 38

Pinon, Rene, 43, 66

Poole, Stanley Lane-, 66

Popowski, Jozef, 57

Potter, Henry Codman, 50

Pougin, Arthur, 10

Pouvourville, Albert de, 54

Pownall, C. A. W, 59


Quincy, Josiah, 14


Rabot, Ch, 10

Raffalovich, Arthur, 10, 24

Ragozin, Zenaide A, 9

Rambaud, Alfred Nicolas, 9, 10, 13, 14

Ransome, Stafford, 31

Rathgen, Karl, 33

Ravenstein, E. G, 13

Reclus, Elisee, 54, 66

Reclus, Onesime, 66

Rees, J. D, 57

Regelsperger, Gustave, 10

Reich, Emil, 15

Reid, Arnot, 13

Reid, Gilbert, 54, 62

Reid, W. C. Jameson, 15, 23, 40, 52

Rein, Johann Justus, 31

Reinsch, Paul Samuel, 50, 58

Reith, G. M, 67

Rendu, Ambroise, 43

Rijnhart, Susie Carson, 23

Rockhill, William Woodville, 23

Rosny, J. H, 38

Ross, Edward Denison, 13

Ross, John, 25

Ruge, Sophus, 18

Russia, 10, 18

Rustem Bey de Bilinski, A. _See_ Bilinski, A. Rustem Bey de.


Saint-Yves, G, 14, 58

Salwey, Charlotte M, 37

Sands, W. F, 39

Sandwith, M, 7

Sarachchandra D[=a]sa, 23

Scherer, James Augustin Brown, 31

Schierbrand, Wolf von, 10

Schoenfeld, Hermann, 19

Schultz, Karl, 42

Scidmore, Eliza Ruhamah, 66

Scrutator, _pseud_, 59

Semenov, Petr Petrovich, 13

Shaw, Albert, 40

Shimada, S, 33

Shoemaker, Michael Myers, 18

Siebold, Alexander, _Freiherr von_, 54

Simmerbach, Bruno, 16

Simpson, James Young, 18

Singleton, Esther, 31

Skrine, Francis Henry, 13, 59

Sladen, Douglas, 32

Smith, Arthur H, 66

Smith, D. Warres, 55

Smyth, G. B, 62

Sniper, _pseud_, 26

Solano, E. John, 23, 59

Soskice, D, 9

Speer, Robert E, 45, 46, 55

Stadling, Jonas Jonsson, 14

Stahl, A. F, 18

Stanley, Henry M, 58

Stead, Alfred, 21, 26, 32, 37, 41, 44, 48

Stead, W. T, 57

Stevens, Durham White, 44, 46

Stewart, William R, 41

Strannik, Ivan, 10

Stuart, Donald, 57


T., H, 45

Tacchella, P, 18

Takahira, Kogoro, 28, 32, 45, 47

Takenouchi, Keish[=u], 28

Tatsuo, Hirata, 47

Terry, T. Philip, 37

Thompson, E. R, 26

Thompson, Herbert M, 11

Thomson, H. C, 66

Thomson, John, 67

Tikhomirov, Lev Aleksandrovich, 11

Tison, Alexander, 34

Tomes, Robert, 31

Tourneux, Maurice, 10

Townsend, Meredith, 55

Treffel, G, 16

Trollope, M. N, 35

Turley, Robert T, 25, 27


Ukhtomski[)i], Esper Esperovich, _kniaz'_, 14, 59

Ular, Alexandre, 23, 26, 33

Underwood, _Mrs._ Lillias Horton, 36

United States. _Bureau of statistics_, 11, 18, 32, 37, 67


Vachon, Maurice, 10

Vallee, Leon, 20

Vambery, Armin, 57

Vandal, Albert, 10

Vanderlip, Frank A, 47

Van Norman, Louis E, 16

Viaud, Julien, 33

Vickers, E. H, 33, 43

Villetard de Laguerie, R, 37, 38

Vladimir, _pseud_, 19

Voguee, E. M. de, 10


Waldo, Frank, 19, 47

Waldstein, Charles, 50

Waliszewski, Kazimierz, 11

Walker, John Brisben, 15

Wallace, D. Mackenzie, 11

Walton, Joseph, 55

Warner, L. O, 35

Watson, Gilbert, 32

Watson, W. Petrie, 32, 33

Weale, B. L. P, 25

Webster, Harrie, 37

Wellby, M. S, 23

Wen Ching, 67

Whigham, H. J, 25, 37, 57

Wiedenfeld, Kurt, 19, 20

Wildman, Rounsevelle, 67

Willets, Gilson, 47

Williams, Frederick Wells, 49

Williams, S. M, 15

Williams, Samuel Wells, 67

Wilson, James Harrison, 51, 62, 67

Wilson, W. P, 49

Wirgman, Theodore, 12

Witte, Sergei Iulitch, 27

Woodbridge, Samuel I, 61

Wright, George Frederick, 14, 16, 26

Wu Ting-fang, 49, 51, 62


X, Lieutenant, _pseud_, 45, 47


Yorck von Wartenburg, Maximilian, _Graf_, 14

Younghusband, Francis Edward, 25


Zabel, Rudolf, 25

Zdsiarsky, A. F, 18

Zenzinoff, B. de, 14, 15, 27, 37, 43

Zepelin, von, 39




Transcriber's Notes

Made minor punctuation corrections and the following changes:

Page 41: Changed exterme to extreme.
  Orig: 1904. Russes et Japonais en exterme orient. F. Le Beschu.

Page 63: Changed show-up to showing up.
  Orig: book, and has certainly succeeded in show-(end of line)
up very clearly some of the chief points in the political problems

Page 66: Changed Illlustrations to Illustrations.
  Orig: Edinburgh and London: Oliphant, ... Illlustrations.

Bold text is shown within ~tildes.~
Italicized text is shown within _underscores._

For non-Latin-1 characters:

OE and oe ligatures have been separated.
The letters a, o, and u with macrons are shown as [=a], [=o], and
[=u], respectively. The letter i with breve is shown as [)i].








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Select List of Books ... Relating to
the Far East, by Appleton Prentiss Clark Griffin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECT BOOKS--FAR EAST ***

***** This file should be named 38552.txt or 38552.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/5/5/38552/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
