The Project Gutenberg EBook of Happy Hearts, by June Isle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Happy Hearts

Author: June Isle

Release Date: January 13, 2012 [EBook #38564]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAPPY HEARTS ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                      Maple Grove Stories

                             For

                        Little Readers.


                         HAPPY HEARTS

                         BY JUNE ISLE.


    CINCINNATI:
    PUBLISHED BY POE & HITCHCOCK.

    R. P. THOMPSON, PRINTER.

    Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1864.

    BY POE & HITCHCOCK,

    In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States
    for the Southern District of Ohio.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER.                                              PAGE.

       I. WHOM HAVE WE ALWAYS                            9

      II. FRITZ DEAD, YET LIVES                         29

     III. HOW? ANSWERED                                 41

      IV. WHAT THE STARS SAW                            47




HAPPY HEARTS.




CHAPTER I.

WHOM HAVE WE ALWAYS.


Mr. and Mrs. Payson had three little children, who were very dear to
them, and whom they amused and instructed in many pleasant ways.

One Spring, just as the leaves were bursting open and the birds were
filling the air with gay songs, Mr. Payson told the children he had
bought a home for them in the country.

This pleased the little ones, and they talked from morning till night
about what they would do in their new home.

In the pretty country they watched the birds building their nests, and
saw them feeding their young and teaching them to fly; and then they saw
them in great cawing, twittering, fluttering swarms moving off to warmer
lands when the yellow Autumn leaves began to fall.

But when the Winter winds sung through the old pine trees, the children
began to talk about Christmas.

"I wonder if Santa Claus will come away out here, with his great pack of
toys," said Rebecca one day. "I am afraid he will forget us, he has so
many children to remember."

"He may perhaps forget us," said Joshua; "for cousin Nelly says that he,
one time, forgot to put any thing in her stocking, although she hung it
where he could find it."

"But," said Rebecca, "Nelly said it was a very stormy night, and they
lived on a hill, and the wind blew so hard they were afraid it would
blow the house down. And I think Santa Claus was afraid the wind would
upset his pack of toys if he went up on aunt Judd's roof."

"I think," said Joshua, "we had better send Santa Claus a letter,
telling him that we have moved from town out into this pretty pine
grove, then he will know where to find us."

"That will be a good way," said Rebecca; "for I remember when Mrs.
White, who lives in our house in town, was here last week, she told
mamma that many persons had called there since we left, and asked for
Mr. Payson. Now, if the people do not know that we have moved away,
Santa Claus may not; so he may go there and slide down the chimney, and,
without asking any thing about it, put all the nice things, which he has
in his pack for us, in Tommy and Jenny White's stockings."

"I will write to Santa Claus," said Joshua, "as soon as I can find
time."

Joshua said this in rather of a large way, for he wished to talk like a
man of business.

"I will run and get your slate now," said Rebecca; and she soon came
with the slate and pencil.

They all sat down and Joshua took the pencil to write; but he found he
could not do much, as his mamma was not there to spell the words for
him.

"Let us ask papa to send word to Santa Claus," said Rebecca.

"And let us ask Mrs. White," said Newton, "to watch, and, when Santa
Claus comes to her house, tell him where we live."

"But Mrs. White might watch all night, and then not see him," said
Rebecca; "for I think Santa Claus never makes any noise till he is just
going out of sight; then his eight tiny reindeers jingle their bells as
they scamper away with the sleigh full of toys."

Mrs. Payson came into the nursery, and the children told her what they
had been saying.

"Santa Claus shall be told where to find you," said Mrs. Payson, "and
you will have a happy Christmas if you are happy in your own hearts. You
shall have a Christmas tree, and we will invite some friends to come and
enjoy its fruits with us. But I wish you to remember, my darlings, if
you have naughty thoughts you can not have a happy Christmas."

"But if some naughty thoughts come, what can we do?" asked Rebecca.

"Try to think about something good and pleasant," said Mrs. Payson, "and
ask God to help you. Yesterday, when I heard Joshua telling Newton, in
an angry way, that he hoped Santa Claus would not bring him any thing, I
thought my dear boy's thinker was wrong."

"I know, mamma," said Joshua, "that I wish to be good. But, if God lets
me be naughty, what good does it do to ask him to help me?"

"God will help you if you ask him in the right way, and if you watch
yourselves," said Mrs. Payson. "If we wished to be happy ourselves we
must do something to make others so; and even little children can do
much good if they try."

"When we are trying to make others happy," said Joshua, "we shall have
good thoughts."

"A little verse which you repeat," said Mrs. Payson, "says truly that

    'Satan finds some mischief still
        For idle hands to do.'

Now I wish to hear what you, my children, have to do before Christmas."

"We must get our gifts ready for the tree," said Rebecca.

"And we must learn our lessons, every day," said Joshua.

"And I must learn all my letters, so papa will give me a rocking-horse,"
said little Newton.

"That is all right," said Mrs. Payson; "but have you not something more
to do?"

"O, yes!" said Joshua, "we are to ride to town and invite our visitors
to come and have a nice time with us in the holidays."

"But, are there not others whom you can help to be happy and good?"
asked Mrs. Payson; "those whom we always have with us?"

"I don't know," said Joshua, "as there are any persons that are always
with us. Bridget has been here only a few months, and she says she must
go away after New-Year; so you do not mean her. And John will leave next
Spring; so you can not mean him."

"When you were learning your Sunday school lesson a few weeks since,"
said Mrs. Payson, "I heard you repeating these words of Christ, 'Ye
have the poor with you always; and whensoever ye will ye may do them
good.'"

"O, yes, mamma, I did not think of that," said Joshua. "But, there are
so many poor people, how can we do them good?"

"We can do our little," said Mrs. Payson, "and if we only make one sad
heart glad we have done a good deed, and we shall be better and happier
ourselves while we are helping others."

"When Mrs. Blake comes here to see you, mamma," said Rebecca, "she talks
about poor people, and how much she does for them. But Mrs. Blake does
not seem to be happy; and she says there is no use in helping the poor,
for if one begins there is no end."

"Mrs. Blake," said Mrs. Payson, "has not a pleasant way of talking; but
I think she enjoys doing good to others in her own cross way. Yet, if we
would be happy ourselves in making others happy, we must love to do it.
If you should give little Harry Grant a pair of mittens because I told
you to do so, while you were fretting because you wished to keep them
yourself, you would be neither better nor happier for doing it; and you
would not speak gently and kindly to the poor little fellow, and so make
his face and your own bright by pleasant words. Mrs. Blake spends much
time and money in helping poor people; but she forgets that she should

    'Speak gently, kindly to the poor.'"

"I have some toys, mamma," said Rebecca, "that I can give to Mrs.
Grant's lame Harry; I am sure they will make his little pale face
smile."

"And I should like to give Willie a pair of shoes," said Joshua; "for
his are very ragged."

"Shall I give him my sled, mamma?" asked Newton.

Now Newton thought more of his sled than he did of any other plaything.
It was painted green and yellow, and had a bright colored strap which he
called the reins. The runners were very smooth, and he expected to have
a gay time with it all Winter. So, when Newton asked about giving his
sled, he knew he was giving what he liked best.

"No, my darling," said Mrs. Payson; "keep your sled. But, we will see
what we all can do for Mrs. Grant and her children, by the time
Christmas comes. She is a good woman, and we can do much to make her
happy while her husband is gone to the war.

"Then there is Mrs. Fisher, who lives near town; can we do something for
her?" asked Mrs. Payson.

"Mr. Fisher gets drunk," said Joshua; "and Mrs. Blake says it does no
good to try to help them, for he sells things that are given to his wife
to buy whisky."

"But shall we leave poor Mrs. Fisher to suffer?" said Mrs. Payson.
"Shall we try to do nothing for her and her dear children? They are
often cold for want of clothes and a fire. They are often hungry,
because Mr. Fisher gets drunk, and is unkind to them.

"With so many good things around us, shall we not try to help the little
hungry children who have an unkind father?"

"O, yes, mamma!" said all the children at once.

"May I give something to Martha Kelly," asked Rebecca, "who says she
never has any presents?"

"Poor little Martha is not much older than you are, my daughter," said
Mrs. Payson; "yet she is obliged to work quite hard; for her mother is
sick and her father is poor. But she has a sweet, smiling face, and she
lives in a happier home than many children of rich parents."

"I know, mamma," said Joshua, "Martha always looks pleasant, even in a
shabby dress."

"Mr. Kelly is a very kind and good man," said Mrs. Payson; "and I hope,
before another Christmas, he will be able to give his family a better
home.

"They look happy because they have good thoughts and try to do their
duty. None can be happy, even in beautiful homes, unless their thoughts
are right.

"I hope you will select a pleasant book for little Martha, my daughter,
and I will send some articles to her mamma."

"It is now your bedtime, my darlings. To-morrow we will begin to prepare
our Christmas gifts for the poor."

The children kneeled down and thanked God for being so good to them, and
asked him to help them to be kind and obedient, and to speak the truth.

After they had said their prayers, Newton ran to his mamma and kneeled
down again by her side, and said, "Will God please to help the hungry
little children to smile, for Christ's sake?"




CHAPTER II.

FRITZ DEAD, YET LIVES.


The next day, after the children had finished their lessons, Mrs. Payson
said, "I will tell you a little story, showing how a child can do much
good.

"Many years ago, I knew a little boy who could not walk. His nurse let
him fall, when he was a baby, and hurt his back, so that he grew out of
shape, and could not stand on his feet.

"The little boy's name was Fritz Ritter. His parents lived in a pleasant
home, and did all they could to make their darling lame boy happy.

"They taught him to read, and write, and to draw pictures.

"But Fritz said, 'That is not enough. I have dear friends, who do every
thing for me. Now, I must do something too.'

"His father kept a man to draw him about in a little wagon; so Fritz
knew all the streets in town, and visited the machine-shops and mills
to see how things are made. Almost every one looked kindly on his sweet,
pale face, and wherever he went the people would talk with him and show
him what he wished to see.

"As he rode about the city he saw many poor houses, and hungry and
ragged children.

"One night, when his mamma laid him in his little bed, she saw that he
was sad and quiet.

"'What is the matter with my little boy to-night?' she asked.

"'I have seen so many poor little children on Stone Alley to-day,' said
Fritz, 'who were ragged and dirty, I wished they had good homes and
good mammas.'

"'I am sorry for all poor little children who are ragged and hungry,'
said Mrs. Ritter. 'But, as we can not give them pleasant homes we must
do what we can for them; for you know Christ says, "The poor ye have
always; and whensoever ye will, ye may do them good."'"

"Fritz turned his face away and shut his eyes as though he was tired.
But he was not tired; he was only thinking.

"He had stopped many times at a little shop, in the edge of town, where
baskets were made; a man, and a woman, and several children worked
there, and they made many kinds of baskets; some of them very fine and
pretty.

"Fritz had sat in the shop a long time that day, and he asked the man if
he might come every day, and learn to make baskets.

"Now, in his little bed, with his eyes shut, he was thinking how he
would make them and sell them for money to help poor children.

"The next morning Fritz told his mamma what he had been thinking about.

"She was pleased with his plan; for she thought it would amuse her
darling little lame boy.

"Fritz went to the basket-maker's shop all Summer, and by the time cold
weather came he could make very beautiful baskets. Some merchants in
town sold them for him, and by Christmas time he had laid up several
dollars, which he said he should give to poor widow Wilcox, who looked
sick and pale, and had two children.

"Mrs. Ritter gave Fritz a little room at home for his shop; and his papa
put into it all the materials necessary for making baskets; and there
Fritz spent several hours every day at his work.

"He was happy and said, 'Now I am of some use, as I can help to make
others good and happy.'

"Widow Wilcox and her children had food, and a fire, and clothes in the
cold Winter weather; and it was the little pale-faced lame boy who gave
them to her.

"Jim and Dora Wilcox learned their books because Fritz wished them to do
so. They would not play any more with bad children on the streets,
because Fritz told them they must not. And when Jim promised that he
would try to remember and not use any more naughty words, Fritz told him
he would give him all the books he would read to Dora and his mother.

"Finally, Jim went every day to Fritz's little shop, and learned to make
baskets. He was so handy that, by the time another Christmas came, he
was able to carry to his mother money that he had himself earned.

"Fritz was about ten years old when he began to make baskets. The Lord
allowed him to live only two years longer; but, in that time, many poor
children loved him, and thanked him for his kindness. When he died many
tears were shed in the alleys and back streets, where the dear
pale-faced boy had tried to make others good and happy.

"Little children went in a great company, when he was buried, and threw
flowers into his grave.

"We believe that when Fritz's gentle spirit left his poor, crooked body,
it went to the happy land, to grow in beauty forever. But he is not
forgotten on earth; and now, many years after, there are those who
bless the dear little lame boy."

"Did you know him, mamma?" asked Rebecca, with tears in her eyes.

"Yes," said Mrs. Payson. "It was when I was a young girl that I attended
the funeral of little Fritz.

"Mr. Wilcox, who keeps the great store of baskets in town, where you
have sometimes stopped with me to see how beautiful they are, is the
little Jim whom Fritz taught to be good and useful.

"He has always taken tender care of his mother, who is now so old she
remembers but little; but if you ask her about Fritz she will talk a
long time about him, whom she calls 'God's dear child.'"

"Your true story, mamma, is better than made-up ones," said Joshua, as
he walked away to the window.

"When I look at my little work-basket, mamma," said Rebecca, "that you
bought of Mr. Wilcox, I shall think of Fritz, and the basket will help
me to be good."

"So you see, my darling," said Mrs. Payson, "when our bodies are turning
to dust in the ground, the deeds which we did may be helping others to
be good or bad."




CHAPTER III.

HOW? ANSWERED.


When the family were gathered in the parlor, after dinner, Mrs. Payson
said, "We will now see how we can help poor Mrs. Fisher; for there are
none who more need kind words and deeds than helpless ones whom a bad
husband and father leaves to suffer, and sometimes to perish, with
hunger and cold."

"But how can we give Mrs. Fisher any thing, if her husband sells it?"
asked Joshua.

"There is an honest woman living next to Mrs. Fisher's," said Mrs.
Payson, "who has washed for me sometimes. I will hire a place in her
little yard for coal, and send some there. I will give Mrs. Fisher
tickets for getting a half bushel at a time, when she needs it, so she
can have a fire."

"And I will give her tickets for getting bread at the bakery, and meat
and potatoes in market," said Mr. Payson. "She must get a little at a
time, and not keep any in the house for her husband to carry off."

"That will be good," said Rebecca; "the little hungry children will
smile."

"I will give half of my money to buy some shoes for Dick Fisher," said
Joshua.

"And I will give half of mine to buy a flannel petticoat for Mrs.
Fisher," said Rebecca.

"Here is my money, mamma," said Newton, who had run to bring his little
box.

"May we send the children some of our toys?" asked Rebecca.

"You may send what you please," said Mrs. Payson. "We will put them in
a basket with enough food for a good dinner, and you may carry all to
her, Christmas morning, with the tickets."

"O, mamma," said Joshua, "it will be pleasant to see how surprised and
happy they will look."

"Now, what shall we do for Mrs. Grant?" asked Mrs. Payson.

"Several neighbors have promised to join me in giving her coal, flour,
and meat, as long as she needs such help," said Mr. Payson.

"I will prepare some clothes for herself and her children," said Mrs.
Payson.

"And we will give them some toys and books," said Joshua.

"Will you please, papa," said Newton, "send word to Santa Claus to carry
his pack to the top of Mrs. Grant's chimney? And I will tell little lame
Harry to hang up his stocking."

"Yes," said Mr. Payson smiling, "I will send word to Santa Claus to have
his eight tiny reindeer jingle their bells right merrily over Mrs.
Grant's chimney."

That night Mr. Payson's three children went to bed feeling very happy;
for they were trying to do something to make others good and happy.




CHAPTER IV.

WHAT THE STARS SAW.


The stars were yet winking through the pine trees on Christmas morning,
when the little Paysons went shouting their "merry Christmas" through
the house.

Santa Claus had filled their stockings with just what they most wanted.
Strange that he should know so well!

There could be no more morning naps now, and while the stars were
shutting their eyes Bridget prepared the early breakfast, so the
children might go with their happy hearts and their gifts to gladden
those who needed kind words and good deeds.

After the family had joined in their morning worship, Mr. Payson said,
"Now, my children, we will go and see some sad faces smile, while mamma
prepares the Christmas-tree; for she says we must not have a peep at it
till our friends come this evening."

By the time the sun was looking over the tree tops, Mr. Payson and the
children were riding toward Mrs. Grant's with a basket of good things
and a great many kind words.

They found the little Grants in quite an uproar. They had hung up their
stockings for the first time in their lives, and now they were spreading
out Santa Claus's wonderful gifts with great glee.

The basket was carried in, and Mr. Payson told Mrs. Grant what more
would be done for her every-day comfort.

Tears came in her eyes when she thanked him and the children.

"It almost made me feel like crying," said Rebecca, when they had left
the house, "to see poor lame Harry's face look so happy."

At Mrs. Fisher's they found a gloomy and unhappy scene.

Mr. Fisher sat with his hair falling over his half-shut eyes, while the
hungry and cold children were huddled around the half-warmed stove on
which their mother was trying to cook something for breakfast.

"My children have come to bring some smiles to yourself and your little
ones this Christmas morning," said Mr. Payson to Mrs. Fisher, as they
stepped into the miserable home.

"Mamma says, will you please have a good dinner?" said Rebecca, as she
and Joshua carried the basket to Mrs. Fisher, whose eyes filled with
tears at this unexpected kindness.

Mr. Payson gave her the tickets for coal and food, and told her that his
wife would call sometimes and see how she enjoyed them.

Mr. Fisher hung his head in shame as the bright faces of the little
Paysons left. But a ray of light had shone into that gloomy home, and
Mrs. Fisher's sad face smiled when she saw her children spreading out
their Christmas gifts. Each one had been kindly remembered and was
bright with happiness.

Joshua, and Rebecca, and Newton rode toward home, carrying hearts filled
anew with love, and gentleness, and kindness.

Mr. Payson next knocked at Mr. Kelly's door. Mrs. Kelly was sitting,
wrapped up, in a rocking chair, sick, but having a pleasant smile.
Little Martha was doing the morning work, and looked with surprise at
the early visitors and their good gifts.

The children soon had the food spread out for Mrs. Kelly to see what a
nice dinner she would have; and Martha fairly danced around the room,
holding up a good Sunday frock for herself and a pretty story book.

"This _is_ a happy Christmas," said Rebecca as they rode home.

"We learn, my children," said Mr. Payson, "that those who try to do
their duty may be rich in happy hearts and smiling homes though they
are very poor.

"But bad hearts and bad ways make the sunshine seem gloomy in the finest
parlors."

When the sun went down that night, friends, both old and young, gathered
in Mr. Payson's parlors, to pluck gifts from the well-loaded
Christmas-tree.

Fruits from all parts of the world were hanging in its branches, and
toys and books peeped out from the green leaves.

When little eyelids were closed in sleep that night, the stars winked
and smiled over little hearts that were brimful of love; because, by
giving, they had grown rich.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Happy Hearts, by June Isle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAPPY HEARTS ***

***** This file should be named 38564.txt or 38564.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/5/6/38564/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
