Project Gutenberg's Quantity Cookery, by Lenore Richards and Nola Treat

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Quantity Cookery
       Menu Planning and Cooking for Large Numbers

Author: Lenore Richards
        Nola Treat

Release Date: January 18, 2012 [EBook #38615]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUANTITY COOKERY ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, David Clarke and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images produced by Core Historical
Literature in Agriculture (CHLA), Cornell University)





Transcriber's Note: I have replaced en-dashes representing ranges of
numbers within tables by the word "to." So something like "6-1/2--7-1/4
cups." in the original is often represented by "6-1/2 to 7-1/4 cups." in
this version.




QUANTITY COOKERY

MENU PLANNING AND COOKING FOR LARGE NUMBERS

BY

LENORE RICHARDS, B.A. and NOLA TREAT, B.S.

ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF INSTITUTION MANAGEMENT
COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE
UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA


BOSTON

LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY

1922

Copyright, 1922,

By Little, Brown, and Company.

All rights reserved

Published April, 1922

Printed in the United States of America




PREFACE


This book has been written in response to the many requests for
practical help in the planning of menus and for the recipes in use in
the cafeteria under the management of the authors.

This book is designed primarily to assist the managers of food
departments in institutions. However, it is hoped that the chapters on
menu planning, the recipes, and the list of weights and their
approximate measures may prove useful as a text for those teachers of
institution management who have the problem of teaching large quantity
cookery and menu planning.

                                        N. T.
                                        L. R.

                                        UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA
                                        January 1, 1922




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                            PAGE

    I. PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THE PLANNING OF MENUS FOR LARGE NUMBERS  1

   II. STANDARDS FOR JUDGING MEALS                                    8

  III. TYPES OF MENUS                                                11

   IV. SUGGESTIVE CHARTS AND LISTS TO BE USED IN MENU PLANNING       42

    V. THE IMPORTANCE AND USE OF FORMS                               66

   VI. RECIPES                                                       73

  VII. TABLE OF WEIGHTS AND THEIR APPROXIMATE MEASURES              191

  INDEX                                                             195





QUANTITY COOKERY




CHAPTER I

PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THE PLANNING OF MENUS FOR LARGE NUMBERS


Well-balanced and appropriate menus are absolutely necessary to the
success of any establishment serving food. Given the best of raw
materials and the most competent cooks, the institutional manager will
fail to please his patrons if his menus show lack of careful planning.
The truth of this assertion is verified by the analysis of many
failures.

On the other hand successful menu planning is not especially difficult.
Like any other art it requires careful study and observance of a few
simple rules.

Of course, it is impossible to formulate one set of rules that will
apply to all situations. Each manager must make his own rules based on
the conditions he has to meet. There are, however, certain basic
principles to be recognized and followed. If the ensuing chapters
succeed in explaining these principles and in emphasizing their
importance, the authors' purpose will have been served.

In planning menus for an institution the manager must:

Keep in mind the nature of the institution; its purpose; the character
of its patronage.

Follow certain dietetic principles.

Maintain constant variety in the food.

Keep menus appropriate to the temperature; the weather; the season;
occasional holidays.

Recognize the limitations imposed by equipment; amount and kind of help;
range of cost permitted; left-over foods to be used; form of service.

The first point to consider in planning a menu is the type of
institution to be served. For reasons that are obvious, the purpose of
the high school cafeteria is very different from that of the
metropolitan hotel, while neither of these has the same object as the
municipal tuberculosis sanitarium.

The age, sex, nationality, economic condition and occupation of the
patrons must be kept in mind. The adult demands a freedom of choice
which may be denied children. For this reason the content of the grade
school lunch may be fixed in an arbitrary way, while this will not do
when one is dealing with adults of any class. For instance, grade school
children are satisfied with the morning bowl of bread and milk and the
noon lunch of bread and soup. Adults, even in a charitable home, would
undoubtedly complain of the simplicity of such meals. The high school
lunchroom may eliminate coffee from its menu and have frequent "pieless"
days. Any such attempts to regulate the diet of adults, except for
patriotic reasons such as were the incentive to denial during the war,
are highly inadvisable.

As far as the food elements are concerned, the same kinds of food may be
served to boys and girls or to men and women. But, practically, they
will not eat the same foods with equal satisfaction, and this should
influence the planning of menus in different institutions.

School lunch managers and social service workers have found that in
order to accomplish their aims they have to recognize racial food
tastes.

The economic condition of the group to be served may limit variety in
the menu, on the one hand, or may permit of maximum variety on the
other. The eight-page menu of the fashionable tea room as definitely
reflects the ability of the patrons to pay as does the simple meal of
three or four dishes served the immigrants at Ellis Island.

The occupation of the patrons, whether active or sedentary, determines
to a large extent the kind of food served to them, from the dietetic
standpoint and from the commercial standpoint as well. The lumberjacks
of the north woods require a diet very different in quality and quantity
from that of the telephone operators in a city exchange.

In institutions serving set menus, with little or no choice, special
attention should be given to dietetic principles. Examples of such
institutions are college dining halls or dormitories, hospitals,
benevolent "homes," boarding houses, fraternities and clubs.

For those who have had little or no training in dietetics and who yet
have the responsibility of planning menus, it may be said that if ample
variety is provided, with emphasis on fruits and vegetables, the
dietetic requirements will probably be met.

The sequence of foods in the menu is important. Where several courses
are to be served, and it is the aim of those planning the menu to keep
the appetite stimulated, acids, meat extractives and warm foods should
be served first. Cloying foods such as sweets, very cold foods and foods
which are satisfying tend to depress the appetite and hence have no
place in the first course of a meal, except for luncheon where the menu
may be very simple. In institutions which have fixed menus, it is
especially desirable that the meal, no matter how simple, be so planned
that it may be served in courses. Children especially are likely to
hurry through their meals, and the serving of food in courses prevents
too rapid eating. It is true, of course, that extra service requires
more labor, and so may not prove possible, even though desirable.

The responsibility for maintaining a constant variety in food calls for
the continued exercise of initiative, the determination to avoid
monotonous repetition, a mind open to new foods and new methods of
preparation and systematic marketing trips in order to keep in touch
with seasonal changes. Perhaps the most frequent criticism of
institutions is on the lack of variety in meals. Hotels, clubs and tea
rooms can draw trade by serving out-of-season foods when they first
appear in the market. Institutions whose purchases are limited by a
budget should make the most of seasonal foods when the market is at its
height and the food is cheapest. Such institutions should avoid serving
foods that are not actually in season. Serving berries or melons before
the height of the season dulls the appetite of the patron for these
foods so that by the time they have become economical to serve he has
tired of them.

Variety should be introduced not only in the kinds of food but in the
preparation, garnish and service. Even in charitable homes and other
institutions where the aim is to serve at a minimum cost, the menus can
be made attractive through variety in preparation. Corn meal and cottage
cheese, two of the least expensive foods we have, can be utilized in a
wide variety of ways. There should be no hesitation about serving new
dishes, for maximum variety is essential to a happy patronage whether in
the tea room or the benevolent institution. The point to be kept in
mind, where the guest has the privilege of selection, is that all the
variety should not come within the day or meal but within the week or
month. Surprise always helps to induce appetite and this fact is as
applicable to the menu in the children's home as to that of the tea
room.

It is good business practice as well as good dietetic practice to plan
meals according to the weather and the time of year. Hot, heavy foods
sell best in cold weather. Cool, crisp, fresh foods sell best on the
hottest days. The public is very susceptible to weather conditions.
Holidays give a popularity to certain foods which they enjoy at no other
time of the year. It is good business to make the most of these foods by
serving them on appropriate days.

There are definite relations between the menu and the equipment
available for its execution. For instance, a menu which calls for oven
cooking to the exclusion of the use of the top of the stove or
supplementary steamers will be impossible to carry out. The menu should
be planned in order that the cooking may be divided between all the
available equipment, such as ovens, steamers and top space on stoves. In
the kitchen, as in the industrial plant, it is good management to give
space only to efficient equipment and to use that equipment to its
maximum capacity.

Again, incomplete equipment may have to be considered in planning the
menu. If there is no power machinery the amount of hand work or heavy
physical preparation called for may have to be cut down in accordance
with the equipment at hand. In serving large numbers power machinery
will often pay for itself in a few months through the saving in labor.
It will not only do the work better and more humanely but will allow a
much greater variety of food. In the matter of equipment the institution
must get away from the idea that it is a large home, with working
conditions as they have been in the average home. It should consider
itself an industrial plant where one of the aims is maximum production
with minimum labor; and it should realize that proper equipment and
proper working conditions are necessary in the accomplishment of this
aim. Even though the labor supply may be adequate, efficient planning of
menus demands that there be an adjustment between those foods requiring
much labor and those requiring little, so that proper balance may be
maintained.

In discussing the limitations in menu making the element of cost has
come up again and again. It becomes a definite restriction in
institutions that work on a budget, or where the group to be served
demands good wholesome food at the lowest price. As examples of such
institutions there are the factory cafeteria, the school lunch and the
college cafeteria.

Though menus must be made out in advance of the day when they are to be
used, they should be sufficiently elastic to allow for proper
utilization of left-overs. Using left-overs may mean very little change
and substitution, or may require complete revision of the day's meals.
Left-overs must be used, for it is only by constant care that the food
cost can be kept down to a minimum. That this is true of all
institutions, whether great or small, is shown by the extreme care
exercised in the largest hotels to the end that no food shall be wasted.
Where there is family service, rather than plate service from the
kitchen, there will probably be a large amount of left-over food. It
requires a good deal of ingenuity to use these left-overs in some other
form so as to maintain variety and that element of surprise which is so
essential. In the cafeteria or other institution using _a la carte_
service the left-over problem is not so serious. It is very nicely taken
care of in tea rooms and hotels which serve a club luncheon, the menu
for which may be chiefly made up from the left-overs.

It is obvious that the form of service may influence the kind and extent
of the menu. That is, the cafeteria can serve a large variety of dishes
because the patrons wait on themselves. A similar choice or variety is
impracticable where there is table service, except in hotels,
restaurants and tea rooms where cost is not so great a factor.




CHAPTER II

STANDARDS FOR JUDGING MEALS


Provided the principles of good nutrition have not been violated, the
main basis for judging any meal is palatability. Palatability depends
upon appearance and quality. Appearance in turn depends upon quantity,
color, form and service upon the plate. Quality is determined by odor,
flavor, temperature, texture and consistency. Reduced to outline form,
the elements of palatability are:

                                     | quantity
                                     | color
                + appearance---------+ form
                |                    | neatness
                |                    | arrangement
                |
  Palatability  +
                |
                |                    | odor
                |                    | temperature
                + quality------------+ flavor
                                     | texture
                                     | consistency

Commercially and aesthetically it is unwise to make servings too large.
Every one has had the experience of being served with more food than can
be eaten with relish and without waste. The effect is to surfeit the
appetite and to limit the variety which a patron may have, unless he is
able financially to order the variety; in which case he is obliged to
leave some food uneaten. In any institution which serves _a la carte_,
it is better to adjust portions and prices to the end that the patron
may have some variety in his meal without prohibitive expense.

Color is important in inducing appetite. The cafeteria counter
displaying a buff-colored pie, snow pudding, rice custard and yellow
cake does not tempt patrons to buy. A basket of fruit, a bright-colored
gelatin dessert or attractive garnishes may transform a drab meal into a
most interesting one. Particularly in all kinds of plate service,
attention must be paid to color, for while clashing color combinations
must be avoided, some color must be used to give the food an appetizing
appearance. A great deal of our food is very neutral in color and admits
of a liberal use of garnishes of one kind or another.

As a rule articles of food served together should be of diverse shapes.
One may enjoy a croquette, a stuffed baked potato, peas in timbales and
a roll in the same meal, but it is usually unwise to serve them on the
same plate.

The necessity for neatness and orderly arrangement of servings is
obvious. At large parties where there is plate service it is wise to
make up a sample plate before the time of serving in order to determine
the best arrangement of food and in order actually to show those who are
to dish up the food how each plate must look when it is placed before
the guest. One who is inexperienced in planning menus, especially for
parties, should accustom himself to visualizing the meal as it will
appear when written upon the menu card and as it will appear upon the
plate. A menu which has seemed very good when planned will often be
unsatisfactory when actually served because some of the above points
have been overlooked.

Odor and temperature are important factors in quality. It would seem
superfluous to say that hot things must be served hot and cold things
must be served cold, yet in serving large numbers the strict observance
of these rules is one of the difficult problems to be solved. _It can be
solved, however_, with efficient equipment properly arranged, a
carefully thought out organization of service and unceasing care.

Repetition of texture and consistency should also be avoided. That is to
say, there should be the maximum variety in preparation of food in order
that no meal shall contain two or more creamed dishes, fried foods,
foods with custard basis or foods with bread foundation.

If a score card were made out for judging a meal, flavor would perhaps
be given the most importance. Here again care must be taken to avoid
duplicating flavors. Too many strong flavors or too many bland flavors
are undesirable. While strong flavors stimulate the appetite it is
unwise to employ them continually, especially where the same group of
people is being served day after day. A more blandly flavored diet is
likely to be less palling and more constantly inviting.

In serving the public, whether it be in the hospital, the college
dormitory or the commercial restaurant, the aim should always be to have
the food better than that to which the patrons are accustomed.

In almost any kind of food work, and especially in institutional food
work, visiting trips to the best hotels, tea rooms, inns, cafeterias and
restaurants are invaluable, since they impart a knowledge of the way
things are done, which in turn creates a confidence and assurance that
nothing else can give.




CHAPTER III

TYPES OF MENUS


CAFETERIA MENUS

Though it may be necessary to offer slightly more choice in foods in the
commercial cafeteria, some cafeterias offer such a wide variety of
choice that the patron is confused and has difficulty in choosing his
meal. Furthermore too much variety makes for sameness from day to day.
In all cafeterias where the same group is served each day, and where
there is little or no competition, a simpler menu may be used. The
following menu outline is suggested for use in the average cafeteria.

A Standard Form for Cafeteria Menu


    1 soup
    2 meats
    (1 meat substitute)
    1 kind of potatoes
    2-3 vegetables
    1-2 hot breads
    1-2 sandwiches
    2-3 salads
    2-3 relishes
    6-8 desserts
    4 beverages

_Meats_

     One inexpensive meat should be served in each meal.

     Two made-over meats should not be served in the same meal.

     Two kinds of beef or pork or two kinds of any other variety of meat
     should not be served in the same meal.


_Potatoes_

     Creamed potatoes may be served with meat lacking gravy or sauce.

     It is seldom advisable to serve mashed potatoes unless there is a
     meat gravy to offer with them.

_Vegetables_

     When possible one vegetable should be starchy and one should be
     succulent.

     Two creamed or two fried or two buttered vegetables should not be
     served in the same meal.

_Breads_

     Raised breads and quick breads give a good variety.

_Salads_

     There should be at least one inexpensive salad.

     The variety in salads may consist of one fruit salad, one vegetable
     salad and one salad in which protein predominates, such as cottage
     cheese, meat or fish.

     Head lettuce salad is universally popular and may appear at every
     meal.

     In salad dressings, there should always be a cooked dressing,
     French dressing and mayonnaise. Other varieties may be added as
     desired.

_Desserts_

     Variety in desserts includes:


     Fruit in some form.
     A pudding with a dough or bread foundation.
     Two cold puddings.
     One kind of ice cream.
     One kind of cake.
     One kind of pie.


     One-crust and two-crust pies should so far as possible be
     alternated in successive menus.

     Two or more kinds of pie may be demanded, but when possible patrons
     should be educated to other choices in desserts.

_Beverages_

     Milk should be served in bottles (with provision for opening).

Thirty Days' Menus for a Cafeteria

The careful manager spends a great deal of time in menu planning. If
some systematic method of menu making can be adopted and used with a
mind constantly alert to seasonal changes in foods, new and attractive
dishes and variety in serving, the plan may result in saving much of
this time.

A set of menus for thirty days has been worked out, with the idea that
they may be repeated at the end of that time without too monotonous
repetition. No Sunday meals are included since the majority of
cafeterias are closed on that day. The Friday menus occur on the fifth
day and every sixth day thereafter. No menu is shown for Saturday night
when, if a meal is served, it may consist of popular dishes such as
chicken in some form, waffles or steaks, along with such left-overs as
it may be desirable to use.

The menus are intended to serve as a _foundation_ to which may be added
new dishes and seasonable fruits and vegetables, a suggestive list of
which is given elsewhere (see pages 57-59). From these foundation menus
may be eliminated such dishes as are unpopular or out of season, or
which for any reason it is impractical to serve. Commercial cafeterias
may find it necessary to add other choices to these menus. Very small
cafeterias may offer fewer choices. The majority of establishments,
however, will find this variety ample, the idea being to serve the
maximum variety within the week rather than within the day or meal.

A star has been used to indicate those dishes in which left-overs may be
used to particular advantage.

CAFETERIA MENUS

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Monday=           |   =Tuesday=          |   =Wednesday=        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Grapefruit           | Oranges              | Grapefruit           |
  | Prunes               | Bananas              | Baked apples         |
  | Apples               | Apricots             | Stewed figs          |
  | Stewed cherries      | Canned pears         | Canned plums         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | CEREALS              | CEREALS              | CEREALS              |
  | Cream of wheat,      | Cream of barley      | Oatmeal              |
  |   chopped figs       | Post toasties        | Shredded wheat       |
  | Grapenuts            | Puffed wheat         | Grapenuts            |
  | Puffed rice          |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | Fried eggs           | Pancakes             | Fried mush           |
  | Bacon                | Cinnamon toast       | Broiled Ham          |
  | Wheat muffins        | Poached Eggs         | Toast                |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of lima bean   | Oyster stew          | Vegetable Soup       |
  |   soup               |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Veal roast, gravy    | Pork chops           | Leg of lamb, mint    |
  | Creamed dried beef   | **Cheese fondue      |   sauce              |
  |   on toast           |                      | Hamburg balls        |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | Creamed potatoes     | Mashed potatoes      |
  | Buttered peas        | Boiled onions        | Scalloped tomatoes   |
  | Cabbage au gratin    | Buttered carrots     | Creamed celery       |
  |                      | Fried apples         |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Pear salad           | Orange salad         | Peach salad          |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |
  | Tomato salad         | Cabbage salad        | Tuna fish salad      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Cinnamon rolls       | Wheat muffins        | Corn bread           |
  | **Ham and pickle     |                      | Raisin and nut       |
  |   sandwiches         |                      |   sandwiches         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | **Chocolate bread    | **Prunecot           | Carrot plum          |
  |   pudding with       |   shortcakes         |   pudding, vanilla   |
  |   vanilla sauce      | Fruit                |   sauce              |
  | Fruit                | Snow pudding,        | Fruit                |
  | Fig tapioca          |   custard sauce      | Baked rhubarb        |
  | **Fruit whip         | Chocolate blanc      | Baked custard        |
  | Caramel cake         |   mange with nuts    | Cocoanut cake        |
  | Banana cream pie     | White cake, lemon    | Cranberry pie        |
  | Ice cream            |   filling, white     | Ice cream, chocolate |
  |                      |   frosting           |   sauce              |
  |                      | Pumpkin pie          |                      |
  |                      | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of celery soup | Peanut butter soup   | Clear tomato soup    |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Swiss steak          | Rib roast of beef    | Baked ham            |
  | Tongue, mustard      | Veal stew            | **Cottage cheese     |
  |   sauce              |                      |   croquettes, cream  |
  |                      |                      |   sauce              |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Browned potatoes     | Mashed potatoes      | Glazed sweet         |
  | **Corn pudding       | Creamed asparagus    |   potatoes           |
  | Mashed turnips       | Buttered beets       | Creamed hominy       |
  |                      |                      | String beans         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Sardine salad        | Pineapple and celery | Banana salad         |
  | Head lettuce salad   |   salad              | Head lettuce salad   |
  | Cottage cheese salad | Head lettuce salad   | Deviled egg salad    |
  |                      | Spinach and egg      |                      |
  |                      |   salad              |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Hot rolls            | Baking-powder        | Raised muffins       |
  |                      |   biscuits           |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Cottage pudding,     | **Rice and raisin    | Grapenut pudding,    |
  |   lemon sauce        |   pudding, hard      |   lemon sauce        |
  | Fruit                |   sauce              | Fruit                |
  | Pineapple pudding    | Fruit                | Loganberry tapioca   |
  | Baked apples         | **Fruit cocktail     | Apricot whip         |
  | White cake, nut      | Caramel tapioca      | Ginger cake          |
  |   icing              | Chocolate cake       | Lemon pie            |
  | Chocolate pie        | Apple pie            | Ice cream            |
  | Ice cream            | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Thursday=         |   =Friday=           |   =Saturday=         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Oranges              | Grapefruit           | Grapefruit           |
  | Pineapple            | Peaches              | Oranges              |
  | Apple-sauce          | Apricots             | Royal Anne cherries  |
  | Bananas              | Baked apples         | Prunes               |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Malt of wheat        | Corn meal mush       | Rice boiled in milk  |
  | Grapenuts            | Puffed rice          | Grapenuts            |
  | Post toasties        | Shredded wheat       | Post toasties        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | French toast         | Toast                | Bacon and eggs       |
  | Toast                | Date muffins         | Toast                |
  | Boiled eggs          | Poached eggs         | Pancakes             |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |        LUNCH         |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of corn soup   | Cream of tomato soup | Noodle soup          |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Creamed sweetbreads  | Baked halibut,       | Roast beef, gravy    |
  |   on toast           |   tartare sauce      | **Spanish rice       |
  | Beef a la mode       | Egg cutlets, cream   |                      |
  |                      |   sauce              |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Parsley buttered     | Baked potato         | Mashed potato        |
  | potatoes             | Fried parsnips       | String beans         |
  | Steamed rice in      | Buttered asparagus   |Spinach and egg       |
  |   milk               |   on toast           |                      |
  | Fried eggplant       |                      |                      |
  | Buttered cabbage     |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Fruit salad          | Prune and cottage    | Grapefruit salad     |
  | Head lettuce salad   |   cheese salad       | Head lettuce salad   |
  | Raisin and carrot    | Head lettuce salad   | Asparagus salad      |
  |   salad              | Perfection salad     |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Baking-powder        | Bran muffins         | Parker House rolls   |
  |   biscuits and       |                      |                      |
  |   honey              |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Loganberry cobbler   | Apple dumplings,     | Orange fritters,     |
  | Fruit                |   lemon sauce        |   syrup              |
  | Maple nut mold,      |  Fruit               | Fruit                |
  |   custard sauce      | Cocoanut custard     | Norwegian prune      |
  | Fruit cocktail       | Cornstarch pudding,  |   pudding            |
  | Cake with fudge      |    chocolate sauce   | **Fruit gelatin      |
  |   frosting           | Spice cake           | Angel cake           |
  | Pineapple pie        | Blackberry pie       | **Mince pie          |
  | Ice cream            |  Ice cream           | Ice cream            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of pea soup    | Creole soup          |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Roast pork loin,     | Breaded veal chops   |                      |
  |   gravy              | **Scalloped fish in  |                      |
  | Macaroni and cheese  |   ramekins           |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | Creamed potatoes     |                      |
  | Baked lima beans     | Buttered onions      |                      |
  |   with green         | Rice croquettes      |                      |
  |   peppers and        |   with jelly         |                      |
  |   pimentos           |                      |                      |
  | Spinach and lemon    |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Peach salad          | Orange salad         |                      |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |                      |
  | Tomato salad         | Celery hearts        |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Corn muffins         | Cottage rolls        |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Chocolate souffle    | Steamed molasses     |                      |
  | Fruit                |   pudding, egg hard  |                      |
  | Caramel Bavarian     |   sauce              |                      |
  | Baked apples         | Fruit                |                      |
  | Sugar cookies        | **Fruit gelatin      |                      |
  | Apricot pie          | Tapioca cream        |                      |
  | Ice cream            | Individual tea       |                      |
  |                      |   cakes with raisins |                      |
  |                      | Butterscotch pie     |                      |
  |                      | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Monday=           |   =Tuesday=          |   =Wednesday=        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Apples               | Bananas              | Grapes               |
  | Sliced oranges       | Grapefruit           | Oranges              |
  | Plums, red canned    | Apricot sauce        | Apple sauce          |
  | Prunes               | Stewed, red, pitted  | Royal Anne cherries  |
  |                      |   cherries           |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Post toasties        | Shredded wheat       | Malt of wheat        |
  | Grapenuts            | Puffed rice          | Grapenuts            |
  | Corn meal mush       | Oatmeal              | Post toasties        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | French toast         | Fried mush           | Doughnuts            |
  | Boiled eggs          | Toast                | Toast                |
  | Toast                | Bacon                | Scrambled eggs       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Clear tomato soup    | Cream of potato      | Noodle soup          |
  |                      |   soup               |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Baked ham            | Roast pork and       | Creamed chicken on   |
  | Spaghetti and cheese |   gravy              |   toast              |
  |                      | Beef stew            | Meat loaf            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Browned sweet        | Mashed potatoes      | Parsley buttered     |
  |   potatoes           | **Corn pudding       |   potatoes           |
  | Creamed cabbage      | Buttered beets       | Creamed carrots      |
  | Baked navy beans     |                      | Spinach and lemon    |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Banana salad         | Nut, celery, cabbage | Sardine salad        |
  | Shredded lettuce     |   salad              | Head lettuce salad   |
  |   salad              | Head lettuce salad   | Mashed potato salad  |
  | **Potato salad       | Prune and peanut     |                      |
  |                      |   butter salad       |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Brown bread          | Raisin bread         | Baking powder        |
  |                      | Egg and pickle       |   biscuits           |
  |                      |   sandwiches         | Cottage cheese,      |
  |                      |                      |   green pepper and   |
  |                      |                      |   nut sandwiches     |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Peach shortcake      | Apple puff pudding,  | **Bread pudding,     |
  | Fruit                |   lemon sauce        |   vanilla sauce      |
  | Chocolate pudding    | Fruit                | Fruit                |
  | Caramel tapioca      | Floating Island      | Apricot whip         |
  | White cake with      | Cranberry sauce      | Maple nut mold,      |
  |   orange filling     | Chocolate cake       |   custard sauce      |
  |   and frosting       | Rhubarb pie          | White cake, white    |
  | Custard pie          | Ice cream            |   icing              |
  | Ice cream            |                      | Banana cream pie     |
  |                      |                      | Ice cream            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     DINNER           |     DINNER           |     DINNER           |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of lima bean   | Cream of celery soup | Cream of pea soup    |
  |   soup               |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Rib roast, gravy     | Veal birds           | Short ribs of beef   |
  | Frankfurters         | Creamed dried beef   | Sausage balls        |
  |                      |   on toast           |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | Baked potatoes       | Browned potatoes     |
  | Stewed tomatoes      | String beans         | Buttered onions      |
  | Scalloped eggplant   | Buttered asparagus   | **Succotash          |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Fruit salad          | Grape and celery     | Banana and nut       |
  | Head lettuce salad   |   salad              |   salad              |
  | Perfection salad     | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |
  |                      | Cottage cheese salad | Tuna fish and celery |
  |                      |                      |   salad              |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Graham muffins       | Corn bread           | Nut bread            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Lemon rice pudding   | Chocolate souffle    | **Brown Betty,       |
  | Fruit                | Fruit                |   lemon sauce        |
  | Baked custard        | **Fruit cocktail     | Fruit                |
  | **Fruit gelatin      | Baked prune whip     | Pineapple tapioca    |
  | Raisin rocks         |   with nuts          | **Fruit Bavarian     |
  | Blueberry pie        | Doughnuts            | Washington pie,      |
  | Ice cream            | Pineapple pie        |   cream filling      |
  |                      | Ice cream            | Raisin pie           |
  |                      |                      | Ice cream            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Thursday=         |   =Friday=           |   =Saturday=         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Apples               | Peaches              | Cherries             |
  | Bananas              | Prunes               | Baked apples         |
  | Pineapple            | Oranges              | Grapefruit           |
  | Pears                | Stewed figs          | Peaches              |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Cream of rye         |  Oatmeal             |  Cream of barley     |
  | Puffed wheat         | Shredded wheat       |  Puffed rice         |
  | Cornflakes           | Grapenuts            |  Post toasties       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | Fried eggs           | Poached eggs on      |  Fried eggs          |
  | French toast         |   toast              |  Toast               |
  | Toast                | Toast                |  Muffins             |
  | Broiled ham          | Rice pancakes        |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of corn soup   | **Vegetable soup     |  Cream of spinach    |
  |                      |                      | SOUP                 |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Swiss steak          | Veal roast with      |  Breaded pork chops  |
  | Creamed eggs on      |   dressing           |  Veal hearts en      |
  |   on toast           | Scalloped salmon     |    casserole         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Baked potato         | Mashed potato        |  Scalloped potatoes  |
  | Mashed rutabagas     | Buttered beets       |  Buttered carrots    |
  | Creamed celery       | Creamed onions       |  String beans        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Orange salad         | Grapefruit salad     |  Pineapple with      |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |    cottage cheese    |
  | Tomato aspic         | **Combination        |  Head lettuce salad  |
  |                      |   vegetable salad    |  Perfection salad    |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Brown bread          | Raised muffins       |  Cinnamon rolls      |
  |                      | **Fruit sandwiches   |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Steamed plum         | **Chocolate rice     |  Raspberry roll,     |
  |   pudding, vanilla   |   custard with       |    raspberry sauce   |
  |   sauce              |   meringue           |  Fruit               |
  | Fruit                | Fruit                |  Red plum whip       |
  | Baked apples         | **Fruit gelatin      |  Rice Bavarian       |
  | Cornstarch pudding,  | Lady Baltimore cake  |    pudding           |
  |   chocolate sauce    | Cream puffs          |  Banana cream cake   |
  | Sponge cake,         | Loganberry pie       |  Apple pie           |
  |   whipped cream      | Ice cream, maple     |  Ice cream           |
  | Butterscotch pie     |   nut sauce          |                      |
  | Ice cream            |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of tomato      | Cream of corn soup   |                      |
  |   soup               |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Leg of lamb, gravy   | Fried oysters with   |                      |
  | **Baked hash         |   lemon              |                      |
  |                      | Pot roast            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | Mashed potatoes      |                      |
  | Creamed cabbage      | Scalloped tomatoes   |                      |
  | Buttered peas        | Steamed rice in milk |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Cottage cheese balls | Deviled egg salad    |                      |
  |   rolled in nuts     | Shredded lettuce     |                      |
  | Head lettuce salad   |   salad              |                      |
  | Radishes             | Celery hearts        |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Muffins              | Baking-powder        |                      |
  |                      |   biscuits           |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | **Baked rice pudding | Peach cobbler        |                      |
  | Fruit                | Fruit                |                      |
  | **Date torte, whipped| Apple tapioca        |                      |
  |   cream              | **Charlotte russe    |                      |
  | Orange custard       | White cake,          |                      |
  | Chocolate cake       |   chocolate icing    |                      |
  | Cherry pie           | Lemon pie            |                      |
  | Ice cream            | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Monday=           |   =Tuesday=          |   =Wednesday=        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Oranges              | Grapefruit           | Apple sauce          |
  | Baked apples         | Bananas              | Peaches              |
  | Cherries             | Plums                | Pineapple            |
  | Prunes               | Apricots             | Grapefruit           |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Malt of wheat        | Oatmeal              | Cream of rye         |
  | Cornflakes           | Shredded wheat       | Puffed wheat         |
  | Grapenuts            | Puffed rice          | Grapenuts            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | Toast                | Toast                | Toast                |
  | **Crumb pancakes     | Bran muffins         | French toast         |
  | Fried eggs           | Poached eggs         | Bacon                |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of corn soup   | Peanut butter soup   | **Vegetable soup     |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Small steaks         | Roast lamb, mint     | Liver and bacon      |
  | **Cheese fondue      |   sauce              | **Hamburg balls      |
  |                      | Weiners              |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Creamed potatoes     | Mashed potatoes      | Glazed sweet         |
  | Beets in vinegar     | Carrots and peas     |   potatoes           |
  | Buttered onions      | Creamed cabbage      | **Corn pudding       |
  |                      |                      | Spinach and lemon    |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Pear salad           | **Potato salad       | Apple and celery     |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |   salad              |
  | Cabbage slaw         | Tomato aspic salad   | Head lettuce salad   |
  |                      |                      | Cottage cheese salad |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | **Crumb muffins      | Cottage rolls        | Corn bread           |
  | **Fruit sandwiches   |                      | **Ham and pickle     |
  |                      |                      |   sandwiches         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Rice and raisins     | **Brown Betty, lemon | Lemon rice pudding   |
  |   with hard sauce    |   sauce              | Fruit                |
  | Fruit                | Fruit                | **Fruit cocktail     |
  | **Fruit gelatin      | Apricot whip         | **Date torte, whipped|
  | Maple nut mold,      | Caramel custard      |   cream              |
  |   custard sauce      | White cake,          | Apple-sauce cake     |
  | Spice cake           |   chocolate frosting | Chocolate pie        |
  | Cocoanut cream pie   | Raspberry pie        | Ice cream            |
  | Ice cream            | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | **Tomato stock soup  | Oyster stew          | Cream of spinach     |
  |                      |                      |   soup               |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Baked ham            | Roast veal, gravy    | Rib roast of beef,   |
  | **Meat loaf          | Rice and nut loaf,   |   gravy              |
  |                      |   brown sauce        | Salmon croquettes,   |
  |                      |                      |   cream sauce        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Baked potatoes       | Mashed potatoes      | Mashed potatoes      |
  | **Scalloped corn     | Buttered turnips     | Spaghetti and        |
  | Mashed squash        | String beans         |   tomatoes           |
  |                      |                      | Creamed onions       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Cottage cheese with  | Pineapple and celery | Grapefruit salad     |
  |   nuts, green        |   salad              | Head lettuce salad   |
  |   peppers and        | Head lettuce salad   | Sliced cucumbers     |
  |   pimentos           | **Combination        |                      |
  | Head lettuce salad   |   vegetable salad    |                      |
  | Asparagus salad      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Baking-powder        | Nut bread            | Cottage rolls        |
  |   biscuits           |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Baked apples         | Cherry steamed       | Grapenut pudding,    |
  | Fruit                |   pudding, cherry    |   lemon sauce        |
  | Prune pudding        |   sauce              | Fig tapioca          |
  | Pineapple pudding    | Tapioca cream        | Fruit                |
  | Jelly roll           | Chocolate blanc      | Snow pudding,        |
  | Gooseberry and       |   mange              |   custard sauce      |
  |   raisin pie         | Fruit                | Doughnuts            |
  | Ice cream            | Cake with fig        | Apricot pie          |
  |                      |   filling and white  | Ice cream            |
  |                      |   frosting           |                      |
  |                      | Butterscotch pie     |                      |
  |                      | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Thursday=         |   =Friday=           |   =Saturday=         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Oranges              | Grapefruit           | Oranges              |
  | Apple sauce          | Bananas              | Cherries             |
  | Apricots             | Peaches              | Grapefruit           |
  | Plums                | Prunes               | Plums                |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Cream of wheat       | Cream of barley      | Corn meal mush       |
  | Cornflakes           | Puffed wheat         | Shredded wheat       |
  | Grapenuts            | Cornflakes           | Grapenuts            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | Toast                | Toast                | Toast                |
  | Buckwheat cakes      | Sausages             | French toast         |
  | Poached eggs         | Muffins              | Fried eggs           |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of pea soup    | Cream of lima bean   | **Chicken and rice   |
  |                      |   soup               |   soup               |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Breaded veal         | Chicken and biscuit  | Rib roast of beef    |
  | **Mutton stew with   | Codfish balls, cream | Tongue with mustard  |
  |   vegetables         |   sauce              |   sauce              |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |   VEGETABLES         | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Browned potatoes     | Baked potatoes       | Mashed potatoes      |
  | **Succotash          | Buttered peas        | Fried parsnips       |
  | Creamed asparagus    | Creamed celery       | String beans         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |   SALADS             | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | **Fruit salad        | Deviled egg salad    | Prune and cottage    |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |   cheese salad       |
  | Beet and egg salad   | Lobster salad        | Head lettuce salad   |
  |                      |                      | **Potato salad       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |   BREADS             | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Baking-powder        | Plain muffins        | Cottage rolls        |
  |   cinnamon rolls     |                      | Lettuce sandwiches   |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |   DESSERTS           | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Peach cobbler        | **Bread pudding,     | Chocolate souffle    |
  | Fruit                |   vanilla sauce      | Fruit                |
  | Prune whip           | Fruit                | Norwegian prune      |
  | Floating Island      | Caramel pudding      |   pudding            |
  | White cake, white    | Baked apples         | **Fruit cocktail     |
  |   frosting           | Chocolate cake,      | Apple sauce cake,    |
  | Apple pie            |   chocolate icing    |   chocolate icing    |
  | Ice cream            | Cream pie            | **Mince pie          |
  |                      | Ice cream            | Ice cream            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |      DINNER          |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 |   SOUP               | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of tomato      | Cream of potato      |                      |
  |   soup               |   soup               |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                |   MEATS              | MEATS                |
  | Roast pork and       | Steamed whitefish,   |                      |
  |   dressing           |   egg sauce          |                      |
  | **Cottage cheese     | Breaded veal hearts  |                      |
  |   croquettes,        |                      |                      |
  |   cream sauce        |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           |   VEGETABLES         | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | Creamed potatoes     |                      |
  | Cabbage in vinegar   | Stewed tomatoes      |                      |
  | Creamed carrots      | Corn with pimentos   |                      |
  |                      | and green peppers    |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Apricot salad        | Banana salad         |                      |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |                      |
  | Celery hearts        | Spinach and egg      |                      |
  |                      |   salad              |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Hot rolls            | Corn bread           |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Carrot plum pudding, | Apple dumplings,     |                      |
  |   vanilla sauce      |   lemon sauce        |                      |
  | Date and nut blanc   | Fruit                |                      |
  |   mange, custard     | Baked custard        |                      |
  |   sauce              | Orange gelatin       |                      |
  | Chocolate pudding    | Lemon filled lay     |                      |
  | Fruit                |   cake               |                      |
  | Cup cakes with       | Blueberry pie        |                      |
  |   fruit              | Ice cream            |                      |
  | Banana cream pie     |                      |                      |
  | Ice cream            |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Monday=           |   =Tuesday=          |   =Wednesday=        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Bananas              | Oranges              | Plums                |
  | Peaches              | Apricots             | Fresh apples         |
  | Grapefruit           | Prunes               | Bananas              |
  | Baked apples         | Royal Anne cherries  | Grapefruit           |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Oatmeal              | Cream of wheat       | Corn meal            |
  | Puffed wheat         | Cornflakes           | Shredded wheat       |
  | Cornflakes           | Grapenuts            | Puffed rice          |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | Toast                | Toast                | Toast                |
  | Poached eggs         | **Crumb griddle cakes| Creamed dried beef   |
  | French toast         | Bacon and fried      |   on toast           |
  |                      |   apples             | Doughnuts            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of potato      | **Creole soup        | Cream of corn soup   |
  |   soup               |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Baked ham            | **Scalloped oysters  | Roast lamb, gravy    |
  | Macaroni and cheese  | Roast beef, gravy    | Meat pie             |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Baked sweet potatoes | Parsley buttered     | Mashed potatoes      |
  | Spinach and egg      |   potatoes           | Fried parsnips       |
  | **Corn pudding       | Mashed squash        | Creamed peas         |
  |                      | Beets in vinegar     |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Apple, celery and    | **Fruit salad        | Banana salad         |
  |   nut salad          | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Cottage cheese,      | **Potato salad       |
  | Combination          |   chopped celery     |                      |
  |   vegetable salad    |   and pimento salad  |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Crumb muffins        | Corn bread           | Cottage rolls        |
  | Fruit sandwiches     |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Steamed plum         | Loganberry cobbler   | **Prunecot shortcake |
  |   pudding, vanilla   | Fruit                | Fruit                |
  |   sauce              | Caramel Bavarian     | Apple tapioca        |
  | Fruit                |   cream              | **Fruit cocktail     |
  | Baked custard        | Baked apples         | Washington pie,      |
  | Prune whip           | Ginger cake, whipped |   chocolate filling  |
  | Jelly roll,          |   cream              | Custard pie          |
  |   chocolate filling  | Lemon pie            | Ice cream            |
  | Peach pie            | Ice cream            |                      |
  | Ice cream            |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of tomato      | Cream of spinach     | **Chicken and rice   |
  |   soup               |   soup               |   soup               |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Roast pork,          | Chicken a la king on | Small steaks         |
  |   dressing, gravy    |   toast              | **Cheese and tomato  |
  | Mutton stew          | **Meat loaf          |   souffle            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | French fried         | Creamed potatoes     |
  | Creamed celery       |   potatoes           | **Scalloped corn     |
  | Rice croquettes,     | **Scalloped tomatoes | String beans         |
  |   jelly              | Creamed cauliflower  |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Orange salad         | Grapefruit salad     | Pear salad           |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |
  | Cabbage salad        | Beet and egg salad   | Tuna fish salad      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Graham bread         | Baking-powder        | **Crumb muffins      |
  |                      |   biscuits and maple |                      |
  |                      |   syrup              |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | **Brown Betty, lemon | **Chocolate rice     | Cottage pudding,     |
  |   sauce              |   pudding            |   lemon sauce        |
  | Fruit                | Fruit                | Fruit                |
  | Tapioca cream        | Cocoanut custard     | Cornstarch blanc     |
  | Chocolate blanc      | Pineapple pudding    |   mange, fruit sauce |
  |   mange              | White cake with      | Chocolate pudding    |
  | Spice cake           |   white icing        | Caramel cake         |
  | Cocoanut cream pie   | Cherry pie           | **Mince pie          |
  | Ice cream            | Ice cream            | Ice cream            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+


  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Thursday=         |   =Friday=           |   =Saturday=         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Peaches              | Grapefruit           | Oranges              |
  | Pineapple            | Bananas              | Plums                |
  | Oranges              | Prunes               | Baked apples         |
  | Prunes               | Apricots             | Cherries             |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Cream of rice with   | Cream of rye         | Cream of barley      |
  |   raisins            | Cornflakes           | Puffed rice          |
  | Puffed wheat         | Shredded wheat       | Grapenuts            |
  | Grapenuts            |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | Toast                | Toast                | Toast                |
  | French toast         | Muffins              | Poached eggs         |
  | Fried eggs           | Pancakes             | Milk toast           |
  |                      | Broiled ham          |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of lima bean   | Cream of tomato      | Cream of celery      |
  |   soup               |   soup               |   soup               |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Pork chops           | Fried salmon steak   | Swiss steak          |
  | **Hamburg balls      |   with lemon         | **Cottage cheese     |
  |                      | **Baked hash         |    croquettes with   |
  |                      |                      |    cream sauce       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Glazed sweet         | Creamed potatoes     | Mashed potatoes      |
  |   potatoes           | Buttered cauliflower | Buttered rutabagas   |
  | Buttered onions      | Corn with pimento    | Stewed tomatoes      |
  | Kidney beans         |   and green peppers  |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Pineapple with       | Celery cabbage salad | Shrimp salad         |
  |   cottage cheese     | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |
  | Head lettuce salad   | **Fruit salad        | String bean and      |
  | Asparagus salad      |                      |   shallot salad      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Nut bread            | Muffins              | Cinnamon rolls       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Apple fritters with  | Bread pudding,       | Steamed cherry       |
  |   syrup              |   vanilla sauce      |   pudding cherry     |
  | Fruit                | Fruit                |   sauce              |
  | Apricot whip         |  Snow pudding,       | Fruit                |
  | Maple nut mold,      |   custard sauce      | Chocolate blanc      |
  |  custard sauce       | Fig tapioca          |   mange              |
  | Banana cream cake    | Cake with orange     | Pineapple tapioca    |
  | Blackberry pie       |   filling and        | Nut cake             |
  | Ice cream            |   frosting           | Apricot pie          |
  |                      | Apple pie            | Ice cream            |
  |                      | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of pea soup    | **Vegetable soup     |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Rib roast of beef    | **Scalloped fish     |                      |
  | Veal hearts en       | Sausage balls, cream |                      |
  |   casserole          |   sauce              |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | French fried         |                      |
  | Buttered beets       |   potatoes           |                      |
  | Cabbage in vinegar   | Buttered carrots     |                      |
  | Creamed asparagus    |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Peach salad          | Orange salad         |                      |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |                      |
  | Sliced or green      | Celery hearts        |                      |
  |   onions             |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Graham muffins       |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Grapenut pudding,    | **Baked rice pudding |                      |
  |   lemon sauce        | Fruit                |                      |
  | Fruit                | Baked rhubarb        |                      |
  | **Fruit gelatin      | **Charlotte russe    |                      |
  | Norwegian prune      | Doughnuts            |                      |
  |   pudding            | Chocolate pie        |                      |
  | Sponge cake          | Ice cream            |                      |
  | Pineapple pie        |                      |                      |
  | Ice cream            |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Monday=           |   =Tuesday=          |   =Wednesday=        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Peaches              | Oranges              | Bananas              |
  | Red pitted cherries  | Grapefruit           | Grapes               |
  | Grapefruit           | Peaches              | Plums                |
  | Apple sauce          | Baked apples         | Grapefruit           |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Rice boiled in milk  | Malt of wheat        | Oatmeal              |
  | Puffed wheat         | Post toasties        | Puffed rice          |
  | Grapenuts            | Shredded wheat       | Grapenuts            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | Pancakes             | Creamed eggs on      | Ham and eggs         |
  | Cinnamon toast       |   toast              | Toast                |
  | Bacon                | Graham muffins       | Buckwheat cakes      |
  |                      | Toast                |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of tomato      | **Vegetable soup     | Cream of asparagus   |
  |   soup               |                      |   soup               |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Rib roast of beef    | Breaded veal steak   | Roast loin of pork,  |
  |   and gravy          | **Corned beef hash,  |   dressing, gravy    |
  | Tongue, mustard      |   tartare sauce      | **Cheese fondue      |
  |   sauce              |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potato        | Creamed potatoes     | Mashed sweet         |
  | String beans         | Buttered onions      |   potatoes           |
  | Fried eggplant       | Scalloped tomatoes   | Lima beans, with     |
  |                      |                      |   green peppers and  |
  |                      |                      |   pimentos           |
  |                      |                      | Creamed celery       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Prune and cottage    | Peach salad          | **Potato salad       |
  |   cheese salad       | Head lettuce salad   | Shredded lettuce and |
  | Head lettuce salad   | **Combination        |   egg salad          |
  | Tuna fish salad      |   vegetable salad    | Shrimp salad         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Fig, raisin and nut  | Bran muffins         | Baking-powder        |
  |   sandwiches         | Peanut butter and    |   biscuits with      |
  |                      |   pickle sandwiches  |   syrup              |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Loganberry cobbler   | Steamed molasses     | Lemon rice pudding   |
  | Fruit                |   pudding, egg hard  | Fruit                |
  | **Fruit whip         |   sauce              | **Charlotte russe    |
  | Date and nut blanc   | Fruit                | **Fruit cocktail     |
  |   mange, custard     | Chocolate blanc      | Chocolate cake,      |
  |   sauce              |   mange              |   white icing        |
  | Cake with fudge      | Baked custard        | Pumpkin pie          |
  |   icing              | Lady Baltimore cake  | Ice cream            |
  | Custard pie          | Gooseberry and       |                      |
  | Ice cream            |   raisin pie         |                      |
  |                      | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of celery      | Cream of corn soup   | Creole soup          |
  |   soup               |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Ham and eggs         | Roast lamb, currant  | Short ribs of beef   |
  | **Meat croquettes,   |   jelly              | Egg cutlets, cream   |
  |   brown sauce        | **Meat pie           |   sauce              |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Baked potato         | Mashed potatoes      | Browned potatoes     |
  | Spinach and lemon    | Buttered peas        | Creamed asparagus    |
  | **Succotash          | Mashed rutabagas     | Rice in milk         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Banana salad         | Grapefruit salad     | Apple and pineapple  |
  | Head lettuce salad   | Head lettuce salad   |   salad              |
  | Cucumber salad       | Cabbage slaw         | Head lettuce salad   |
  |                      |                      | Perfection salad     |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Rolls                | Parker House rolls   | Corn muffins         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | **Chocolate bread    | Grapenut pudding,    | Prune custard        |
  |   pudding, vanilla   |   lemon sauce        |   pudding            |
  |   sauce              | Fruit                | Fruit                |
  | Fruit                | Snow pudding,        | **Fruit gelatin      |
  | Norwegian prune      |   custard sauce      | Baked apples         |
  |   pudding            | Fig tapioca          | Spice cake           |
  | **Fruit cocktail     | Sponge cake          | Apricot pie          |
  | Nut loaf cake        | Butterscotch pie     | Ice cream            |
  | Blueberry pie        | Ice cream            |                      |
  | Ice cream            |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    DATE              |    DATE              |    DATE              |
  |   =Thursday=         |   =Friday=           |   =Saturday=         |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Grapefruit           | Pears                | Bananas              |
  | Peaches              | Plums                | Peaches              |
  | Oranges              | Grapes               | Oranges              |
  | Prunes               | Apricot sauce        | Plum sauce           |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | FRUITS               | FRUITS               | FRUITS               |
  | Cream of barley      | Cream of rye         | Cream of wheat       |
  | Puffed wheat         | Shredded wheat       | Puffed rice          |
  | Grapenuts            | Post toasties        | Grapenuts            |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           | HOT DISHES           |
  | **Fried corn meal    | Poached eggs         | **Scrambled eggs with|
  |   mush               | White Mt. muffins    |   bacon              |
  | Bacon                | Pancakes             | Cinnamon toast       |
  | Toast                | Broiled ham          | Toast                |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |       LUNCH          |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of bean soup   | **Chicken noodle soup| Peanut butter soup   |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Chicken a la king    | Baked whitefish      | Hot roast beef       |
  | Sausage balls        |   with dressing      |   sandwiches and     |
  |                      | Rice and nut loaf,   |   gravy              |
  |                      |   cream sauce        | **Veal croquettes,   |
  |                      |                      |   brown sauce        |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Parsley buttered     | Baked potatoes       | Scalloped potatoes   |
  |   potatoes           | Cabbage in vinegar   | Corn and pimentos    |
  | Mashed squash        | Beets, buttered      | Fried parsnips       |
  | Creamed peas         |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Banana salad         | **Fruit salad,       | Pineapple salad      |
  | Head lettuce salad   |   whipped cream      | Head lettuce salad   |
  | **Spinach and egg    | Head lettuce salad   | Cottage cheese salad |
  |   salad              | Tomato salad         |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | **Ham sandwiches     | Corn bread           | **Steamed brown      |
  | Hot rolls            |                      |   bread              |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Orange shortcake     | Steamed cherry       | Cottage pudding,     |
  | Fruit                |   pudding, cherry    |   lemon sauce        |
  | Baked apples stuffed |   sauce              | Fruit                |
  |   with raisins and   | Fruit                | Pineapple pudding    |
  |   nuts               | Prune whip           | Tapioca cream        |
  | Caramel custard      | Date torte, whipped  | **Oatmeal cookies    |
  | Washington pie,      |   cream              | Raisin pie           |
  |   chocolate filling  | Jelly roll, cream    | Ice cream, chocolate |
  | Rhubarb pie          |   filling            |   sauce              |
  | Ice cream            | Apple pie            |                      |
  |                      | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |       DINNER         |
  | SOUP                 | SOUP                 | SOUP                 |
  | Cream of potato      | Cream of pea soup    |                      |
  |   soup               |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | MEATS                | MEATS                | MEATS                |
  | Roast veal,          | Pork chops, dressing |                      |
  |   dressing, gravy    | Codfish balls, cream |                      |
  | **Baked hash         |   sauce              |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           | VEGETABLES           |
  | Mashed potatoes      | Baked sweet          |                      |
  | Buttered carrots     |   potatoes           |                      |
  | String beans         | Apple fritters with  |                      |
  |                      |   syrup              |                      |
  |                      | Stewed tomatoes      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | SALADS               | SALADS               | SALADS               |
  | Cottage cheese balls | Tuna fish salad      |                      |
  |   rolled in nuts     | Shredded lettuce     |                      |
  | Head lettuce salad   |   salad              |                      |
  | Asparagus salad      | Kidney bean salad    |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | BREADS               | BREADS               | BREADS               |
  | Bran muffins         | **Crumb muffins      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |   DESSERTS           | DESSERTS             | DESSERTS             |
  | Blackberry cobbler   | **Old-fashioned rice |                      |
  | Fruit                |   pudding            |                      |
  | Floating Island      | Fruit                |                      |
  | Chocolate pudding    | Maple nut mold,      |                      |
  | Apple sauce cake,    |   custard sauce      |                      |
  |   chocolate icing    | Orange Bavarian      |                      |
  | Lemon pie            |   cream              |                      |
  | Ice cream            | Gingerbread,         |                      |
  |                      |   whipped cream      |                      |
  |                      | Chocolate pie        |                      |
  |                      | Ice cream            |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

**Indicates dishes in which left-overs may be used to advantage.


TEA-ROOM MENUS

The tea-room menu is characterized by daintiness and excellence in food,
garnish and service. Large tea rooms serve a variety such as is found in
large hotels, with practically no changes in their menus from day to
day. They are open to the same criticism as are the cafeterias that
serve everything in the market at every meal, and so make their menu
monotonous. Smaller tea rooms offer limited choices,--soups, relishes,
hot dishes, vegetables, salads, breads and beverages. To add choices to
a menu beyond the number which will satisfy the patrons is not economy.
The longer the menu list, the more labor, equipment, food wastage and
spoilage. Therefore the tea-room menu list should be as simple as is
consistent with the demands of those to be served. The menus shown below
are of the type which are changed from day to day. The first is a very
good example of this type, embodying a moderate degree of choice. It is
suitable for a tea room serving perhaps six hundred or more people
daily.

  LUNCHEON[1]

  Iced Fruit Cocktail
  Tuna Fish Cocktail
  Celery Hearts
  Iced Grape Fruit
  Oyster Cocktail
  Grape Fruit & Mint Cocktail
  Button Radishes
  Olives

  SOUP

  Vegetable Soup
  Lamb Broth & Rice
  Oyster Stew
  Cream of Corn Soup
  Chicken & Tomato Puree

  MEATS, FISH, ETC.

  _French Bread, Hot Rolls, or Bran Muffins Served with these Orders_

  Roast Chicken, Dressing, Mashed Potatoes and Gravy
  Creamed Sweetbreads on Toast with French Fried Potatoes
  Chicken Baked with Noodles in Casserole and Toasted Bran Muffins
  Fried Oysters with Chili Sauce and Baked Potato
  Broiled Tenderloin Steak with Sweet Potatoes Southern Style
  Breaded Veal with Browned Potatoes and Gravy
  Broiled White Fish with Lyonnaise Potatoes
  Cheese Omelet with Toasted Rolls and Preserves
  Rice and Salmon Box with Mexican Slaw
  Assorted Hot Vegetable Dinner

  VEGETABLES

  Apple Fritters
  Buttered Asparagus on Toast
  Fresh Spinach & Egg
  Candied Sweet Potatoes
  Baby Garden Beets
  Buttered or Creamed Peas
  Sauted Egg Plant
  Home Baked Beans

  BREADS

  Hot Biscuits with Orange Marmalade
  Bran Muffins
  Toasted English Muffins
  Nut Bread
  Toasted Cheese Rolls
  Rye Bread & Swiss Cheese Sandwich
  French Bread
  Hot Home Made Rolls
  Hot Corn Bread

  SALADS

  Combination Salad
  Sweetbread Salad
  Shrimp Salad
  Club Salad
  Chicken Stuffed Paradise Peppers
  Tomato Stuffed with Cottage Cheese & Almonds
  Chicken Salad
  Tuna Fish Salad
  Sliced Tomato & Cheese Ball Salad
  Head Lettuce and Roquefort Cheese Dressing
  Pineapple, Prune and Neufchatel Cheese Salad
  Grape Fruit & Orange Salad
  Cream Slaw
  Waldorf Salad
  California Fruit and Nut Salad
  Fruit Salad
  Banana and Walnut Salad
  Shredded Lettuce and Egg Salad
  Head Lettuce with Thousand Island Dressing
  Stuffed Egg Salad with Thousand Island Dressing
  Lazarus Vegetable Salad

  FROZEN DESSERTS, PASTRY, ETC.

  Fresh Strawberries and Cream
  Black Walnut Loaf Cake
  Lemon Pie
  Red Raspberry Roll with Cream
  Almond Macaroons
  Apple Pie a la Mode
  Fresh Apple Pie with Cheese
  Coffee Parfait
  Chocolate Ice Cream
  Charlotte Russe
  Prune Whip with Cream
  Cherry Parfait
  Bittersweet Chocolate Parfait
  Chocolate Meringue with Vanilla Ice Cream Center
  Apricot & Almond Parfait
  Chocolate Almond Parfait
  Butter Scotch Meringue
  Hot Fudge Sundae Steamed Fruit Pudding with Hard Sauce
  Chocolate Mint Parfait
  Vanilla Ice Cream
  Black Walnut Frozen Cream
  French Cake
  Bittersweet Chocolate Meringue
  Chocolate Luxurro Dessert
  Vanilla Ice Cream with Swiss Chocolate Sauce
  Date & Nut Parfait
  Baked Apple & Whipped Cream
  Apricot a la Mode

[Footnote 1: Courtesy of The Lazarus Tea Room, Columbus, Ohio.]

Less choice is shown in the following menus which would be suitable to a
tea room serving from two hundred to six hundred daily.

  TEA-ROOM MENU[2]

  Celery
  Olives
  Radishes
  Green onions
  Fruit cocktail
  Spiced figs

     *     *     *     *     *

  Tomato bouillon in cup
    Tureen  For two
  Barley soup in cup
    Tureen  For two

     *     *     *     *     *

  White fish broiled to order

     *     *     *     *     *

  Spring chicken, country style, jelly
  Broiled lamb chops, peas
  Roast leg of veal, dressing
  Fresh mushrooms on toast
  Boiled beef, horse radish sauce

     *     *     *     *     *

  Boiled rice and cream
  Asparagus on toast
  Candied sweet potatoes
  Buttered new beets

     *     *     *     *     *

  Head lettuce, vinaigrette dressing
  Waldorf salad
  Fresh fruit salad, mayonnaise dressing
  Combination vegetable salad, French dressing

     *     *     *     *     *

  Cinnamon rolls
  Parker House rolls
  Nut bread
  Corn bread Maple syrup

     *     *     *     *     *

  Vanilla ice cream Wintergreen sherbet
  Baked apples, whipped cream
  Apple pie Red raspberry pie Whipped cream
  Grapefruit half; whole
  Strawberry shortcake, whipped cream
  Ice cream sandwich, hot chocolate sauce
  Banana custard, whipped cream
  Fresh cake Whipped cream
  Pineapple Bavarian cream, whipped cream
  Coffee or tea

[Footnote 2: Courtesy of Glass Block Tea Room, Duluth, Minnesota.]

Still less choice is offered in the menus printed below, yet they are
entirely satisfactory for a very small tea room serving not more than
one hundred daily.

=Tea-Room Menus=

  _Relishes_
  Salted Almonds
  Celery Hearts

  _Soup_
  Bouillon with Wafers

  _Ready to Serve_
  Lambs Chops and Peas
  Creamed Fresh Mushrooms on Toast

  _Vegetables_
  French Fried Potatoes
  Scalloped Cauliflower

  _Salads_
  Tea-room Special Salad
  Head Lettuce Salad with
    Thousand Island Dressing
  Frozen Fruit Salad

  _Sandwiches_
  Club Sandwiches
  Olive Sandwiches

  _Breads_
  Hot Cinnamon Rolls
  Bread and Butter

  _Desserts_
  Baked Alaska
  Baked Apples
  Orange Bavarian
  Wellesley Fudge Cake

  _Beverages_
  Coffee: per cup for one
          per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Tea:    per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Chocolate per cup

     *     *     *     *     *

  _Relishes_
  Celery Hearts and Stuffed Olives
  Salted Almonds

  _Cocktail_
  Oyster Cocktail

  _Ready to Serve_
  Fillet of Sole, Tartare Sauce
  Omelet with Jelly

  _Vegetables_
  Potatoes in Half Shell
  Brussels Sprouts, Buttered

  _Salads_
  Chicken Salad
  Head Lettuce Salad with
    Thousand Island Dressing
  Fruit Salad

  _Sandwiches_
  Cream Cheese Sandwiches
  Ham and Olive Sandwiches

  _Breads_
  Hot Biscuits and Honey
  Assorted Breads and Butter

  _Desserts_
  Chocolate Meringue Pudding
  Maple Mousse
  Lady Baltimore Cake

  _Beverages_
  Coffee: per cup for one
          per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Tea:    per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Chocolate per cup

     *     *     *     *     *

  _Relishes_
  Stuffed Olives
  Fresh Shallots
  Raspberry Jam

  _Soup_
  Cream of Corn Soup

  _Ready to Serve_
  Broiled Tenderloin of Pork
  Corned Beef Hash with Poached
    Egg and Tartare Sauce

  _Vegetables_
  Sweet Potato Croquettes
  Artichokes with Drawn Butter
    Sauce
  Boston Baked Beans and Brown
    Bread

  _Salads_
  Stuffed Tomato
  Head Lettuce with Thousand
    Island Dressing
  Asparagus and Cold Chicken Mousse

  _Sandwiches_
  Date and Nut Sandwiches
  Hot Roast Beef Sandwiches

  _Breads_
  Cranberry Muffins
  Assorted Bread and Butter

  _Desserts_
  Banana Cream Cake
  Individual Pumpkin Pies
  Ice Cream with Hot Maple
    Fudge Pecan Sauce
  Baked Prune Whip

  _Beverages_
  Coffee: per cup for one
          per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Tea:    per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Chocolate per cup

     *     *     *     *     *

  _Relishes_
  Honey in Glasses
  Queen Olives
  Raspberry Jam

  _Soup_
  Consomme with Vegetables

  _Ready to Serve_
  Chicken a la King in Bread Cases
  Meat Rosettes

  _Vegetables_
  Scalloped Sweet Potatoes with
    Apples
  Fried Oyster Plant

  _Salads_
  Lobster Salad
  Head Lettuce Salad with Thousand
    Island Dressing
  Delicious Fruit Salad

  _Sandwiches_
  Toasted Cheese Sandwiches
  Cold Sliced Tongue Sandwiches

  _Breads_
  Date Muffins
  Assorted Breads and Butter
  Bread and Butter Folds

  _Desserts_
  Individual Orange Pies
  Baked Alaska
  Wellesley Fudge Cake
  Baked Custards with Maple Sauce

  _Beverages_
  Coffee: per cup for one
          per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Tea:    per pot for one
          per pot for two
  Chocolate per cup




CHAPTER IV

SUGGESTIVE CHARTS AND LISTS TO BE USED IN MENU PLANNING


LIST OF FOODS


  SOUPS
    _Cream soups_
      Cream of corn
      Cream of pea
      Cream of tomato
      Cream of asparagus
      Cream of celery
      Cream of potato
      Cream of browned onion
      Cream of navy bean
      Cream of lima bean
      Cream of peanut butter
      Cream of spinach
      Oyster stew
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Stock soups_
      Consomme
      Bouillon
      Tomato bouillon
      Vegetable soup
      Creole soup
      Mutton broth
      Rice tomato soup
      Chicken soup with rice
      Chicken soup with noodles
      Vermicelli
      Clear tomato
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  MEATS
    _Beef_
      Rib roast
      Pot roast
      Hot roast beef sandwiches
      Beef a la mode
      Swiss steak
      Steaks, tenderloin and sirloin
      Hungarian goulash
      Beef loaf
      Hamburg balls
      Creamed dried beef on toast
      Short ribs and browned potatoes
      Corned beef hash; with poached eggs
      Meat pie
      Meat stew with vegetables
      Meat stew with dumplings
      Meat croquettes
      Corned beef and cabbage
      Beef heart and dressing
      Mock duck
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Pork_
      Roast pork
      Roast pork and dressing
      Roast pork and apple sauce
      Pork chops
      Pork chops with dressing
      Baked ham
      Ham baked in milk
      Broiled ham
      Ham and eggs
      Sausages
      Bacon and eggs
      Broiled pork tenderloin
      Frankfurts
      Spare ribs and sauerkraut
      Spare ribs and dressing
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Lamb and mutton_
      Roast lamb and gravy
      Roast lamb and mint sauce
      Lamb stew with vegetables
      Lamb chops
      Roast mutton
      Mutton chops
      Mutton stew
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Veal_
      Roast veal and dressing
      Breaded veal
      Veal loaf
      Calves liver and bacon
      Veal stew, plain; with vegetables; with peas
      Veal birds
      Breaded veal heart
      Veal rosettes
      Veal croquettes
      Scalloped veal with rice
      Veal hearts en casserole
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Chicken_
      Roast chicken
      Chicken fricassee
      Chicken giblets with rice
      Chicken and biscuit
      Creamed chicken, with biscuits; on toast; in bread cases; in timbales
      Chicken pie, white and dark meat; all white meat
      Chicken a la King
      Chicken croquettes
      Hot chicken sandwich
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  FISH
    _Salmon_
      Fresh salmon, Steamed; baked
      Fresh salmon fried in steaks
      Canned salmon in loaf
      Scalloped salmon
      Creamed salmon on toast
      Salmon with lemon
      Salmon croquettes
  _Whitefish_
      Steamed; baked; planked; with dressing
  _Trout_
      Baked; fried
  _Codfish_
      Creamed, on plain boiled potatoes
      Codfish balls
  _Halibut_
      Steamed; fried; baked
      Scalloped fish
      Fish cakes
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  OYSTERS
      Scalloped
      Creamed oysters on toast
      Fried
      Oyster cocktail
      Oyster stew
      ___________________


  EGGS
      Fried with ham
        with bacon
      Egg croquettes
      Egg cutlets
      Scrambled eggs with
        minced ham
        with bacon
        with marmalade
        with jelly
      Poached eggs; on toast
      Baked eggs in ramekin;
        in potato nest
      Steamed eggs
      Creamed eggs on toast
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  CHEESE DISHES
      Cheese fondue
      Cheese souffle
      Rice and cheese
      Macaroni and cheese
      Hominy and cheese
      Spaghetti and cheese
      Creamed cheese
      Cottage cheese loaf with nuts and green peppers
      Cottage cheese croquettes with white sauce


  MEAT SUBSTITUTES
      Turkish pilaf
      Rice and nut loaf
      Spanish rice
      Peanut and rice loaf
      Lentil loaf
      Rice croquettes
      Spaghetti and tomatoes
      Spaghetti and tomatoes with bacon
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  MISCELLANEOUS MEAT
  DISHES
      Hash
      Croquettes
      Tongue
      Heart
      Frankfurts
      Brains, fried
        with scrambled eggs
      Sweetbreads
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  VEGETABLES
    _Potatoes_
      Baked
      Mashed
      Scalloped
    _Potatoes_ (continued)
      Creamed
      American fried
      Browned
      Lyonnaise
      Parsley buttered potatoes
      Stuffed baked potatoes
      Potato chips
      Riced potatoes
      Potato croquettes
      Potato cakes
      Potato cones
      Potato puff
      Plain boiled potatoes
      Diced browned potatoes
      Potatoes au gratin
      Sweet potatoes, boiled
        Baked
        Fried
        Scalloped with apples
      Sweet potato croquettes
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Beans_
      String beans
      String beans creamed
      Wax beans
      Boiled navy beans
      Baked navy beans
      Green lima beans
      Dried lima beans, boiled
      Baked lima beans
      Kidney beans
      Succotash
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Celery_
      Creamed
      Relish
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Asparagus_
      Buttered asparagus on toast
      Creamed
      Creamed asparagus on toast

    _Corn_
      Corn with green and red peppers
      Corn on cob
      Corn pudding
      Succotash
      Scalloped corn
      Corn fritters
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Cabbage_
      Creamed
      Scalloped
      Scalloped cabbage au gratin
      Fried
      Boiled
      Sauerkraut
      Hot slaw
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Carrots_
      Buttered, diced
      Creamed
      Buttered carrots and peas
      Creamed carrots and peas
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Cauliflower_
      Creamed
      Scalloped cauliflower in ramekins; au gratin
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Beets_
      Buttered
      Beets in vinegar sauce
      Pickled beets
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Eggplant_
      Fried
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Hominy_
      Fried
      Creamed
      Scalloped
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Onions_
      Buttered
      Creamed
      Scalloped
      Fried
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Macaroni_
      Macaroni and tomatoes
      Macaroni croquettes
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Spaghetti_
      Spaghetti and tomatoes
      Spaghetti croquettes
      Spaghetti and tomatoes with bacon
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Peas_
      Buttered
      Buttered peas and carrots
      Creamed
      Creamed peas and carrots
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Peppers_
      Stuffed with corn
      Stuffed with meat
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Rice_
      Rice with gravy, southern style
      Rice with cream
      Rice croquettes
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Parsnips_
      Fried
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Spinach_
      Spinach and lemon
      Spinach and egg
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Squash_
      Baked
      Mashed
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Turnips_
      Creamed
      Buttered, diced
      Mashed
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Rutabagas_
      Mashed
      Creamed
      Buttered
      ___________________

    _Tomatoes_
      Stewed
      Stewed tomatoes with bread
      Scalloped
      Baked
      Stuffed
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  BREADS
    _Quick breads_
      White muffins
      Graham muffins
      Bran muffins
      Corn meal muffins
      Date muffins
      Rice muffins
      Crumb muffins
      Blueberry muffins
      Bacon muffins
      Cranberry muffins
      Corn bread
      Brown bread
      Baking-powder biscuit
      Baking-powder biscuit cinnamon rolls, with frosting
      Baking-powder nut bread
      Baking-powder nut and raisin bread
      Baking-powder brown bread
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Yeast breads_
      White bread
      Graham bread
      Oatmeal bread
      Raisin bread
      Nut bread
      Coffee cake
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Rolls_
      Cottage rolls
      Parker House rolls
      Clover-leaf rolls
      Cinnamon rolls
      Raised muffins
      Hot cross buns
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  SANDWICHES
    Lettuce
    Olive
    Olive and egg
    Celery
    Celery and chicken
    Chicken
    Ham
    Peanut
    Fig and nut
    Cheese
    Cheese and pimento
    Meat
      Ham sliced
      Ham minced
      Meat minced
    Fig and date
    Raisin and nut
    Cucumber
    Parsley butter
    Egg
    Tomato and cucumber
    Green pepper
      Club
      Toasted cheese
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  SALADS
    _Vegetable salads_
      Asparagus
      Cabbage
      Cabbage salad with nuts
      Cabbage salad with pickles and green peppers
      Cabbage and ham
      Cabbage and salmon
      Cabbage and tuna fish
      Cabbage and shrimp
      Cabbage and pineapple
      Celery and apple
      Stuffed celery
      Tomato salad
        Whole, stuffed
        Half
        Sliced
      Tomato and cucumber
      Spring salad (head lettuce, tomato, onion, radishes,
        peppers, cucumber)
      String bean
      Kidney bean
      Spinach mounded with sliced egg
      Head lettuce with mayonnaise
      Head lettuce with French dressing
      Head lettuce with Thousand Island dressing
      Lettuce shredded with egg
      Deviled eggs
      Potato
      Cucumber
      Sliced cucumbers in vinegar
      Combination
      Vegetable salad, peas, celery, beets
      Perfection
      Sliced onions in vinegar
      Egg, cheese and pickle
      Tomato aspic
      Tomato and celery
      Celery, peas and nuts
      Cabbage, celery, meat, pimento
      Celery and beet
      Mashed potato
      Bean and beet
      Sliced Bermuda onion
      Squares of New York cheese on lettuce
      Carrot and raisin
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Fruit salads_
      Orange, grapefruit and pineapple
      Waldorf
      Apple, banana and date
      White grape, apple and nut
      Orange and nut
      Apple and pineapple
      Pear
      Pineapple and celery
      Pineapple and nut
      Date and cottage cheese
      Prune and cottage cheese
      Pineapple and grated cheese
      Argyle
      Banana
      Prune and peanut butter
      Grapefruit
      Fruit salad with ginger ale
      Banana, peanut and carrot

    _Fish and meat salads_
      Salmon and celery
      Sardine
      Tuna fish
      Shrimp
      Lobster
      Chicken
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Cottage cheese salads_
      Molded and sliced with celery
      Molded and sliced with green peppers and nuts
      Balls rolled in nuts
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  DESSERTS
    _Hot puddings_
      Rice and raisins with hard sauce
      Rice and raisins with cream
      Rice custard
      Chocolate rice pudding
      Baked rice pudding
      Lemon rice pudding
      Rice compote with peaches
        with raspberries
        with prunes
      Baked tapioca custard with meringue
      Apple tapioca
      Prune pudding
      Indian pudding
      Bread pudding
      Chocolate bread pudding
      Cottage pudding
      Grapenut pudding
      Apple fritters
      Corn fritters
      Banana fritters
      Pineapple fritters
      Orange fritters
      Plain fritters
      Apple dumplings
      Apple batter pudding
      Brown Betty with lemon sauce
      Steamed suet pudding
      Steamed cherry pudding
      Steamed date pudding
      Steamed carrot pudding
      Prunecot shortcake
      Peach shortcake
      Orange shortcake
      Strawberry shortcake
      Peach cobbler
      Apricot cobbler
      Cherry cobbler
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Cold puddings_
      Baked custard
      Caramel custard
      Maple nut mold, custard sauce
      Chocolate blanc mange
      Tapioca cream
      Raspberry tapioca
      Caramel tapioca
      Pineapple tapioca
      Apple tapioca
      Fruit whips
      Strawberry
      Prune
      Apricot
      Plum
      Caramel Bavarian cream
      Cornstarch pudding with chocolate sauce
        with berry sauce
        with custard sauce
      Fig tapioca
      Fruit cocktail
      Charlotte russe
      Floating island
      Orange custard
      Fruit gelatin
      Norwegian prune pudding
      Pineapple pudding
      Rice Bavarian pudding
      Rhubarb tapioca
      Snow pudding
      Raisin tapioca
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  FRUITS
    _Sauces_
      Prunes
      Apricots
      Cranberry
      Rhubarb
      Apple
      Stewed figs
    Baked apples
    Cherries
      White
      Red
    Oranges
      whole
      sliced
    Bananas
    Dates with whipped cream
    Grapefruit
    Pears
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________


  ICE CREAMS
    _Orange parfait Mousse_
      Maple
      Pineapple
      Vanilla nut
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Sherbets_
      Lemon
      Orange
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _Ice cream_
      Vanilla
      Strawberry
      Chocolate
      Maple
      Macaroon
      Greengage
      Peach
      Tutti Frutti
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________


  ICES
    Orange
    Lemon
    Strawberry
    Apricot
    Pineapple
    Grape
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________


  CAKES
    Yellow or white cake
      with vanilla frosting
      with fig frosting
      with raisin frosting
      with cocoanut frosting
      with maple frosting
      with nut frosting
      with orange frosting
      with chocolate frosting
      with nut and raisin frosting
      with pineapple frosting
      with date frosting
      with maraschino cherry frosting
    Chocolate cake
    Lady Baltimore cake
    Lord Baltimore cake
    Fudge cake
    Apple-sauce cake
    Gingerbread
      with whipped cream
      with chocolate frosting
    Sponge cake with frosting
    Sponge cake with whipped cream
    Lemon filled layer cake
    Individual cakes
    Spice cake
    Banana cake with meringue
    Marble cake
    Sunshine cake
    Angel food cake
    Strawberry cake (white cake, with sliced strawberries in the frosting)
    French pastries
    Martha Washington pie
    Cream puffs with vanilla custard filling
      with chocolate custard filling
      with whipped cream
    Tarts
      Lemon
      Orange
    Marguerites
    Cookies
      Fruit
      Sugar
      Spice
      Oatmeal
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    Doughnuts
      Plain
      Raised
    Jelly roll with jelly filling
      with chocolate custard filling
      with vanilla custard filling
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________
    ___________________


  PIES
    _Two-crust_
      Canned apple
      Fresh apple
      Cranberry pie, latticed
      Cranberry and raisin
      Blueberry
      Apricot (dried)
      Red raspberry
      Black raspberry
      Blackberry
      Loganberry
      Gooseberry
      Gooseberry and raisin
      Cherry
      Mince
      Rhubarb
      Peach
      Raisin
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

    _One-crust_
      Lemon
      Banana cream
      Custard
      Pumpkin
      Chocolate
      Butterscotch
      Apricot cream
      Pineapple
      Cream
      Cocoanut cream
      Sour cream
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________
      ___________________

  BEVERAGES
    Coffee
    Tea
      Green
      Black
      Iced
    Chocolate
      with whipped cream
      with marshmallows
    Cocoa
      Hot
      Iced
    Milk
    Buttermilk
    Lemonade
    Lemonade and orangeade
    Orange juice
    Ginger-ale lemonade with mint
    Fruit punch
    Spiced grapejuice


SEASONAL CHART OF FOODS

(Spaces are left for additions)

  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |           |WINTER        |SPRING        |SUMMER     |FALL          |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Soups      |Celery        |Fresh         |           |Celery        |
  |           |Oyster stew   |  asparagus   |           |Oyster stew   |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Meats      |Sausage       |Lamb          |Lamb       |Sausage       |
  |           |Spare ribs    |              |           |Spare ribs    |
  |           |Fried rabbit  |              |           |Fried rabbit  |
  |           |Turkey        |              |           |Turkey        |
  |           |Goose         |              |           |Goose         |
  |           |Duck          |              |           |Duck          |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Meat       |              |Mushrooms     |           |Stuffed       |
  |Substitutes|              |              |           |  peppers     |
  |           |              |              |           |Mushrooms     |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Fish       |Oysters       |              |           |Oysters       |
  |           |  creamed     |              |           |  creamed     |
  |           |  scalloped   |              |           |  scalloped   |
  |           |  fried       |              |           |  fried       |
  |           |  cocktail    |              |           |  cocktail    |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Vegetables |Sweet potatoes|New potatoes  |String     |Sweet potatoes|
  |           |  baked       |  buttered    |  beans    |  baked       |
  |           |  boiled      |  with parsley|Lima beans |  boiled      |
  |           |  browned     |  creamed     |Fresh peas |  browned     |
  |           |  glazed      |Asparagus     |Corn on cob|  glazed      |
  |           |  mashed      |  buttered    |Eggplant   |  mashed      |
  |           |  fried       |  creamed     |Summer     |  fried       |
  |           |  scalloped   |              |  squash   |  scalloped   |
  |           |    with      |              |Tomatoes   |    with      |
  |           |    apples    |              |           |    apples    |
  |           |Cauliflower   |              |           |Hubbard       |
  |           |  creamed     |              |           |  squash      |
  |           |  buttered    |              |           |  baked       |
  |           |  scalloped   |              |           |  mashed      |
  |           |Hubbard       |              |           |Tomatoes      |
  |           |  squash      |              |           |Parsnips      |
  |           |  baked       |              |           |Eggplant      |
  |           |  mashed      |              |           |Brussels      |
  |           |Parsnips      |              |           |  sprouts     |
  |           |Brussels      |              |           |Celery        |
  |           |  sprouts     |              |           |  creamed     |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Salads     |Grapefruit    |Fresh         |Cucumber   |Stuffed       |
  |           |              |  asparagus   |Fresh young|  celery      |
  |           |              |Cucumber      |  onion    |Cucumbers     |
  |           |              |Fresh young   |Radishes   |Tomato        |
  |           |              |  onion       |Tomato     |Grapefruit    |
  |           |              |Radishes      |           |              |
  |           |              |Watercress    |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Breads     |Cranberry     |Hot cross     |Blueberry  |Cranberry     |
  |           |  muffins     |  buns        |  muffins  |  muffins     |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Desserts   |Mince pie     |Baked         |Blueberries|Mince pie     |
  |           |Pumpkin pie   |  rhubarb     |Raspberries|Pumpkin pie   |
  |           |Cranberry pie |Rhubarb       |           |Cranberry pie |
  |           |  jelly       |  tapioca     |           | jelly        |
  |           |  sauce       |Strawberry    |           | sauce        |
  |           |Grapefruit    |  shortcake   |           |Grapefruit    |
  |           |              |Fresh         |           |Fresh pears   |
  |           |              |  pineapple   |           |Baked pears   |
  |           |              |  sauce       |Fresh apple|Fresh apricots|
  |           |              |Fresh         |  sauce    |Fresh peaches |
  |           |              |  strawberries|Fresh      |Fresh plums   |
  |           |              |              |  apricots |Concord       |
  |           |              |              |Fresh      |  grapes      |
  |           |              |              | peaches   |Tokay grapes  |
  |           |              |              |Fresh plums|Cantaloupe    |
  |           |              |              |Concord    |              |
  |           |Cranberry and |Rhubarb pie   |  grapes   |              |
  |           |  raisin pie  |              |Cantaloupe |              |
  |           |Raisin pie    |Rhubarb and   |           |Watermelon    |
  |           |              |  raisin pie  |Watermelon |Cranberry and |
  |           |              |              |           |  raisin pie  |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Beverages  |Hot cocoa     |Lemonade      |Lemonade   |              |
  |           |Hot chocolate |Lemonade      |Lemonade   |              |
  |           |              |  with fresh  |  with     |              |
  |           |              |  mint        |  fresh    |              |
  |           |              |Iced cocoa    |  mint     |              |
  |           |              |Iced chocolate|Iced tea   |              |
  |           |              |Iced coffee   |Iced cocoa |              |
  |           |              |              |Iced       |              |
  |           |              |              |  chocolate|              |
  |           |              |              |Iced coffee|              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
  |Breakfast  |Buckwheat     |              |           |Buckwheat     |
  | dishes    |  cakes with  |              |           |  cakes with  |
  |           |  sausage     |              |           |  sausage     |
  |           |Fried hominy  |              |           |              |
  |           |  cakes       |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  |           |              |              |           |              |
  +-----------+--------------+--------------+-----------+--------------+


POPULAR FOOD COMBINATIONS

Since it is customary to plan the menu, using the meat as a basis, and
since custom and good usage make certain combinations popular, a list of
such combinations is given below with the idea that others may be added
as desired.

SUGGESTIVE AND POPULAR FOOD COMBINATIONS

  +---------+------------------+--------------------+------------------+
  |KIND OF  |VEGETABLE         |SALAD, SAUCE AND    |DESSERT           |
  |MEAT     |COMBINATION       |BREAD COMBINATION   |COMBINATION       |
  +---------+------------------+--------------------+------------------+
  |Beef     |Potatoes-Irish    |                    |                  |
  |         |  (prepared in any|                    |                  |
  |         |  form)           |                    |                  |
  |         |Cauliflower       |                    |                  |
  |         |Beets             |                    |                  |
  |         |Salsify           |                    |                  |
  |         |Tomatoes          |                    |                  |
  |         |Mushrooms         |                    |                  |
  |         |Corn              |                    |                  |
  |         |                  |                    |                  |
  |Beef,    |Cabbage           |Cabbage slaw        |                  |
  |  corned |Boiled potatoes   |Perfection salad    |                  |
  |         |Cauliflower       |  with mayonnaise   |                  |
  |         |Brussels sprouts  |Tartare sauce       |                  |
  |         |                  |                    |                  |
  |Chicken  |Sweet potatoes    |Head lettuce        |                  |
  |         |Squash            |Tomato              |                  |
  |         |Celery            |Cucumber            |                  |
  |         |Onions            |Asparagus           |                  |
  |         |Asparagus         |Fruit               |                  |
  |         |Peas              |Cranberry muffins   |                  |
  |         |Green corn        |Beaten biscuit      |                  |
  |         |Mushrooms         |Hot biscuit         |                  |
  |         |Rice              |Cranberry sauce     |                  |
  |         |                  |                    |                  |
  |Fish     |Tomatoes          |Tartare sauce       |Lemon pie         |
  |         |Onions            |Hollandaise sauce   |Fruit gelatin     |
  |         |French fried      |Egg sauce           |Fruit cocktail    |
  |         |  potatoes        |Lemon sauce         |Lemon rice pudding|
  |         |Creamed potatoes  |Tomato sauce        |                  |
  |         |Browned potatoes  |Vegetable salads    |Fruit tapiocas    |
  |         |Spinach with lemon| (of all kinds)     |Baked rhubarb     |
  |         |Stuffed peppers   |Perfection salad    |Pineapple pudding |
  |         |                  |Cucumber sauce      |                  |
  |         |                  |                    |                  |
  |Ham      |Potatoes          |Potato salad        |Pumpkin pie       |
  |         |  Creamed         |Cabbage slaw        |Indian pudding    |
  |         |  Browned         |All vegetable       |Apple pie         |
  |         |  Parsley buttered|  combination salads|Baked apples      |
  |         |  Baked           |Spinach salad       |Apple fritters    |
  |         |Sweet potatoes    |Head lettuce        |Apple sauce       |
  |         |  Baked           |Apple salad         |Apple dumplings   |
  |         |  Glazed          |Mustard sauce       |Apple tapioca     |
  |         |  Fried           |Steamed brown       |Baked custard     |
  |         |  Mashed          |  bread             |Ginger cake       |
  |         |Carrots           |Corn muffins        |                  |
  |         |Hominy            |Corn bread          |                  |
  |         |Rice              |Hot biscuit         |                  |
  |         |Beans             |                    |                  |
  |         |  Lima, baked     |                    |                  |
  |         |  Navy, baked     |                    |                  |
  |         |  String          |                    |                  |
  |         |Spinach           |                    |                  |
  |         |Corn              |                    |                  |
  |         |Cabbage           |                    |                  |
  |         |Brussels sprouts  |                    |                  |
  |         |Cauliflower       |                    |                  |
  |         |                  |                    |                  |
  |Lamb and |Potatoes          |                    |                  |
  |  mutton |  Mashed          |                    |                  |
  |         |  Browned         |                    |                  |
  |         |  Parsley buttered|                    |                  |
  |         |    (with chops)  |                    |                  |
  |         |Peas              |Sauces              |                  |
  |         |Carrots           |  Mint              |                  |
  |         |Asparagus         |  Caper             |                  |
  |         |Tomatoes          |  Red currant jelly |                  |
  |         |                  |                    |                  |
  |Pork     |Tomatoes          |Cranberry sauce     |Acid desserts     |
  |  (_See_ |                  |                    |                  |
  |   Ham)  |Parsnips          |                    |                  |
  |         |                  |                    |                  |
  |Veal     |Potatoes          |All vegetable salads|                  |
  |         |  Mashed          |All fruit salads    |                  |
  |         |  Browned         |Hot breads or rolls |                  |
  |         |  Creamed         |                    |                  |
  |         |    (with breaded |                    |                  |
  |         |    veal)         |                    |                  |
  |         |Sweet potatoes    |                    |                  |
  |         |  (in any form)   |                    |                  |
  |         |Celery            |                    |                  |
  |         |Cauliflower       |                    |                  |
  |         |Cabbage           |                    |                  |
  |         |Brussels sprouts  |                    |                  |
  |         |String beans      |                    |                  |
  |         |Tomatoes          |                    |                  |
  |         |Peas              |                    |                  |
  +---------+------------------+--------------------+------------------+


WAYS OF USING LEFT-OVER FOODS

  +---------------------------------+----------------------------------+
  | LEFT-OVER MEATS                 | LEFT-OVER VEGETABLES             |
  +---------------------------------+----------------------------------+
  |Croquettes                       |Buttered vegetables may be used in|
  |Scalloped meat with rice or      |  Soup                            |
  |  or potato                      |    Creole soup                   |
  |Shepherd's pie                   |                                  |
  |Ham with scrambled eggs          |  Meat stews                      |
  |Ham fondue or omelet             |  Hash                            |
  |Hash                             |  Salmon loaf (peas and celery)   |
  |Hash with poached eggs           |  Peas in omelet                  |
  |Meat pie (biscuit)               |  Stuffed peppers                 |
  |Meat pie with dressing           |  Stuffed tomatoes                |
  |Meat balls rolled in cooked rice |Rice may be used in               |
  |Minced meat on toast             |  Scalloped rice with cheese      |
  |Mincemeat for pie                |  Soups                           |
  |Minced meat in ramekins          |  Puddings                        |
  |Stews                            |  Croquettes                      |
  |Stuffed peppers                  |  Hash                            |
  |Stuffed tomato                   |  Salmon or fish loaves           |
  |Meat bones cooked for stock      |Potatoes, used same as rice       |
  |                                 |All creamed vegetables can be     |
  |                                 |  scalloped or used in soup       |
  +---------------------------------+----------------------------------+

  +-------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
  |LEFT-OVER FRUITS   |LEFT-OVER BREADS   |LEFT-OVER DAIRY PRODUCTS    |
  |AND JUICES         |AND CAKES          |AND EGGS                    |
  +-------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
  |Blanc manges       |Bread puddings     |Dairy                       |
  |Brown Betty        |Brown bread        |  Sour milk                 |
  |Cocktail           |Brown Betty        |    cakes                   |
  |Cobbler            |Crumb pancakes     |    corn bread              |
  |Scalloped fruit    |Crumb cookies      |    gingerbread             |
  |Gelatin            |Crumb muffins      |    muffins                 |
  |Mince pie filling  |Dressing           |    pancakes                |
  |Fruit salads       |Scalloped fruit    |  Sour cream                |
  |Sherbets and ices  |Fondues            |    butter                  |
  |Tapiocas           |Meat loaf          |    corn bread              |
  |Whips              |Hamburg balls      |    spice cake              |
  |                   |Stewed tomatoes    |    salad dressing          |
  |                   |                   |  Cheese                    |
  |                   |                   |    bean loaf               |
  |                   |                   |    cottage cheese loaf     |
  |                   |                   |    cottage cheese          |
  |                   |                   |      croquettes            |
  |                   |                   |    rice and cheese         |
  |                   |                   | SALADS                     |
  |                   |                   |    souffles                |
  |                   |                   |    fondues                 |
  |                   |                   |  Eggs, broken              |
  |                   |                   |    dipping mixture         |
  |                   |                   |    cakes                   |
  |                   |                   |    custards                |
  |                   |                   |    croquettes              |
  |                   |                   |    salad dressing          |
  +-------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+


GARNISHES

Clever use of garnishes will do a great deal to make servings
attractive, to develop surprise and stimulate appetite.

A list of garnishes appropriate to different kinds of food appears
below. Of course there are many others, and the number of different ways
in which ordinary garnishes can be used effectively is surprisingly
large. The alert manager will observe what others in his field are
doing, and will discover many ingenious ideas by reading food journals
and women's magazines.

The garnishes used for soups are practically the same whether for cream
or clear soups.


  Wafers, cheese and plain
  Croutons
  Olives
  Radishes
  Celery hearts
  Whipped cream (on cream soups)


Some meat garnishes can be used at all times; others are especially
adapted to certain kinds of meat.

  In general
    Parsley
    Watercress, in season
    Mixed pickles

  For steaks
    Lemons cut in fancy shapes
    Sauted mushrooms
    Potato roses
    Stuffed tomatoes
    Stuffed peppers
    Grilled and buttered Brussels sprouts

  For fish
    Lemons, in slices and cut in fancy shapes
    Cucumber baskets, filled with dressing
    Parsley
    Watercress
    Clam shells, stuffed with clams and mushrooms
    Mushrooms, sauted
    Potatoes, cut in fancy shapes, such as shoe strings
      or lattice, and fried in deep fat

There are certain garnishes which it is customary to use with salads,
especially with chicken salad.

  For chicken salad
    Hard-cooked eggs, sliced or cut in eighths
    Lemons, sliced
    Pickles
    Paprika
    Parsley
    Capers
    Olives
    Head lettuce cups

  For fish salad
    Pickles
    Olives
    Lemons, cut in fancy shapes
    Cucumber baskets holding extra salad dressing
    Paprika
    Parsley

  For fruit salad
    Tiny cheese balls
    Cheese balls rolled in chopped nuts
    Tiny sandwiches
    Olives
      green
      ripe
      stuffed
    Cheese straws in fancy shapes

Very often where sandwiches are ordered they will serve as the main dish
of the luncheon meal. They should be made as appetizing as possible by
the use of suitable garnishes.

  Pickles
  Olives
  Cheese balls
  Parsley
  Watercress
  Attractive paper or plain linen doilies
  Nut meats

Desserts by their very nature, require some garnish to make them the
perfect and satisfying last course which they should be. Candied fruit,
marshmallows, slices of fresh orange or strawberries in season, whipped
cream and bright candies add the needed bit of color. Here the use of
paper doilies, glasses and attractively shaped china dishes is a great
factor in appearance.




CHAPTER V

FORMS


THE IMPORTANCE AND USE OF FORMS

Printed forms or other practical aids which may help to reduce menu
planning to a systematic routine are invaluable. Forms such as the party
engagement blanks, shown elsewhere, and the meat order blank and menu
blanks below tend to a desirable standardization. Since meat orders for
the week are usually made out first and the menus planned around the
meats, a form similar to the one shown below, with adaptations for the
particular institution, may be helpful.

The lists of foods and the list of seasonal changes and garnishes
contained in this book will save mental effort and tedium in planning by
suggesting new combinations and variety.

Probably no single device will serve different kinds of institutions,
but the principle of using appropriate printed forms to help in
remembering details holds good for all institutions.

MEAT ORDER

WEEK BEGINNING December 6, 1920. WHERE University Cafeteria

  +--------+-------+-------------+---------------+--------+------------+
  |        |       |             |               |        |            |
  |DELIVER |AMOUNT |CUTS         |SPECIFICATIONS |COST    |USE         |
  |        |       |             |               |        |            |
  +--------+-------+----+--------+---------------+--------+------------+
  |_Mon._  |30 lb. |beef shoulder|               |.13     |Mon. night  |
  |A.M.    |       |  clod       |               |        |            |
  |A.M.    |2 lb.  |bacon        |Best grade,    |.37     |Tues.       |
  |        |       |             | cut 36 slices |        |morning     |
  |        |       |             | to lb.        |        |            |
  |P.M.    |40 lb. |pork loin    |10 to 12 lb.   |.26     |Tues. noon  |
  |        |       |             | loin          |        |            |
  |P.M.    |20 lb. |beef stew    |1-inch cubes,  |.13-1/2 |Tues. noon  |
  |        |       |             | no bones,     |        |            |
  |        |       |             | no gristle    |        |            |
  +--------+-------+-------------+---------------+--------+------------+
  |_Tues._ |20 lb. |short ribs of|               |.07-1/2 |Tues. noon  |
  |A.M.    |       | beef        |               |        |            |
  |A.M.    |15 lb. |sausage      |best grade, no |.18     |Tues. night |
  |        |       |             | cereal        |        |            |
  |A.M.    |20 lb. |cottage      |               |.12     |Tues.       |
  |        |       | cheese      |               |        | night      |
  |P.M.    |50 lb. |chickens,    |to arrive      |.24     |Wed. noon   |
  |        |       | 4 to 5 lbs. | _frozen_      |        |            |
  |        |       | each        |               |        |            |
  +--------+-------+-------------+---------------+--------+------------+
  |_Wed._  |20 lb. |veal steak   |round, cut thin|.26     |Wed. night  |
  |A.M.    |       | for rolling |               |        |            |
  |A.M.    |5 lb.  |sweetbreads  |veal           |.75     |Wed. night  |
  |A.M.    |1 qt.  |oysters      |standard       |.70     |Wed. night  |
  |        |       |             | selects, 80   | per qt.|            |
  |        |       |             | to qt.        |        |            |
  |P.M.    |50 lb. |beef, round  |1 inch thick   |.13-1/2 |Thurs. noon |
  |        |       | steak       |               |        |            |
  +--------+-------+-------------+---------------+--------+------------+
  |_Thurs._|  2    |hams         |14 to 16 lb.   |.30     |Thurs. night|
  |A.M.    |       |             | each          |        |            |
  |P.M.    |55 lb. |veal roast   |round          |.26     |Fri. noon   |
  +--------+-------+-------------+---------------+--------+------------+
  |_Fri._  |2 qt.  |oysters      |standard       |.70 per |Fri. night  |
  |A.M.    |       |             | selects, 80   | qt.    |            |
  |        |       |             | to qt.        |        |            |
  |A.M.    |20 lb. |rib roast of |               |.25     |Fri. night  |
  |        |       | beef        |               |        |            |
  |P.M.    |20 lb. |pork chops   |cut 4 to lb.   |.18     |Sat. noon   |
  |P.M.    |15 lb. |veal hearts  |               |.11     |Sat. noon   |
  +--------+-------+-------------+---------------+--------+------------+
  |_Sat._  |40 lb. |tenderloin   |prime          |.40     |Mon. noon   |
  |A.M.    |       |             |               |        |            |
  +--------+-------+-------------+---------------+--------+------------+

MENU FORM

MENUS UNIVERSITY FARM AND SHEVLIN CAFETERIAS

  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     DATE             |     DATE             |     DATE             |
  |    =Monday=          |    =Tuesday=         |    =Wednesday=       |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |     BREAKFAST        |
  |     FRUITS           |     FRUITS           |     FRUITS           |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     CEREALS          |     CEREALS          |     CEREALS          |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     HOT DISHES       |     HOT DISHES       |     HOT DISHES       |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     LUNCH            |     LUNCH            |     LUNCH            |
  |     SOUP             |     SOUP             |     SOUP             |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     MEATS            |     MEATS            |     MEATS            |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     VEGETABLES       |     VEGETABLES       |     VEGETABLES       |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     SALADS           |     SALADS           |     SALADS           |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREADS           |     BREADS           |     BREADS           |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     DESSERTS         |     DESSERTS         |     DESSERTS         |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     DINNER           |     DINNER           |     DINNER           |
  |     SOUP             |     SOUP             |     SOUP             |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     MEATS            |     MEATS            |     MEATS            |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     VEGETABLES       |     VEGETABLES       |     VEGETABLES       |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     SALADS           |     SALADS           |     SALADS           |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     BREADS           |     BREADS           |     BREADS           |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     DESSERTS         |     DESSERTS         |     DESSERTS         |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  |                      |                      |                      |
  +----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+


AN OUTLINE FORM FOR SPECIAL DINNERS

The efficiency of an organization is judged by the degree of routine
which each phase of the work assumes. In most institutions the serving
of special dinners is quite apart from the ordinary routine of business.
If this service is to be handled simply and efficiently, all of its
various steps must be listed and taken up in an orderly fashion with the
end in view of perfecting an emergency organization as efficient as that
which regulates the daily tasks.

First of all, arrangements made with those who are giving the dinner
should be definite and complete. In order to prevent misunderstandings,
a printed blank such as that shown below (with any adaptations found
necessary) will prove helpful. This may be made out in duplicate, one
copy being retained by the manager and one by those engaging the
services.

Reduced to their simplest form, the steps to be followed in organizing
this work are outlined below.

I. Fill in, in duplicate, the printed blank

  DINNER ENGAGEMENTS

  Date ___________________        Day of week _______________________

  Time ___________________

  Engagement made by ___________________    Phone ___________________

  Organization or Club ___________________

  Price ___________________       Probable Number ___________________

  Room desired ____________       Flowers ___________________________

    Style of service:
    Cafeteria service ____
    Table service ____
    Tables set and served by guests ____

  Date Guaranteed Number is to be reported ___________________

  Leeway granted (either way) on guaranteed number
                    On 25-40    2 plates, more or less
                       50-60    4 plates, more or less
                      75-100    6 plates, more or less
                     125-175    8 plates, more or less
                     200 up    10 plates, more or less

  NOTICE.--Care should be taken to have the guaranteed number of plates
  accurately stated.

  II. Plan the menu. If desired, the above form may include space for
    writing in the menu, in order that both parties may have a clear
    understanding of just what is to be served

  III. Make out order list
    _a._ For food
    _b._ For dish rental (if necessary)
    _c._ For printing (if necessary)
    _d._ For flowers or other decorations

  IV. Employment of help
    _a._ Rescheduling the regular help
    _b._ Overtime for the regular help
    _c._ Hiring of additional help

  V. Division of the work
    _a._ Directions to cooks
      1. Copy of the menu
      2. Recipes and amounts to be prepared
    _b._ Service of the food
      1. In the kitchen
        (_a_) Instructions for counting out and arrangement of utensils
            for the service of the food
        (_b_) Organization of each serving center, where the number
            served is so large that more than one center is necessary
        (_c_) Assignment of special duties to workers at the serving
            center
        (_d_) A drawing or serving of a sample plate showing arrangement
            of food on the plate
      2. In the dining room
        (_a_) Directions to the head waitress and waitresses
          (1) List of dishes to be counted out and carried to serving
              center, warming ovens or refrigerators
          (2) Directions for setting the tables. A cover may be set
              or a sketch made to show the proper arrangement
              of the silver, napkin and the glass
          (3) Decoration of the tables
          (4) Arrangement of the serving tables
          (5) A copy of the menu
          (6) Specific instructions for serving food to the guests

  VI. Records
    _a._ Cost of the food
      1. Cost of food should be figured on basis of recipes and quantities
          used, and listed according to the order in which the food
          appears in the meal
      2. Left-overs listed
      3. Approximate value of left-overs as listed
      4. Net food cost is total food cost less the value of usable left-overs
    _b._ Cost of labor
      1. Time spent by regular employees
      2. Overtime spent by regular employees
      3. Extra labor employed for occasion
      4. Total labor cost
    _c._ Overhead cost
      1. Flowers or other decorations
      2. Printing of menu cards or place cards
      3. Favors if supplied
      4. Dish rental and breakage
      5. Estimated heat, light, fuel, laundry and other overhead
    _d._ Summary
      1. Total cost
          food
          labor
          overhead
      2. Total receipts
      3. Profit or loss
    _e._ Number served
    _f._ Per capita cost




CHAPTER VI

RECIPES


In the pages that follow are some two hundred recipes for use in
institutions. It will be noted that throughout these recipes, measures
are used rather than weights. This for two main reasons. First, cooks,
except for highly trained professionals, use measures more easily and
with greater success than weights. Second, most institutions cannot
afford an adequate number of accurate scales; and scales that are not
accurate are worse than useless. Measures, on the other hand, are
inexpensive and always available. It may be said that because of the
amounts and the size of the measures used in large quantity cookery
there is not the degree of inaccuracy which is found in measuring small
quantities.

It is hoped the form of the recipes with the spaces for figuring costs
and calories will be of value from the commercial and classroom
standpoint.

Stars indicate those recipes in which left-overs may be used to
particular advantage.


SOUPS


BOUILLON

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Beef, cubed           |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Bones, veal           |          |7-1/2 |        |         |
  Water                 |4 gal.    |   lb.|        |         |
  Peppercorns           |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Carrots, diced        |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Onions, diced         |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Celery, diced         |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Turnips, diced        |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Egg whites and shells |7         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cut the meat in cubes and soak two thirds of it in the cold water for
about three fourths of an hour. Sear the remainder and add to the meat
which is soaking. Heat the meat, veal bone and water to boiling and let
simmer for four or five hours. Add the seasonings and the vegetables and
cook until the vegetables are soft. Pour the whole through a colander
and cool. When the fat has set, remove and clear by mixing the cold
stock with the shells and slightly beaten whites of eggs. Bring the
mixture to a boil, stirring constantly. Let simmer 15 to 20 minutes.
Strain through two or three thicknesses of cheese cloth.

  Number of servings 64-96
  Amount of one serving 1/3 to 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHICKEN SOUP

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Stock, chicken        |4 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Onions                |1-1/4 lb. |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/3 to    |      |        |         |
                        | 1/2 c.   |      |        |         |
  Celery salt           |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Green peppers, chopped|1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Rice                  |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the chopped onions, green peppers, rice, salt and celery salt to the
chicken stock and cook until the rice is tender.

  Number of servings 85
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


NOODLE SOUP

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Eggs                  |3         |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Stock                 |4 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Onions                |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  Salt                  |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Celery salt           |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

To make the noodles, beat the eggs lightly and add the flour and salt.
This makes a very stiff mixture. Put the mixture on a board and roll as
thin as possible. Sprinkle the dough with flour and roll it into a tight
roll. From this, slice the noodles. Shake out and let dry. Heat the
stock to boiling, add the seasonings and the noodles and cook until
done. Noodles may be made up and kept for some time in the refrigerator.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


TOMATO RICE SOUP

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Stock                 |5 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Green peppers         |10       |       |        |         |
  Onions                |         |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Tomatoes              |1 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Rice                  |2-1/2 c. |       |        |         |
  Carrots, finely diced |1-1/2 c. |       |        |         |
  Flour                 |3 c.     |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/3 c.   |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1-1/2 c. |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Chop the onions, carrots and green peppers and add to the boiling salted
stock and tomatoes. Add the rice and cook until the rice is tender.
Melt the fat, stir in the flour and add to the hot liquid to thicken.

  Number of servings 115
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**VEGETABLE SOUP

  --------------------+------------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS         |AMOUNT      |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  --------------------+------------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Stock               | 1-1/2 gal. |      |        |         |
  Tomatoes, #10 cans  | 2          |      |        |         |
  Bay leaves          | 3          |      |        |         |
  Water               | 1-1/2 gal. |      |        |         |
  Carrots, diced      | 1 pt.      |      |        |         |
  Celery, diced       | 1 qt.      |      |        |         |
  Onions              |            |1 lb. |        |         |
  Rice                | 1 c.       |      |        |         |
  Salt                | 1/4 c.     |      |        |         |
  --------------------+------------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the seasonings to the boiling stock, tomatoes and water. When the
vegetables have become softened, add the rice and cook for 15 to 20
minutes. Do not strain.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount of one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM OF CELERY SOUP

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Celery stock         |6 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Onions               |          |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Butter substitute    |          |3/4 lb.|        |         |
  Flour                |3 c.      |       |        |         |
  Milk                 |7 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Paprika              |1/2 tsp.  |       |        |         |
  Red pepper           |1/4 tsp.  |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |1/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Make a celery stock by cooking the leaves and outside stalks in water to
cover. Rub through a sieve. Cook finely chopped onion with the required
amount of stock. Melt the fat, stir in the flour and add the hot milk to
make a white sauce. Combine puree and white sauce. Add paprika, red
pepper and salt just before serving.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM OF CORN SOUP

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Corn                 |1-1/2 gal.|       |        |         |
  Water                |1 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Onion                |          |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Butter substitute    |3/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  Flour                |1-1/2 c.  |       |        |         |
  Milk                 |2 gal.    |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |1/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  Paprika              |1/2 tsp.  |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+-----------

Cook the corn with the water and chopped onion and rub through a sieve.
Melt the fat, stir in the flour and add the hot milk to make a white
sauce. Combine white sauce with puree. Add salt and paprika just before
serving.

  Number of servings 64
  Amount of one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM OF LIMA BEAN SOUP

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Butter substitute     |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Lima beans, cooked    |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Grated onion or       |          |      |        |         |
      chives            |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Chopped parsley       |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the lima beans with the onion until soft and rub through a puree
sieve. Melt the fat, stir in the flour and add hot milk to make a white
sauce. Combine the puree and white sauce and add the salt just before
serving.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM OF PEA SOUP

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Peas                  |2 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Onion                 |         |1/8 lb.|        |         |
  Bay leaf              |1 leaf   |       |        |         |
  Milk                  |6 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.   |       |        |         |
  Flour                 |1 c.     |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the peas, together with their juice from the cans, and the onion
and bay leaf until the peas are soft. Rub through a puree sieve. Melt
the fat, stir in the flour and add the hot milk to make a white sauce.
Combine puree with white sauce. Add salt just before serving.

  Number of servings 38
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM OF SPINACH SOUP

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Spinach Juice         |1 c.     |       |        |         |
  Onion                 |         |1/8 lb.|        |         |
  Milk                  |6 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |         |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Flour                 |1 c.     |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Chop the onion and add to one half of a #10 can of spinach and cook
until the onions are tender. Scald the milk. Melt the fat and add the
flour. When thoroughly mixed add to the hot milk, stirring constantly.
When the spinach is seasoned, drain, rubbing lightly through a puree
sieve until you obtain one cup of spinach juice. Add the spinach juice
to the thickened milk and season.

  Number of servings 35
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM OF TOMATO SOUP

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Tomatoes              |1 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Bay leaves            |2        |       |        |         |
  Onion                 |         |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Sugar                 |1/8 c.   |       |        |         |
  Soda                  |2 tsp.   |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.   |       |        |         |
  Flour                 |1 c.     |       |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the tomatoes with the bay leaves and onion. Rub through a puree
sieve and add the sugar and soda. Melt fat, stir in the flour and add
hot milk to make a white sauce. Combine puree and white sauce by pouring
puree into white sauce. Add salt just before serving.

  Number of servings 36
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


OYSTER STEW

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |4 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Oysters               |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk and add the butter substitute, paprika and oysters. Cook
until the edges of the oysters begin to curl. Add the salt just before
serving. If the soup must stand some time before all is used, the
oysters should be combined with the milk only as needed.

  Number of servings 64
  Amount of one serving 1 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PEANUT BUTTER SOUP

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Peanut butter         |          |6 lbs.|        |         |
  Milk                  |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Celery Stock          |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1-1/4 gal |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the water to the peanut butter and mix to a smooth paste. Heat the
milk and celery stock, reserving sufficient liquid to make a paste of
the flour. When the liquid is hot add the flour paste. When thickened
add the peanut butter mixture and the salt.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount of one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MEATS


BEEF A LA MODE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Beef round            |          |50 lb.|        |         |
  Carrots, chopped      |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Peppers, chopped      |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Tomatoes, #10 can     |1         |      |        |         |
  Onions, chopped       |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |3 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Place the meat in a roasting pan in a hot oven to sear. When well
seared, cover with water and continue cooking in a medium oven for from
four to five hours. About an hour and a half before serving add the
chopped carrots, peppers, onions and tomatoes, and salt. Just before
serving thicken the stock with the flour mixed to a paste with water.
The vegetables should be served with the meat.

  Number of servings 200
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**CORNED BEEF HASH

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Corned beef           |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Potatoes, cooked      |          |12 lb.|        |         |
  Onions                |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  Meat stock            |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak and cook the corned beef until tender. Grind or chop the beef,
potatoes and onion and mix with corned beef stock or gravy. Bake in a
hot oven until brown. Serve with tartare sauce.

  Number of servings 70
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED DRIED BEEF ON TOAST

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Dried beef            |          |5 lb. |        |         |
  Flour                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  White sauce           |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Bread, slices         |40        |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Shred the dried beef in small pieces. Melt the fat and saute the dried
beef in it. Add to this one cup of flour and let brown with the beef.
Follow the usual manipulation for white sauce, and when cooked combine
with the beef and serve on toast.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c. and 1/2 slice of bread
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**HAMBURG BALLS

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Ground beef           |         |10 lb. |        |         |
  Crumbs                |3 c.     |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.   |       |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Onion                 |         |1/8 lb.|        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the meat well with crumbs, seasoning and milk. Shape in balls or
cakes and bake in well-greased pans.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**HASH

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Meat, chopped         |6 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Potatoes              |6 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Onions                |2/3 lb.  |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.   |       |        |         |
  Gravy or meat stock   |3 qt.    |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Chop or grind the meat and potatoes. Mix with the onions and salt and
moisten with the gravy or meat stock. Put in shallow pans and bake in
the oven until brown.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**MEAT CROQUETTES

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Meat, chopped         |1 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Rice, uncooked        |1 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Water                 |1 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Onions, chopped       |1/3 lb.  |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.   |       |        |         |
  Stock to mix          |         |       |        |         |
  Crumbs, sifted        |4 c.     |       |        |         |
  Eggs                  |4        |       |        |         |
  Milk                  |1/2 c.   |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the rice in the boiling salted water to which the onions have been
added, until the rice is tender. Add the chopped or cubed meat and if
necessary additional stock to moisten. Using a dipper measuring half a
cup per serving, mold the mixture into croquettes. Put the sifted crumbs
on a board, roll the croquettes in the crumbs, dip in a dipping mixture
made of eggs and milk, roll again in the crumbs and fry in deep fat. If
desired, one gallon of cooked potatoes may be substituted for the rice,
in which case the water also would be omitted.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**MEAT LOAF

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Hamburger             |         |30 lb. |        |         |
  Salt                  |3/4 c.   |       |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |4 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Eggs, whole           |6        |       |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |10       |       |        |         |
  Milk                  |3 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Onions                |         |1 lb.  |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the salt, bread crumbs and onions with the meat. Beat the eggs
slightly and add to the milk. Combine with the meat and mix thoroughly.
Weigh out into loaf pans which have been well greased. Be careful to
press the meat well into the corners of the pan and avoid having the
center of the meat higher than the edges. Bake in a medium hot oven
until the meat is done. This makes nine five-pound loaves, cutting
twenty-four slices each.

  Number of servings 216
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**MEAT LOAF WITH TOMATO AND CELERY

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Meat, ground          |         |20 lb. |        |         |
  Crumbs                |5 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Milk                  |3 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Tomatoes              |3 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Celery, chopped       |2 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Eggs                  |10       |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/3 c.   |       |        |         |
  Onions                |         |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Add the crumbs, tomatoes, chopped celery, salt and onions to the meat
and mix well. Beat the eggs slightly, add the milk and mix with the
meat. Weigh out into well-greased loaf pans and bake in a medium oven.
In order to make the loaves uniform be careful to press the meat well
into the corners of the pans and avoid having the center of the loaf
higher than the sides. One pound of hamburg steak, as purchased, will
make nine servings when the other ingredients that go into the loaf have
been added.

  Number of servings 180
  Amount in one serving 1/5 pound, after cooking
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MEAT PIE

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Stew meat             |20 lb.   |       |        |         |
  Water                 |2 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Onions                |1/2 c.   |       |        |         |
  Potatoes, diced       |2 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/3 c.   |       |        |         |
  Flour                 |4 c.     |       |        |         |
  Biscuit recipe (see   |2/3      |       |        |         |
    page 124)           |of recipe|       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Cut the meat in one-inch cubes and cover with boiling water. Cook just
below the boiling point. When the meat is almost tender add the salt,
onions and potatoes. Mix the flour to a paste with water and thicken the
stock just before serving. Serve one half cup of stew with one biscuit.
The biscuit may be baked separately or the stew may be poured into
baking pans, covered with biscuits and the biscuits baked in the oven.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**MEAT PIE WITH DRESSING

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Dressing              |5 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Meat, cubed           |4-1/2 qt.|       |        |         |
  Onion                 |         |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |6 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  Meat stock            |3 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Flour                 |2 c.     |       |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |1 c.     |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |2 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Cut left-over meat into one-inch cubes and heat in a gravy made of the
seasoned and thickened stock. Line a baking pan with dressing, leaving a
well in the center. Fill this with the meat and gravy and cover with the
buttered crumbs. Bake in a hot oven until brown. When serving, both meat
and dressing should be given.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MEAT STEW

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Meat, cubed           |         |20 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |3 gal.   |       |        |         |
  Onions                |         |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Carrots               |1-1/4 qt.|       |        |         |
  Potatoes              |5 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Flour                 |3 c.     |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.   |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Cover the cubed meat with boiling water and cook just below the boiling
point until tender. About one hour before serving time add the onions,
carrots and salt. The potatoes may be added later, since they require
less cooking. Mix the flour to a paste with water and thicken the stew
after the vegetables are tender.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RIB ROAST OF BEEF

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rib roast             |          |50 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1-1/2 to  |      |        |         |
                        |  2 gal  .|      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3-4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------


Place the meat in a roasting pan and sear in a hot oven. When brown, add
the salt and water and continue the roasting. Baste or turn as is
necessary. Mix the flour to a paste with water and use in making the
gravy.

  Number of servings 125
  Amount in one serving 2/5 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SWISS STEAK

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Round steak, 1 in.   |          |       |        |         |
    thick              |          |20 lb. |        |         |
  Flour                |2-1/2 c.  |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |  1/4 c.  |       |        |         |
  Water                |1-1/2 gal.|       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Trim the steak. Mix the flour and salt and pound into the steak. Sear
the steak in a pan on the top of the stove, put into a roasting pan,
cover with water and cook slowly for from three to four hours.

  Number of servings 45
  Amount in one serving 2/5 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


WEINERS

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Weiners               |         |10 lb. |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the weiners and cut the links apart. Put them in boiling water and
cook until they swell and start to burst. Drain and serve.

  Number of servings 40-42
  Amount in one serving 2
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHICKEN AND BISCUIT

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cooked chicken meat,  |          |      |        |         |
    cubed               |          |12 lb.|        |         |
  Onion                 |          | 1 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Celery salt           |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Stock                 |4 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Biscuit recipe (see   |5/6 of    |      |        |         |
    page 124)           | recipe   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Heat the stock and season with the onion, salt and celery salt. Thicken
with the flour mixed to a paste with some of the cold stock which has
been reserved. Add the chicken meat, and serve with baking-powder
biscuits or on toast. _In ordering chicken_ for the above recipe, _three
and a half to four pounds of chicken, New York dressed, must be ordered
for every pound of cooked chicken meat which is desired_. In cooking
chicken care should be taken to cool the chicken and stock as quickly as
possible and then put into the refrigerator. The chicken should be
cooled out of the stock. From fifty pounds of chicken, New York
dressed, approximately five gallons of stock may be obtained.

  Number of servings 150
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHICKEN A LA KING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Chicken fat           |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Chicken stock         |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Onions, chopped       |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1/2 gal.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/3 to    |      |        |         |
                        |    1/2 c.|      |        |         |
  Cooked chicken meat,  |          |      |        |         |
    cubed               |7-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Pimentos, chopped     |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Green peppers, chopped|1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Fresh mushrooms       |          |2 lb. |        |         |
    or                  |          |      |        |         |
  Canned mushrooms      |3 cans    |      |        |         |
  Butter                |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |16        |      |        |         |
  Toast, 1/2 slices     |150       |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Heat the stock with the onion. Melt the chicken fat, add the flour, and
when well mixed add to the boiling stock, stirring rapidly. Add the
scalded milk, the green peppers, pimentos and cubed chicken. Saute the
mushrooms in the butter and add. Beat the yolks and add them with the
salt, last. Serve on toast, in bread cases or patty shells.

  Number of servings 150
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHICKEN CROQUETTES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Chicken meat, cubed   |          |5 lb. |        |         |
  Rice                  |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Chicken               |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Parsley               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Celery salt           |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Onion juice           |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Chicken stock         |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |8         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Crumbs, sifted        |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the rice and add to the boiling chicken stock to which has been
added all of the seasonings. Make a thick white sauce, using the one
quart of the chicken stock and the flour. Combine with the rice, white
sauce, and add the cubed chicken meat and cool. Form the mixture into
croquettes, dip into sifted crumbs, then into a dipping mixture made of
the eggs and milk and then in crumbs and fry in deep fat.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


ROAST LAMB

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Lamb                  |          |50 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1-1/2 to  |      |        |         |
                        |  2 gal.  |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3-4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the lamb, put in a roasting pan and sear in a hot oven. When brown,
add the salt and water and continue the roasting. Mix the flour to a
paste with water and use in making the gravy.

  Number of servings 125-150
  Amount in one serving 1/3 to 2/5 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BAKED HAM

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Hams, 15 lbs. each    |3         |45 lb.|        |         |
  Sugar                 |6 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cloves, whole         |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Crumbs                |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Put the hams in a kettle, cover with water and bring to a boil. Simmer
for three to four hours or until they are done. When tender remove from
water, peel off the skin and place in a baking pan. Stick the cloves
into the hams and pour over them a syrup made of the vinegar and brown
sugar. Sprinkle them with crumbs and brown in a hot oven.

  Number of servings 175
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BREADED PORK CHOPS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Pork chops            |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Bread crumbs          | 5 c.     |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  | 10       |      |        |         |
  Milk                  | 1-1/4 c. |      |        |         |
  Salt                  | 2/3 c.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a dipping mixture of the eggs and milk. Add to this the salt. Dip
the chops in the mixture, then in the crumbs and place in a well-greased
pan and cook the chops in a medium hot oven. Pork should be well
cooked.

  Number of servings 80-85
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PORK CHOPS WITH DRESSING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Pork chops            |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Broken bread          |2-1/2 gal.|      |        |         |
  Onion                 |          |10 oz.|        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1-1/4 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4  c.   |      |        |         |
  Hot water to moisten  |          |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Place the pork chops in a well-greased baking pan. Sprinkle with salt,
and in the center of each put a quarter of a cup of dressing. Bake in a
medium hot oven until the pork is well cooked. To make the dressing,
melt the fat and add to it the finely chopped onions. When brown pour
over the broken bread. Add the salt and hot water sufficient to moisten.
Avoid getting the dressing too wet.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb. and 1/4 c. dressing
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


ROAST PORK

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Loin of pork          |          |50 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |3/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2-1/2  to |      |        |         |
  Onions                |  3 gal.  |1 lb. |        |         |
  Flour                 |5 to 6 c. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Put the pork in a roasting pan in a hot oven and cook until well seared
and brown. Add the salt and water and continue cooking, turning the
meat or basting as is necessary. When the meat is almost tender add the
chopped onions to the stock to flavor. When tender remove the meat from
the pan and thicken the stock on top of the stove with the flour mixed
to a thin paste with water. The gravy must be strained to remove the
chopped onion.

  Number of servings 125
  Amount in one serving 2/5 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SAUSAGE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sausage               |          |10 lb.|        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sausage, bread crumbs and salt and mold into flattened balls.
There should be four servings to the pound. An ice-cream dipper of the
right size may be used to keep the balls uniform in size.

  Number of servings 44
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BREADED VEAL

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Veal, round steak     |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |8         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs, sifted  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Trim the steak and cut into pieces the size of one serving. Beat the
eggs, add the salt and the milk. Dip the meat in the milk and egg
mixture, then into the crumbs, put into a well-greased roasting pan and
cook in a moderate oven. Turn as is necessary. Veal should be thoroughly
cooked.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BREADED VEAL HEARTS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Veal hearts           |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Bread crumbs, sifted  |2 qt      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |8         |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash and slice the hearts. Make a dipping mixture of the eggs, milk and
salt. Dip the hearts in this mixture, then in the crumbs. Place in a
well-greased roasting pan and cook in a moderate oven until brown and
tender. Turn as is necessary. Veal should be thoroughly cooked.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


ROAST VEAL

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Veal, round          |          |50 lb. |        |         |
  Salt                 |2/3 c.    |       |        |         |
  Onions               |          |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Flour                |5 c.      |       |        |         |
  Water                |2-1/2 gal.|       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Wash or wipe the meat and place in a roasting pan in a hot oven. When
seared, add the salt and water and continue roasting, basting and
turning frequently until the meat is tender. Remove the meat from the
pan, add the onion and cook. Additional water may be added to the
stock. Thicken with the flour mixed to a paste with water.

  Number of servings 200
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


VEAL BIRDS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Veal round steak      |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Dressing              |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Fat                   |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Trim the veal and cut in pieces about four to five inches long and two
and one half inches wide. The scraps of meat that are trimmed off may be
added to the dressing. Salt the meat, cover with dressing, roll, and
fasten with toothpicks. Melt the fat in a skillet on top of the stove
and sear until brown. Put the birds into a baking pan and pour the milk
and water around them. Bake in a moderate oven until tender. Four birds
may be obtained from one pound of meat.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/4 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


VEAL HEARTS EN CASSEROLE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Veal hearts           |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Flour                 |2-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Bacon fat             |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Stock                 |1-1/2 gal.|      |        |         |
  Green peppers, chopped|1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Onions                |1 lb.     |      |        |         |
  Carrots, diced        |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Parsley, chopped      |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Celery salt           |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Peppercorns           |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash and slice the hearts, dredge in flour and salt and brown in the
bacon fat. Put the hearts into a roasting pan, pour the stock over them
and add the remaining seasonings and cook in a slow oven until the heart
is tender.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 2/5 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED SWEETBREADS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sweetbreads           |          |5 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  White sauce           |3 qts.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  Bread                 |24 slices |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

If frozen, soak the sweetbreads in cold water for an hour to thaw, then
parboil in acidulated, salted water until tender, about half an hour.
When cooked, drain and plunge into cold water. Remove the tough
connecting membrane. Make the white sauce using the white sauce recipe,
add the fat and paprika and reheat the sweetbreads in the sauce. Serve
with half a slice of toast per person.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LIVER AND BACON

  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT  |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Liver                |        |8 lb.    |        |         |
  Bacon                |        |1-3/4 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                 |2 tbsp. |         |        |         |
  Eggs                 |4       |         |        |         |
  Milk                 |1/4 c.  |         |        |         |
  Crumbs               |3 c.    |         |        |         |
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Slice the liver thin and cut in pieces the size of a serving. Pour hot
water over the liver and let stand fifteen minutes. Drain the liver.
Make a dipping mixture of the eggs and milk and add the salt to it. Dip
the liver in the mixture, then in the crumbs and place in a well-greased
baking pan. Cook in a slow oven until well browned and until the liver
is done. Place the bacon in rows in a baking sheet and cook in a hot
oven until brown. Place a strip of bacon on top of each piece of liver
and serve.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/6 lb. liver and 1 slice bacon
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


TONGUE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tongue, fresh         |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Water                 |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the tongues thoroughly. Put in a kettle and cover with boiling
water to which the salt and vinegar have been added. Cook below the
boiling point until the tongues are tender. Remove the outer skin of the
tongue. Slice thin and serve with mustard sauce.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 1/3 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FISH


CODFISH BALLS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Boneless cod          |          |2 lb. |        |         |
  Eggs                  |30        |      |        |         |
  Potatoes, raw, diced  |          |10 lb.|        |         |
  Butter substitute     |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |2/3 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Shred the codfish and add to the potatoes and cook in boiling water
until the potatoes are tender. Drain thoroughly, add the beaten eggs,
butter substitute, paprika and mash until smooth. Fry the codfish
mixture in deep fat, using an eight-to-the-quart size ice-cream dipper
to keep the servings uniform. Since this mixture contains a large number
of eggs, the balls do not require dipping in eggs and crumbs.

  Number of servings 65
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRIED HALIBUT

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Halibut               |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  | 2/3 c.   |      |        |         |
  Crumbs                | 5 c.     |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  | 5        |      |        |         |
  Milk                  | 3/4 c.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cut the fish in pieces for serving and dip in a mixture made of the
milk, eggs and salt. Dip in crumbs. Place in a well-greased baking pan
and cook in a medium oven until the fish is tender.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 2/3 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRIED OYSTERS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Oysters               |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |8         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Look over the oysters carefully and remove the shells. Dip them in a
dipping mixture made of milk, eggs and salt. Let drain to remove surplus
liquid, dip in the crumbs and fry in deep fat.

  Number of servings 56
  Amount in one serving 5
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


OYSTER COCKTAIL

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Oysters               |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Catsup                |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Grated onion juice    |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Tabasco sauce         |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Celery, chopped       |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Peppers, chopped      |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Look over the oysters carefully and put in cocktail glasses. Mix the
lemon juice, catsup, grated onion, tabasco sauce and salt, and pour over
the oysters. Sprinkle the top with chopped celery and peppers.

  Number of servings 40
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**SCALLOPED OYSTERS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Broken bread          |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Broken crackers       |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tbsp. |      |        |         |
  Onion juice           |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Oysters               |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Look over the oysters carefully for shells. Scald the milk and pour over
the crackers, broken bread, salt, onion juice and butter substitute and
mix. Put a layer of the moistened crackers and bread over the bottom of
a greased baking pan, then a layer of oysters and cover the top with the
bread and cracker mixture. Bake in medium oven until brown.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRIED SALMON

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Salmon                |          |20 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Crumbs                |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |5         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cut the fish in pieces for serving and dip in a mixture made of the
milk, eggs and salt. Dip in crumbs. Place in a well-greased baking pan
and cook in a medium oven until the fish is tender.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 2/3 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SALMON LOAF

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Salmon, 1 lb. cans    |12        |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |16        |      |        |         |
  Celery, diced         |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the salmon, bread crumbs, celery, paprika and salt. Scald the milk
and add to the beaten eggs. Add to the remaining ingredients and put
into well-greased loaf pans. Bake in a moderate oven until the loaf is
firm. This amount makes twenty-five pounds of mixture.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SCALLOPED SALMON

  --------------------+-----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS         |AMOUNT     |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  --------------------+-----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Salmon, 1 lb. cans  |10         |       |        |         |
  Bread, broken       |4 qt.      |       |        |         |
  Milk                |4 qt.      |       |        |         |
  Bay leaves          |1/8 c.     |       |        |         |
  Parsley sprigs      |1/4 c.     |       |        |         |
  Onions              |           |1/8 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                |1-1/2 tbsp.|       |        |         |
  Butter substitute   |1 c.       |       |        |         |
  Flour               |2 c.       |       |        |         |
  Paprika             |1/2 tsp.   |       |        |         |
  Crumbs              |3 c.       |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute   |           |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  --------------------+-----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Add the bay leaves, parsley and onion to the milk and bring to the
boiling point. Melt the fat, add the flour and add to the milk, stirring
rapidly. When the milk has thickened, strain out the seasonings and
pour over the broken bread. Grease a scalloping pan and line with
crumbs. Add a layer of salmon, then a layer of white sauce and bread,
then a layer of salmon and another layer of white sauce. Cover with the
buttered crumbs. Put in an oven to brown.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 2/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MEAT SUBSTITUTES


**CHEESE FONDUE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Broken bread          |8 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cheese                |          |5 lb. |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |36        |      |        |         |
  Mustard               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the grated or chopped cheese, mustard, salt, paprika and fat to the
broken bread. Scald the milk and add to the well-beaten egg yolks and
pour over the above ingredients. Fold in the stiffly beaten egg whites
and bake in a greased pan in a slow oven.

  Number of servings 75
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**COTTAGE CHEESE CROQUETTES

  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT     |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cottage cheese       |6 qt.      |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs         |6 qt.      |      |        |         |
  Nut meats, chopped   |6 c.       |      |        |         |
  Paprika              |2 tbsp.    |      |        |         |
  Chopped onion        |3/4 c.     |      |        |         |
  Chopped green pepper |2 c.       |      |        |         |
  Salt                 |3/4 c.     |      |        |         |
  Milk                 |1 to       |      |        |         |
                       | 1-1/2 gal.|      |        |         |
  Crumbs               |4-1/2 c.   |      |        |         |
  Eggs                 |10         |      |        |         |
  Milk                 |1-1/4 c.   |      |        |         |
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Combine the cottage cheese and crumbs with the nut meats and seasonings.
Add the milk and mix well. Using an eight-to-the-quart size ice-cream
dipper, measure the mixture into croquettes. Mold, dip in a dipping
mixture made of the eggs and one and a quarter cups of milk, then in
crumbs. Fry in deep fat. Serve with a cream sauce.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MACARONI AND CHEESE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Macaroni, broken      |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Cheese                |          |2 lb. |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  White sauce           |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the broken macaroni in boiling salted water until tender. Drain and
pour cold water on the macaroni to separate. Make a white sauce and add
to it the cheese and macaroni. Put in a well-greased baking pan and
cover with buttered crumbs.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RICE AND CHEESE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rice                  |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cheese                |          |2 lb. |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the rice in boiling salted water until tender. Make a white sauce
of the flour and milk and add the chopped or ground cheese and paprika.
Combine with the rice and pour into baking pan. Put in a hot oven to
brown. A part of the cheese may be reserved and sprinkled over the top
if desired.

  Number of servings 40
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RICE AND NUT LOAF

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rice, before cooking  |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Stock or liquid       |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1-1/2 gal.|      |        |         |
  Nut meats, chopped    |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Green peppers         |12        |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |30        |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the rice in the boiling salted stock. As the rice absorbs the
stock, add the milk gradually, to avoid curdling. When the rice is
tender, remove from the fire and add the chopped nuts, peppers and
beaten eggs. Grease loaf pans and fill with the rice mixture. The loaf
pans should be set in a pan of hot water to avoid over-baking the
bottom of the loaf, thus forming a hard crust. Serve with a cream or
tomato sauce.

  Number of servings 192
  Amount in one serving 4 oz.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


EGG CUTLETS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Eggs, hard cooked     |4 doz.    |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |4         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a stiff white sauce of the flour, milk, butter substitute and salt.
Hard cook the eggs, peel and chop, and add to the white sauce and cool.
When cold mold in the shape of a cutlet and dip in dipping mixture made
of the eggs and milk, and then in crumbs and fry in deep fat. Use an
ice-cream dipper to keep the servings uniform in size.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**SCRAMBLED EGGS AND HAM

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Eggs                  |96        |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Ham, cubed            |4 to 6 c. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Beat the eggs slightly, add the milk, salt and ham. Melt the fat in a
skillet or kettle, pour in the egg mixture, and cook at a low
temperature.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 3/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MEAT SAUCES


MUSTARD SAUCE

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |2 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tsp.   |       |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tsp.   |       |        |         |
  Vinegar               |1/2 c.   |       |        |         |
  Oil                   |1 c.     |       |        |         |
  Mustard               |         |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Mayonnaise dressing   |3-1/2 c. |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar, paprika, salt and mustard with the vinegar. Add the oil
gradually, stirring well. Combine with the mayonnaise. This is a very
strong flavored sauce and only a small amount is necessary for a
serving. This makes five and a quarter cups of sauce.

  Number of servings 250
  Amount in one serving 1 tsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


TARTARE SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Mayonnaise            |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
    or                  |          |      |        |         |
  (Cooked salad dressing|1 qt.)    |      |        |         |
  Pickles, chopped      |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Onions, chopped       |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Parsley, chopped      |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Chop the pickles, onions and parsley and add to the dressing. Thin with
the vinegar. This makes five and a half cups of sauce.

  Number of servings 90
  Amount in one serving 1 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


TOMATO SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tomatoes, #10 can     |1         |      |        |         |
  Stock, meat stock     |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Celery salt           |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Carrots, chopped      |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Onion                 |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Bay leaf              |4         |      |        |         |
  Parsley, chopped      |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Fat                   |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the seasonings to the boiling stock and tomato and cook until soft.
Melt the fat, stir in the flour and make a paste with the hot liquid and
add to the remainder of the liquid. Strain to remove the chopped
vegetables.

  Number of servings 192
  Amount of one serving 2 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


WHITE SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |3         |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk, reserving sufficient cold milk to make a paste with the
flour. Add the paste to the hot milk, stirring constantly. When
thickened add the egg yolks and salt.

  Total volume 2 gal.
  Total calories
  Total cost


VEGETABLES


CREAMED ASPARAGUS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Asparagus, 15 oz. can |10        |      |        |         |
  White sauce           |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a white sauce, using the liquor from the asparagus as part of the
liquid. Heat the asparagus with the salt and butter substitute and add
to the white sauce.

  Number of servings 58
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED FRESH ASPARAGUS

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Asparagus             |         |9 lb.  |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |         |3/8 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  White sauce           |4-1/2 qt.|       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the asparagus and cut in two-inch pieces. Cook in boiling water
until tender and drain. Combine with the white sauce, salt and butter
substitute.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRESH ASPARAGUS ON TOAST

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Asparagus             |          |12 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |2 lb. |        |         |
  Toast                 |60 slices |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the asparagus. Do not break the stalks except when they are very
long. Tie in bundles and put in a kettle of boiling salted water to
cook, so placing the bundles that the tops stand out of water. The steam
from the boiling water will serve to cook the tops. When the asparagus
is tender, drain. Place the stalks on a slice of toast and moisten the
toast with one tablespoon of hot water and two tablespoons of melted
fat. The number of stalks of asparagus will be determined by the size
and length of the individual stalks. From twelve pounds, sixty servings
should be obtained.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 1 slice of toast with asparagus
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BAKED BEANS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Beans                 |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Molasses              |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Mustard               |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Bacon fat or scraps   |          |1 lb. |        |         |
    or                  |          |      |        |         |
  Ham fat               |          |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the beans twelve hours or more. Add the soda and boil until almost
tender. Drain, add the seasonings, the fat and three quarts of water
and bake in a medium oven until the beans are tender and well browned.

  Number of servings 75
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LIMA BEANS WITH GREEN PEPPERS AND PIMENTOS

  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT  |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Lima beans           |6 qt.   |         |        |         |
  Water                |6 qt.   |         |        |         |
  Pimentos, 8 oz. cans |2       |         |        |         |
  Bacon fat            |2 c.    |         |        |         |
  Onions               |        |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                 |1/3 c.  |         |        |         |
  Paprika              |3 tbsp. |         |        |         |
  Green peppers        |1-1/2 c.|         |        |         |
  Molasses             |1/4 c.  |         |        |         |
  Corn syrup           |1 c.    |         |        |         |
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the lima beans in water over night. Drain and cook them in the six
quarts of boiling salted water until almost tender. Add the remaining
ingredients to the beans and pour into baking pans. Bake in a medium
oven until the beans are tender and brown. The green peppers may be
reserved and used as a garnish on top of the baking pans as they come
out of the oven, if desired.

  Number of servings 150
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


STRING BEANS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  String beans, #10 can |1         |      |        |         |
  Bacon drippings       |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Open the can of beans and unless there is an excess of liquid do not
drain. Add the seasonings and heat.

  Number of servings 26
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BUTTERED BEETS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Beets                 |          |8 lb. |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the beets and steam or boil until tender. Remove the skin, cube or
slice, reheat, salt and pour the fat over them.

  Number of servings 36-54
  Amount in one serving 1/3-1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CABBAGE IN VINEGAR

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cabbage               |          |8 lb. |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Remove the outer leaves of the cabbage and cut in eighths. Cook the
cabbage in boiling salted water until tender. Avoid over-cooking to keep
the cabbage from discoloring and from becoming strong in flavor. Drain
off the water and add the butter substitute, vinegar and paprika.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BUTTERED CABBAGE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cabbage               |          |8 lb. |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Remove the outer leaves of the cabbage and cut the heads in eighths.
Cook in boiling salted water until tender. Avoid over-cooking, to
prevent the cabbage from discoloring and from developing a strong
flavor. Drain off the water and add the butter substitute.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED CABBAGE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cabbage               |          |8 lb. |        |         |
  White sauce           |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the cabbage and cut into eighths. Do not shred. Cook in boiling
salted water until tender. Drain and cover with the white sauce.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount of one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BUTTERED CARROTS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Carrots, diced        |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Pare and dice the carrots. Cook in boiling salted water to cover until
tender. Add the butter substitute and serve.

  Number of servings 56
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BUTTERED CARROTS AND PEAS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Carrots, diced        |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Peas, #2 cans         |5         |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the diced carrots in boiling salted water until tender. Drain and
combine with the peas which have been heated in their own liquid, the
butter substitute and the salt.

  Number of servings 52
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED CARROTS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Carrots               |          |10 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  White sauce           |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash, scrape or pare, and dice the carrots. Cook in boiling water until
tender. Drain and mix with the white sauce and butter substitute.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED CELERY

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Celery, chopped       |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Cream sauce           |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash and clean the celery and cut in three-fourths inch lengths. Cook in
boiling salted water until tender. Avoid over-cooking, to prevent the
discoloration of the celery. When tender, drain, and combine with the
white sauce.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CORN PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Corn, #2 cans         |4         |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |8         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk and add to the corn, sugar, salt, bread crumbs and
well-beaten egg. Pour the mixture into individual ramekins or a baking
pan. Place in a pan of water and bake in a medium oven until the custard
has set. Serve hot.

  Number of servings 54
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CORN WITH GREEN PEPPERS AND PIMENTOS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Corn, #2 cans         |20        |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  Salt                  |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Pimento, chopped      |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Green peppers, chopped|2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the corn, butter substitute, salt, pimento, green pepper and heat.

  Number of servings 144
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**SCALLOPED CORN

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                 |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |1/2 c.    |       |        |         |
  Onion, grated        |          |1/8 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                 |1 tbsp.   |       |        |         |
  Broken bread         |4 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Broken crackers      |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Corn, #2 cans        |3         |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Heat the milk, butter substitute and onion. Add the salt and pour over
the crackers and bread. Cover a greased baking pan with the bread and
cracker mixture, then with a layer of corn, and finally a layer of the
crackers and bread. Bake in a hot oven until brown.

  Number of servings 46
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**SUCCOTASH

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Lima beans            |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Corn, #2 cans         |8         |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Onion, grated         |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the beans over night in cold water to cover. Drain, cover with
boiling water and cook until tender. Mix the beans with the corn, which
has been heated, add the seasonings and butter substitute.

  Number of servings 70
  Amount in one serving between 1/3 and 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRIED EGGPLANT

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Eggplant              |          |14 lb.|        |         |
  Water                 |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |6 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |8         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Crumbs, sifted        |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cut the eggplant in thin slices and pare. Soak it in the strong salt
water about two hours. Make a dipping mixture by beating the eggs and
milk together. Dip the eggplant in this mixture and then in the crumbs
and fry in deep fat.

  Number of servings 56
  Amount in one serving 2-3 slices
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BUTTERED ONIONS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Onions                |          |10 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1/2 tbsp. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Peel the outer skins from the onions and cook in the boiling salted
water until tender. Drain and add the butter substitute and paprika.

  Number of servings 24
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED ONIONS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Onions                |          |10 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  White sauce           |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Peel the outer skins from the onions and cook in the boiling salted
water until tender. Drain and add to the white sauce.

  Number of servings 40
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BUTTERED PEAS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Peas, #2 cans         |10        |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Open the peas and unless there is an excess of liquid do not drain. Add
the seasonings and heat.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving between 1/3 and 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAMED PEAS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Peas                  |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  White sauce           |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Open the peas and drain, reserving the juice to use as part of the
liquid in making the white sauce. When using the juice of the peas, care
should be taken not to add it to the white sauce until just before
combining with the peas, to avoid curdling.

  Number of servings 84
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BROWNED POTATOES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Potatoes, pared       |          |30 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Fat                   |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Stock                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Steam or boil the potatoes until almost done. Place the partially cooked
potatoes in a roasting pan and pour the fat and hot salted stock over
them. Bake in a hot oven until the potatoes are brown, basting or
turning as is necessary.

  Number of servings 90
  Amount in one serving 1/3 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


STEAMED POTATOES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Potatoes, after paring|          |15 lb.|        |         |
  White sauce           |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Steam or boil the potatoes until tender. Drain and add the white sauce.
If steamed, the salt may be sprinkled on the top of the potatoes. If
boiled, add the salt to the boiling water.

  Number of servings 66
  Amount in one serving 2/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRENCH FRIED POTATOES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Potatoes, after paring|          |10 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cut the potatoes. Dry on a cloth. Put in a basket and fry in deep fat
until brown. Drain and empty on to a brown paper and sprinkle with salt.

  Number of servings 30
  Amount in one serving 1 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MASHED POTATOES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Potatoes, pared       |          |15 lb.|        |         |
  Milk, scalded         |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Steam or boil the potatoes until done. Mash thoroughly and add the
scalded milk and salt. Beat until light.

  Number of servings 66
  Amount in one serving 2/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PARSLEY BUTTERED POTATOES

  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT  |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Potatoes, pared      |        |30 lb.   |        |         |
  Parsley, chopped     |2-2/3 c.|         |        |         |
  Salt                 |1/4 c.  |         |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |        |1-1/3 lb.|        |         |
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Steam or boil the potatoes until tender. When done, put the potatoes
into a shallow kettle, pour the butter substitute and salt over them and
sprinkle them with parsley. Shake the kettle vigorously to get the
potatoes covered with the fat and parsley. This may be accomplished more
easily if only a few potatoes are prepared at a time.

  Number of servings 90
  Amount in one serving 1/3 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**SCALLOPED POTATOES

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Potatoes, steamed,   |          |       |        |         |
    sliced             |4 gal.    |       |        |         |
  White sauce          |1-1/2 gal.|       |        |         |
  Onion, grated        |          |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                 |1/2 to    |       |        |         |
                       | 3/4 c.   |       |        |         |
  Crumbs               |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |1/2 c.    |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Grease a scalloping pan. Cover with a layer of potatoes, then with white
sauce to which the onion and salt have been added. Add another layer of
potato and white sauce and cover with buttered crumbs. Bake until brown.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 2/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


STUFFED BAKED POTATOES

  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT  |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Potatoes             |12      |4-3/4 lb.|        |         |
  Butter substitute    |1/8 c.  |         |        |         |
  Salt                 |2 tbsp. |         |        |         |
  Egg whites           |3       |         |        |         |
  Milk                 |1 c.    |         |        |         |
  Paprika              |1/4 tsp.|         |        |         |
  Chopped pimento      |1/8 c.  |         |        |         |
  Chopped parsley      |1/4 c.  |         |        |         |
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Bake smooth, medium-sized potatoes until done. Remove them from the
oven, and inserting a knife, cut a cap from side. Scoop out the inside
of the potatoes, mash or run through a ricer and add the milk,
seasonings, fat, chopped pimento and parsley. Lastly, fold in the beaten
egg whites. Fill the potato shells with the seasoned mixture and brown
in a hot oven.

  Number of servings 12
  Amount in one serving 1
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


GLAZED SWEET POTATOES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sweet potatoes        |          |50 lb.|        |         |
  Sugar, brown          |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |      |        |         |
    or bacon fat        |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Steam and peel the potatoes. If a vegetable parer is available, the
potatoes may be put through the machine before steaming. When done, put
in shallow baking pans and pour a syrup made of the sugar, water and
melted fat over them. Brown in a hot oven.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount in one serving 1/2 lb.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RICE CROQUETTES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rice                  |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |20        |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |6         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the rice in the milk and water until tender. Remove from fire and
add well-beaten eggs, salt and butter substitute. Turn into shallow pans
to cool. Mold and dip in egg and milk mixture, then in crumbs and fry in
deep fat. If desired the dipping mixture and crumbs may be omitted and
the mixture molded with an ice-cream dipper and dropped at once into the
hot fat. Serve with jelly, jam or syrup.

  Number of servings 65
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MASHED RUTABAGAS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rutabagas             |          |15 lb.|        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Pare the rutabagas, steam until tender and mash. Season with the butter
or butter substitute, and salt.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SPINACH AND EGG

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Spinach, #10 cans     |2         |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |6         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the salt and vinegar to the spinach and heat. Hard cook the eggs and
slice them. When the spinach is hot spread in steam table or scalloping
pans, and arrange the sliced, hard-cooked eggs in rows on top of the
spinach. Sliced lemon may be used in place of the egg.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**SCALLOPED TOMATOES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tomatoes, #10 cans    |2         |      |        |         |
  Broken bread          |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Grated onion          |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Crumbs                |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the onion, sugar and salt to the tomatoes and heat. Pour over the
broken bread, which has been put in the bottom of a baking pan. Cover
with buttered crumbs and brown in the oven.

  Number of servings 56
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**STEWED TOMATOES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tomatoes, #10 cans    |2         |      |        |         |
  Broken bread          |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Grated onion          |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Heat the tomatoes with the seasonings. Add the broken bread just before
serving.

  Number of servings 65
  Amount in one serving,
    between 1/3 and 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BREADS


BAKING-POWDER BISCUITS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Shortening            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix and sift the dry ingredients. Rub in the shortening lightly with the
tips of the fingers. Add the milk gradually, mixing to a soft dough. The
amount of milk may vary, due to differences in the flour. Put the dough
on to a floured board and roll three quarters of an inch in thickness.
To obtain one hundred and eighty biscuits, use a cutter two and one
half inches in diameter.

  Number of servings 90
  Amount in one serving 2
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BAKING-POWDER CINNAMON ROLLS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |4 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Shortening            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a baking-powder biscuit dough. Roll to one third of an inch
thickness, making the dough rectangular in shape. Mix the cinnamon and
sugar and spread over the rolled dough. Sprinkle with the raisins, dot
with the fat and, starting with the longer side, roll up the dough. Cut
off rolls half an inch in thickness and bake in a hot oven. These rolls
may be improved by adding a teaspoon of boiled frosting to the top of
each before serving.

  Number of servings 120
  Amount in one serving 1 roll
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**BACON MUFFINS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2-1/2 to  |      |        |         |
                        | 2-3/4 qt.|      |        |         |
  Bacon fat             |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |8         |      |        |         |
  Bacon, cooked         |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients and the liquid ingredients separately. Combine
by adding the liquid to the dry. Add the fat and bacon pieces last. Bake
in well-greased muffin pans.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1/4 c. batter
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CORN-MEAL MUFFINS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 |10 c.     |      |        |         |
  Corn meal             |10 c.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |10        |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients. Beat the eggs and add to the milk. Combine the
dry and liquid ingredients. Add the melted fat. Put in well-greased
muffin tins and bake in a hot oven. This may be baked in sheets as corn
bread.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c. batter
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**CRUMB MUFFINS

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                |2-1/2 qt. |       |        |         |
  Sugar                |3 c.      |       |        |         |
  Crumbs               |2-1/2 qt. |       |        |         |
  Baking powder        |3/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |2 tbsp.   |       |        |         |
  Eggs                 |8         |       |        |         |
  Milk                 |3-1/2 to  |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |  4 qt.   |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients and the liquid ingredients separately. Combine
by adding the liquid to the dry. Add the melted fat last. Bake in
well-greased muffin tins.

  Number of servings 120
  Amount in one serving 1/4 c. batter
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**DARK BRAN MUFFINS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Cake crumbs           |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Bran                  |3-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Milk, sour            |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Molasses              |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |4         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients. Beat the eggs, add the milk and molasses and
combine with the dry ingredients. Bake in well-greased muffin pans, in a
hot oven.

  Number of servings 90
  Amount in one serving 1/4 c. batter
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


GRAHAM MUFFINS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 | 10 c.    |      |        |         |
  Flour, graham         | 10 c.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 | 3 c.     |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         | 3/4 c.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  | 2 tbsp.  |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  | 8        |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3-1/4 to  |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute,    | 3-1/2 qt.|      |        |         |
    melted              |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Prepare as for plain muffins.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1/3 to 1/2 c. batter
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PLAIN MUFFINS

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                |3/4 qt.   |       |        |         |
  Flour                |5 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Baking powder        |3/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |2 tbsp.   |       |        |         |
  Eggs                 |8         |       |        |         |
  Milk                 |3-1/4 to  |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute,   | 3-1/2 qt.|       |        |         |
    melted             |          |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Mix and sift the dry ingredients. Beat the eggs, add the milk and pour
the liquid over the dry ingredients. Add the melted fat and pour the
mixture into well-greased muffin tins to bake.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1/4 to 1/3 c. batter
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RAISED MUFFINS

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk, scalded        |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Water, cold          |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Egg yolks            |6         |       |        |         |
  Sugar                |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |1 c.      |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |3 tbsp.   |       |        |         |
  Yeast                |          |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Water, lukewarm      |1 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Flour                |10 to     |       |        |         |
                       | 12 qt.   |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk. Soften the yeast in the lukewarm water and add to the
remaining water and scalded milk. Add the egg yolks, sugar, fat and salt
and flour to make a soft dough. Let rise. Beat well and fill very
well-greased muffin tins half full. Let rise. Bake in a hot oven.

  Number of servings 216
  Amount in one serving 1/5 c. dough
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**BROWN BREAD

  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT     |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Stale cake or bread  |1 qt.      |      |        |         |
  Cold water           |7 c.       |      |        |         |
  Molasses             |1 c.       |      |        |         |
  Corn meal            |3 c.       |      |        |         |
  Graham flour         |6 c.       |      |        |         |
  Soda                 |1-1/2 tbsp.|      |        |         |
  Raisins              |1 c.       |      |        |         |
  Salt                 |1 tbsp.    |      |        |         |
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the stale bread or cake in the cold water until soft. Add the
molasses and the dry ingredients. Mix well and put into a well-greased
pan and steam from two to three hours until done. The length of time for
steaming depends on the size of the can.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


NUT BREAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 | 3 qt.    |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         | 3 tbsp.  |      |        |         |
  Nuts                  | 1 qt.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  | 1/2 tsp. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 | 1 qt.    |      |        |         |
  Milk                  | 1 qt.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  | 6        |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     | 1/4 c.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients, including the nuts. Add the milk to the beaten
eggs. Combine by adding the liquid to the dry ingredients. Add the
melted fat. Pour the mixture into greased loaf pans and let stand one
half hour. Bake in a moderate oven. This will make four loaves, cutting
25 slices per loaf.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CINNAMON ROLLS

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Water                |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Milk                 |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Yeast                |          |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Water                |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Flour                |11-3/4 qt.|       |        |         |
  Salt                 |1/2 c.    |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |1-1/2 c.  |       |        |         |
  Fat, melted          |          |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Sugar                |5 c.      |       |        |         |
  Cinnamon             |5 tsp.    |       |        |         |
  Raisins              |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Follow the directions given under Parker House rolls for the method of
mixing the dough. When the dough is ready, put on a well-floured board
and roll out in a rectangular shape to about half an inch in thickness.
Brush with melted fat and sprinkle with the mixed sugar, cinnamon and
raisins. Commencing with the long side of the dough, make into a roll.
Cut crosswise of the roll making slices half an inch in thickness. Place
on a greased pan, let rise until they have doubled in size, and bake in
a hot oven.

  Number of servings 24 dozen_
  Amount in one serving 1-1/3 oz. per roll
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PARKER HOUSE ROLLS

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Water                |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Milk                 |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Yeast                |          |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Water, lukewarm      |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Flour                |11 to     |       |        |         |
                       |  12 qt.  |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |1/2 c.    |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |1-1/2 c.  |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk. Soften the yeast in the two cups of lukewarm water. Add
the sugar and fat to the scalded milk and then add the two quarts of
water. When the milk and water mixture is a little more than lukewarm
add the yeast and five quarts of flour. Beat to smooth batter and let
rise one hour. Then add the salt and the remainder of the flour. Beat on
the machine or knead. Let rise one hour. When the dough is light, cut
into small pieces, getting twelve rolls from each pound of dough. With
the palm of the hand, roll these pieces into smooth balls and place them
in rows to rise. When they have again become light, roll the balls flat,
with a rolling pin or stick, brush with melted fat, fold over and put in
pans to rise. When they have doubled in size, bake in a hot oven until
well browned. The tops may be brushed with melted fat, when they come
from the oven.

  Number of servings 24 dozen
  Amount in one serving 1-1/3 oz.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______

WHITE BREAD

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Yeast                |          |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Water, lukewarm      |1 pt.     |       |        |         |
  Milk, scalded        |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Fat                  |1 c.      |       |        |         |
  Sugar                |1 c.      |       |        |         |
  Cold water           |2 qt.     |       |        |         |
  Flour                |13 to     |       |        |         |
                       |  14 qt.  |       |        |         |
  Salt                 |1/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Soften the yeast in the pint of water. Scald the milk and add the fat,
sugar and cold water. When the liquid is lukewarm, add the yeast and mix
to a sponge with a part of the flour. It will require about six quarts.
Let rise one hour and add salt and work to a stiff dough with the
remainder of the flour. Let rise again about one hour. Cut into loaves
of two pounds each. Place in well-greased pans, let rise and bake about
one hour. This makes twelve one and three quarter pound loaves, after
baking.

  Number of servings 12 loaves
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SANDWICHES


COTTAGE CHEESE SANDWICH FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cottage cheese        |          |4 lb. |        |         |
  Green peppers, chopped|2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Nuts, chopped         |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Mayonnaise            |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the chopped green peppers, nuts and mayonnaise to the cheese and
mix. This amount makes three and one half quarts. From a one-pound loaf
of bread, sixteen sandwich slices may be obtained.

  Number of servings 84
  Amount in one serving 1/6 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


EGG SANDWICH FILLING

  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT     |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Eggs, hard cooked    |2 doz.     |      |        |         |
  Crumbs, sifted       |1 c.       |      |        |         |
  Salt                 |2 tsp.     |      |        |         |
  Mayonnaise           |3 c.       |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice          |1-1/2 tbsp.|      |        |         |
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Hard cook the eggs, cool and chop. Mix with the remaining ingredients.
This amount makes two quarts, and will fill forty-eight sandwiches,
using two full slices of bread for each sandwich. From a one-pound loaf,
sixteen sandwich slices may be obtained.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/6 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRUIT SANDWICH FILLING

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Raisins              |          |1 lb.  |        |         |
  Figs                 |          |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Sugar                |1-1/2 c.  |       |        |         |
  Flour                |1 tbsp.   |       |        |         |
  Cold water           |1/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  Orange juice         |1/2 c.    |       |        |         |
  Lemons, juice and    |          |       |        |         |
    grated rind        |2         |       |        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Chop the raisins and figs and combine with the flour and sugar. Add the
orange juice, lemon juice and water and cook in a double boiler or
steamer until thick. This amount will make three and three fourths cups
of filling and will fill twenty-five sandwiches, using two full slices
of bread.

  Number of servings     25
  Amount in one serving 1/6 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**HAM SANDWICH FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Ham, boiled or baked  |          |3 lb. |        |         |
    (left-over)         |          |      |        |         |
  Pickles, chopped      |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs, sifted  |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Mayonnaise            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Chop the ham and pickles and mix with the bread crumbs and mayonnaise.
This amount will make three quarts. One cup of mixture will fill six
sandwiches, using two full slices of bread for each sandwich. From a
one-pound loaf, sixteen sandwich slices may be obtained.

  Number of servings     72
  Amount in one serving 1/6 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SALADS


CABBAGE SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cabbage               |          |8 lb. |        |         |
  Pimentos, chopped     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Pickles, chopped      |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Green peppers, chopped|1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Boiled dressing       |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Shred the cabbage and let soak in cold water one hour or more. Drain off
the water and mix cabbage with the other ingredients.

  Number of servings 108
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CARROT AND RAISIN SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Carrots               |          |4 lb. |        |         |
  Raisins               |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Salad dressing,       |          |      |        |         |
    mayonnaise          |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash, pare or scrape the carrots and chop until fine. Add the raisins
and salad dressing to the carrots and mix. Serve on lettuce.

  Number of servings 54
  Amount of one serving  1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**COMBINATION VEGETABLE SALAD

  -----------------------+---------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS            |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  -----------------------+---------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Peas                   |2 qt.    |      |        |         |
  Cooked beets, diced or |         |      |        |         |
    cooked carrots, diced|2 qt.    |      |        |         |
  Celery, cut fine       |2 qt.    |      |        |         |
  French dressing        |1 qt.    |      |        |         |
  -----------------------+---------+------+--------+---------+----------

Dice the beets or carrots very fine. Drain the peas. Marinate the
vegetables in three separate containers. Do not mix them together. Heap
on a lettuce leaf using two tablespoons of each vegetable and keeping
each mound distinct.

  Number of servings 64
  Amount in one serving 2 tbsp. of each vegetable
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**POTATO SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Boiled potatoes       |10 qt.    |      |        |         |
  Celery                |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  French dressing       |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Chopped parsley       |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Pimentos, 15 oz. can  |1         |      |        |         |
  Onions                |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Dice the potatoes and add the French dressing to marinate. Cut the
celery fine, chop the pimento and onion and add to the marinated
potatoes with remaining ingredients. Serve on a lettuce leaf.

  Number of servings 120
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


TOMATO JELLY SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tomatoes              |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cloves                |1/8 c.    |      |        |         |
  Bay leaves            |10        |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |1/4 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Cayenne               |1/8 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Gelatin               |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Cold water            |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the tomatoes with the seasonings and add to the gelatin which has
been softened in the cup of cold water. Strain and pour into molds. Let
set and serve on lettuce with mayonnaise.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


VEGETABLE GELATIN SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Gelatin               |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Cold water            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Boiling water         |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |4 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Shredded cabbage      |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Mild vinegar          |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Celery, diced         |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Red pepper, cut fine  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soften the gelatin in the cold water. Add to the boiling water, in which
the sugar and salt have been dissolved. After the gelatin has cooled and
just started to set, add the mild vinegar, lemon juice and the
vegetables. Pour into molds or into a shallow pan to cool and set.
Serve on a lettuce leaf with salad dressing.

  Number of servings 54
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


APPLE AND CELERY SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Apples                |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Celery                |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Dates, chopped        |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salad dressing        |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Pare and dice the apples and mix with the chopped dates. Cut the celery
fine and add to the apples and dates. Mix with the salad dressing and
serve on lettuce. In case there is danger of the apples turning dark,
they may be covered with salt water or water containing a little
vinegar, while they are being pared and diced.

  Number of servings 44
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BANANA SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Bananas               |20        |      |        |         |
  Nuts, chopped         |1-1/3 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salad dressing        |2-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cut the bananas in halves crosswise and roll in the chopped nuts until
well coated. Place half a banana on a lettuce leaf. Serve with a
tablespoon of salad dressing.

  Number of servings 40
  Amount in one serving 1/2 banana
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRUIT SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Pineapple, diced      |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Oranges, diced        |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Celery, diced         |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salad dressing        |3-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Dice the oranges and pineapple and cut the celery fine. Drain the fruit
and mix with the celery. Serve on a lettuce leaf with one tablespoon of
dressing on top.

  Number of servings 54
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


GRAPEFRUIT SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Grapefruit, size 70   |14        |      |        |         |
  Celery, cut fine      |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  French dressing       |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Peel the grapefruit and remove the fruit in whole sections from the
connecting tissue. Arrange three whole sections of the fruit, one on top
of the other, on a lettuce leaf, and put a teaspoon of finely cut celery
at each side of the sections. Put one scant teaspoon of French dressing
over each salad.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 3 sections
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


COTTAGE CHEESE SALAD WITH CELERY AND GREEN PEPPERS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cheese                |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Cream                 |6 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |4 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Celery, chopped       |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Green pepper, chopped |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the cheese with the cream and salt. More cream may be necessary to
moisten the cheese if it is very dry. Add celery and green pepper and
serve on a lettuce leaf.

  Number of servings 64
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PRUNE AND COTTAGE CHEESE SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Prunes, 40--50 size   |          |3 lb. |        |         |
  Cottage cheese        |6 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sour cream            |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the prunes over night and cook until soft. Cool. Remove the seeds
by cutting one side of the prunes lengthwise, being careful not to mash
the prunes. Season the cheese with the salt, mix with the cream, and
fill the prunes, using 2 teaspoons of cheese which have been rolled into
a ball, for each prune. Salad dressing may be served with the prunes if
desired.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 3 stuffed prunes
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


DEVILED EGG SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Eggs                  | 24       |      |        |         |
  Salt                  | 2 tsp.   |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               | 1/2 c.   |      |        |         |
  Mayonnaise            | 1/2 c.   |      |        |         |
  Mustard               | 1 tsp.   |      |        |         |
  Paprika               | 1 tsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the eggs until hard and cut in halves lengthwise. Remove the yolks.
Cream the yolks together with the mayonnaise and seasonings and refill
the whites of the eggs. Serve half an egg on a lettuce leaf and garnish
with a pickle cut in halves.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/2 egg
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHICKEN SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Chicken, diced        |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Celery, diced         |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Mayonnaise            |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the chicken and celery lightly with two thirds of the mayonnaise.
Serve on a lettuce leaf and garnish with the remaining mayonnaise.
Lemon, hard-boiled egg and capers may also be used as garnish for
chicken salad.

  Number of servings 16
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LOBSTER SALAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Lobster, 1 lb. can    |4         |      |        |         |
  Celery, diced         |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Mayonnaise dressing   |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Open the cans of lobster and look over. Avoid breaking up into shreds or
very small pieces. Mix with the celery and the mayonnaise and serve on a
lettuce leaf.

  Number of servings 64
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BOILED DRESSING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cornstarch            |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Mustard               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |1-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |16        |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix and sift the cornstarch and sugar and add to the scalded milk. Mix
the mustard, paprika and salt to a paste with some of the vinegar. Add
the remainder of the vinegar to the thickened milk, then add the egg
yolks, and cook until the eggs are done. Add the seasonings and cool.

  Total volume 4-3/4 qt
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRENCH DRESSING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Mustard               |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Pepper                |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Oil                   |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Onion juice           |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients and add enough vinegar to make a paste. Add to
this the remainder of the vinegar and oil and beat thoroughly.

  Total volume 6 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MAYONNAISE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Egg yolks             |3         |      |        |         |
  Vinegar               |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Oil                   |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Mustard               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Powdered sugar        |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Paprika               |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Red pepper            |1/4 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Beat the egg yolks thoroughly, and add to them about two tablespoonfuls
of vinegar and continue beating. Add the oil a little at a time until a
thick emulsion has been formed, and then the oil and vinegar may be
added alternately in larger amounts. The seasonings may be added dry, or
a little of the vinegar reserved to mix to a paste with them.

  Total volume 5 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


THOUSAND ISLAND DRESSING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Mayonnaise            |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Chili sauce           |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Green peppers, chopped|1-2/3 c.  |      |        |         |
  Chives, chopped       |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the chopped green peppers, chives and chili sauce with the
mayonnaise and chill. Mayonnaise to be used for Thousand Island dressing
should be very stiff.

  Total volume 3-3/4 qt.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


HOT DESSERTS AND SAUCES


APPLE DUMPLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                 |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Shortening            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 to      |      |        |         |
                        | 1-1/2 qt.|      |        |         |
  Sugar, brown          |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Apples, quartered     |3-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Rub shortening into the flour, baking powder and salt. Add milk to make
a soft dough. Roll thin and cut in squares. Place about a half to three
quarters of an apple, depending on size, in each square and sprinkle
with about one and one half tablespoons of cinnamon and sugar mixed
together. Fold the corners over the apples and bake in a moderate oven.
Serve with a lemon or hard sauce.

  Number of servings 42
  Amount in one serving 1
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**BREAD PUDDING

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Scalded milk          |2 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Broken bread          |6 c.     |       |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2/3 c.   |       |        |         |
  Raisins               |         |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.   |       |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  Eggs                  |5        |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Add the beaten eggs, sugar, salt and vanilla to the scalded milk and
pour over the bread and raisins. Bake in a water bath in a moderate
oven until the custard sets. Serve with a vanilla sauce.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**BROWN BETTY

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Apples, chopped       |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Crumbs                |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Brown sugar           |2-2/3 c.  |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Nutmeg                |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cover the bottom of a baking pan with a layer of crumbs. Cover the
crumbs with chopped apples. Mix sugar, cinnamon and nutmeg together and
sprinkle one half of it over the apples. Add one half of the water and
lemon juice mixed together. Repeat crumbs, apples, spices and liquid.
Pour the melted fat on top. Bake and serve with lemon sauce.

  Number of servings 48 to 50
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**CHOCOLATE BREAD PUDDING

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Scalded milk          |2 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Broken or cubed bread |6 c.     |       |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2/3 c.   |       |        |         |
  Eggs                  |5        |       |        |         |
  Raisins               |         |1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.   |       |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Add the beaten eggs, sugar, salt and vanilla to the scalded milk and
pour over the bread and raisins. Bake in a pan of hot water in a
moderate oven until the custard sets. Serve with a vanilla sauce.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving between 1/3 and 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE SOUFFLE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Cocoa                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |3-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |8         |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |16        |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the flour, sugar and cocoa and stir into the boiling water. When
thickened add the egg yolks and vanilla. Cool. Fold this custard mixture
into the stiffly beaten egg whites. Pour into a baking dish and put the
dish into a pan of hot water. Bake in a moderate oven until done. Serve
with whipped cream.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


COTTAGE PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Butter substitute     |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |5         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |3-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |2-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the sugar and fat. Add the well-beaten eggs and alternate the
liquid and the dry ingredients. Bake. Serve with lemon, vanilla, fruit
or chocolate sauce.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1 square 2 in. x 2 in.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRITTERS

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Eggs                  |6         |      |        |         |
  Sour cream            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sweet milk            |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Diced apples,    }    |          |      |        |         |
    or             }    |          |      |        |         |
  Diced oranges,   }    |          |      |        |         |
    or             }    |          |      |        |         |
  Diced Bananas,   }--- |3 c.      |      |        |         |
    or             }    |          |      |        |         |
  Corn             }    |          |      |        |         |
    or             }    |          |      |        |         |
  Hominy           }    |          |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients and wet ingredients separately and combine. Drop
from a spoon into hot fat, using one and a half tablespoons per fritter.

  Number of servings 35
  Amount in one serving 2 fritters
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRUIT COBBLER

  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT     |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                |3 qt.      |      |        |         |
  Baking powder        |1/2 c.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                 |1-1/3 tbsp.|      |        |         |
  Shortening           |1-1/2 c.   |      |        |         |
  Milk                 |1 to       |      |        |         |
                       | 1-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Fruit, # 10 can      |1          |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch           |1/2 c.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                |5 c.       |      |        |         |
  Water                |2-1/2 qt.  |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice          |1/4 c.     |      |        |         |
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Crust: Rub shortening into well-mixed dry ingredients. Add milk
sufficient for a soft dough and roll on a well-floured board. Make the
dough the shape of the baking pan to be used.

Fruit: Drain the fruit and heat the juice and water, adding the
well-mixed sugar and cornstarch. When thickened add the fruit and lemon
juice. Fill the bottom of the baking dish with the fruit and juice;
cover with the dough and bake in a hot oven.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving piece 1-1/2 in. x 2 in. with 1/4 c. fruit sauce
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


GRAPENUT PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |7 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Grapenuts             |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Bread crumbs          |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1-1/3 c.  |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |16        |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk and pour over the grapenuts and bread crumbs. Add the
sugar, salt, beaten eggs and raisins to the bread crumbs and scalded
milk. Pour into a baking pan and bake in water bath in a moderate oven
until the custard sets.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CARROT PLUM PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar, brown          |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Suet, ground          |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Carrots, grated raw   |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Potatoes, grated raw  |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemon, grated rind    |          |      |        |         |
    and juice           |1         |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Nutmeg                |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the sugar and chopped suet to the grated carrot, potato and lemon
juice. Mix the dry ingredients and combine with the above mixture. Add
the raisins. Pour the mixture into a well-greased baking pan. Cover and
steam for one to two hours. Individual steamed puddings may be made by
filling greased ramekins half full of the dough and steaming. Avoid
turning on too much steam when the pudding is first put into the
steamer. Serve with vanilla sauce.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c. of dough
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


STEAMED MOLASSES PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Molasses              |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |3 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |3         |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |4-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Boiling water         |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the molasses, eggs, salt and water and add the flour and soda. Mix
well. This makes a very thin batter. Pour into a greased pan and steam
from one to one and one half hours. Serve with an egg hard sauce. If the
molasses is very dark and strong use one half molasses and one half corn
syrup.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c. of batter
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PRUNE PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |12        |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |4 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Prunes, after cooking |          |4 lb. |        |         |
  Egg whites            |12        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1-1/4 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk, mix and sift the cornstarch and sugar and add to the
milk, stirring constantly. When the cornstarch has thickened add the egg
yolks and salt. Pour this custard mixture over the prunes which have
been seeded and placed in the bottom of a pudding pan. Spread the
meringue and brown in the oven.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving, between 1/3 to 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PRUNECOT FILLING FOR SHORTCAKE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Prunes, after cooking |          |2 lb. |        |         |
  Dried apricots, after |          |      |        |         |
    cooking             |          |2 lb. |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Seed the cooked prunes and mix with the apricots. Add the sugar and
lemon juice and heat. This filling may be put between layers of
shortcake dough and on top. Serve with whipped cream.

  Number of servings 27
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SHORTCAKE

  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS         |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour               |8 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Baking powder       |1-3/4 c. |         |        |         |
  Salt                |3 tbsp.  |         |        |         |
  Sugar               |1/2 c.   |         |        |         |
  Butter substitute   |         |2-3/4 lb.|        |         |
  Milk                |3 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Butter              |1 c.     |         |        |         |
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Mix and sift the dry ingredients. Rub in the shortening lightly, with
the tips of the fingers. Add the milk gradually, mixing to a soft dough.
The amount of milk may vary due to differences in the flour. Put the
dough on to a board and roll out to about one third inch in thickness.
Cut out, using a cutter three inches in diameter. Brush the tops with
melted fat and place one biscuit on top of the other; bake in a hot
oven. When baked, the shortcakes break open easily. Serve with fruit
between the halves and on top.

  Number of servings 144
  Amount in one serving 1 short cake
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Strawberries, after   |          |      |        |         |
    hulling             |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 to      |      |        |         |
                        | 2-1/2 c. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Hull the strawberries and wash them in a colander. Crush slightly, add
the sugar, and let stand half an hour or until the sugar dissolves.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE RICE PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rice uncooked         |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cocoa                 |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |16        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the rice in the scalded milk. When the rice is almost tender add
the cocoa and sugar and finish cooking. Pour into a baking pan and
spread with a meringue and brown in the oven.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


OLD-FASHIONED BAKED RICE PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rice                  |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |1-2/3 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |5-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the rice, pour over it the scalded milk and bake in a slow oven,
stirring occasionally. When the rice is almost tender add the sugar,
raisins and salt, and continue cooking.

  Number of servings 32
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RICE WITH HARD SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rice                  |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the rice in boiling salted water until tender. Add the raisins and
serve with hard sauce.

  Number of servings 36
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE SAUCE

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |1 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Cocoa                 |1-1/2 c  |       |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1/4 c.   |       |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.   |       |        |         |
  Water                 |2 qt.    |       |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |         |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients well. Add to boiling water, stirring constantly
with wire whisk. Add the fat, and when cool add the vanilla.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in each serving 2 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CUSTARD SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |6         |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the cornstarch and sugar and add to the scalded milk. When the
cornstarch has cooked add the thoroughly beaten egg yolks and cook for a
few minutes. Remove from fire and add the salt and vanilla.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount in one serving 1-1/2 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


EGG HARD SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Butter substitute     |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |6         |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar thoroughly. Add the beaten yolks and continue
creaming. Add the vanilla and fold in the beaten whites. Put this sauce
into the refrigerator to set.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 2 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


HARD SAUCE

  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Butter                |         |1/4 lb.|        |         |
  Sugar, powdered       |1-1/2 c. |       |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.  |       |        |         |
  ----------------------+---------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the butter, add the sugar and vanilla gradually.

  Number of servings 24
  Amount in one serving 1 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LEMON SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Water                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Butter or butter      |          |      |        |         |
    substitute          |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Lemon rind, cut thin  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar and cornstarch and add to the boiling water, stirring
constantly. When the starch is clear, remove from the fire and add the
fat, lemon juice and salt, and lemon rind.

  Number of servings 85
  Amount in one serving 2 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


COLD DESSERTS


APPLE TAPIOCA

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tapioca, pearl        |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water, boiling        |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Apples                |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |1-1/2 tsp.|      |        |         |
  Lemons                |3         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the tapioca in water over night. Add to the boiling salted water
and cook until clear. Add the sugar, cinnamon and lemon juice and pour
over the apples.

  Number of servings 42
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BAKED APPLES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Apples, 100 size      |25        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash and core the apples. Make a syrup of the sugar and water and pour
over the apples. Bake in the oven until the apples are tender.

  Number of servings 25
  Amount in one serving 1
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BAKED CUSTARD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk, scalded         |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Eggs, whole           |12        |      |        |         |
    or                  |          |      |        |         |
  Eggs, yolks           |20        |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Nutmeg                |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Beat the eggs, sugar and salt and add to the scalded milk and pour into
custard cups. Put the cups into a pan and pour hot water around them.
Bake in a moderate oven.

  Number of servings 40
  Amount in one serving Between 1/3 to 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CARAMEL BAVARIAN CREAM

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |1-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Hot water             |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Milk, scalded         |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |16        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Gelatin               |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Cold water            |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |16        |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Add the cold water to the gelatin. Caramelize the sugar, add the hot
water and pour over the softened gelatin. Let this mixture cool. Scald
the milk, add the egg yolks and cook as for a soft custard. When both
mixtures are cool and the gelatin has begun to set, beat the egg whites
until stiff and pour in the two mixtures and beat. Pour into a pan to
reset. Serve with whipped cream.

  Number of servings 45
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CARAMEL TAPIOCA

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Pearl tapioca         |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Brown sugar           |6 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Mapleine              |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the tapioca over night and cook until clear in the boiling water
and brown sugar. Remove from the fire and add the salt and mapleine.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE BLANC MANGE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cocoa                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar, cornstarch and cocoa and add to the scalded milk. When
the mixture has thickened, remove from the fire and add the salt and
vanilla.

  Number of servings 95
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE PUDDING

  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                |2 c.      |       |        |         |
  Eggs                 |2 doz.    |       |        |         |
  Vanilla              |1/4 c.    |       |        |         |
  Chocolate            |          |3/4 lb.|        |         |
  ---------------------+----------+-------+--------+---------+----------

Melt the chocolate over hot water. Separate the eggs and beat the sugar
and egg yolks to a creamy consistency. When the chocolate is melted, add
the beaten yolks and sugar to it, and continue cooking until the mixture
thickens. Beat the egg whites stiff, add the chocolate mixture and the
vanilla to them. Mix thoroughly. Pour into glasses and put in the
refrigerator to cool and set. Serve with whipped cream.

  Number of servings 36
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CORNSTARCH PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |3         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar and cornstarch and add to the hot milk, stirring
constantly. When the starch has cooked remove from the fire and add the
vanilla and salt. Fold in the well-beaten egg whites and mold.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving Between 2/3 and 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


DATE NUT BLANC MANGE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Brown sugar           |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Boiling water         |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |12        |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tbsp. |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Nut meats             |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Dates                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the cornstarch, sugar and salt and add to boiling water, stirring
constantly. Add this mixture to the well-beaten whites and vanilla and
beat until smooth. If a kitchen mixing machine is available, combine the
two mixtures on the machine and beat thoroughly. This will increase the
volume and improve the consistency. Add the dates and nut meats. Serve
with a custard sauce.

  Number of servings 56
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**DATE TORTE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Walnuts               |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Dates                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |12        |      |        |         |
  Crumbs                |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients with the dates and nuts. Add the lemon juice and
water, and fold in the stiffly beaten egg whites. Pour into a
well-greased baking pan, set the pan in hot water and bake in a moderate
oven. This may be served hot or cold with whipped cream.

  Number of servings 24
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FIG TAPIOCA

  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS         |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Tapioca, pearl      |3 c.     |         |        |         |
  Water               |3 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Brown sugar         |6 c.     |         |        |         |
  Figs, layer         |         |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                |1 tsp.   |         |        |         |
  Vanilla             |3 tbsp.  |         |        |         |
  Nut meats, chopped  |1-1/2 c. |         |        |         |
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the tapioca over night. Add to the rapidly boiling water and cook
until clear. Remove from the fire and add the chopped figs and nuts,
vanilla and salt.

  Number of servings 72
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRUIT COCKTAIL

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Oranges               |1 doz.    |      |        |         |
  Bananas               |2 doz.    |      |        |         |
  Pineapple             |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Lemons                |3         |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a syrup of the sugar and water and pour over the diced fruit. The
juice of the lemons may be added to the syrup.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRUIT GELATIN

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Gelatin               |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Cold water            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Boiling water         |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Orange juice          |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |2/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Oranges               |3         |      |        |         |
  Bananas               |6         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the gelatin in the cold water. Add the sugar to the boiling water
and pour over the softened gelatin, stirring until the gelatin is
dissolved. When the gelatin has begun to set, add the fruit juice and
the diced fruit.

  Number of servings 60
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**FRUIT WHIP

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Fruit pulp            |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |4         |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Put the fruit pulp, sugar and unbeaten egg whites into a mixing bowl and
beat until stiff. Whips in this quantity should be made with a power
beater or mixing machine.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


MAPLE NUT MOLD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Brown sugar           |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |24        |      |        |         |
  Nut meats, chopped    |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Mapleine              |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |  tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the cornstarch to a paste with part of the water. Bring the
remainder of the water to a boil, add the brown sugar and the cornstarch
paste, stirring constantly. Beat the egg whites stiff, and when the
cornstarch mixture is clear add to the egg whites and beat. When
thoroughly mixed add the mapleine, nut meats and salt. Pour into pans
to mold. This pudding is most satisfactory in texture, and volume is
increased when beaten on a power machine.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount of one serving  1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


NORWEGIAN PRUNE PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Prunes, after cooking |          |4 lb. |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Boiling water         |          |      |        |         |
    or                  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Prune juice           |          |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Seed and cut up the cooked prunes. Mix the cinnamon, sugar, salt and
cornstarch together and add to the boiling water or prune juice and cook
until the starch is clear. Remove from the fire and add the lemon juice
and prunes.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PINEAPPLE PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Water                 |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemons                |4         |      |        |         |
  Pineapple, grated, #10|1 can     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar and cornstarch and add to the boiling water. When clear,
remove from the fire and add the pineapple and lemon juice. Serve with
whipped cream.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PINEAPPLE TAPIOCA PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Pearl tapioca         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  Pineapple juice       |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Pineapple, cut fine   |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |3         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the tapioca over night and cook in boiling water till transparent.
Remove from the fire and add the sugar, lemon, pineapple and the beaten
whites of eggs. Serve with whipped cream.

  Number of servings 20
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PRUNE GELATIN

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cold water            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Gelatin               |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Prune juice           |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemons                |6         |      |        |         |
  Prunes, after cooking |          |4 lb. |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the gelatin in the cold water until softened. Heat the prune juice
to boiling, add the sugar and pour over the gelatin, stirring until
dissolved. When the gelatin begins to set, add the lemon juice and pour
over the seeded prunes which have been arranged in rows on the bottom of
a pan.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RAISIN TAPIOCA

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tapioca               |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Mapleine              |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Nuts, chopped         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the tapioca over night. Add to the boiling water and sugar and cook
until clear. Remove from the fire and add the raisins, mapleine, nuts
and salt.

  Number of servings 75
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SNOW PUDDING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Gelatin               |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Cold water            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Boiling water         |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |20        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |6 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the gelatin in the cold water. Add the sugar to the boiling water
and pour over the softened gelatin, stirring until the gelatin is
dissolved. When the gelatin has begun to set, add the lemon juice. Beat
the egg whites stiff, add the gelatin and beat. Put into a pan and let
the mixture harden. Serve with custard sauce.

  Number of servings 72
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


TAPIOCA CREAM

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Tapioca, pearl        |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |15        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1-1/2 gal.|      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak the tapioca over night and cook until clear in the scalded milk.
Beat the eggs and sugar, add to the tapioca mixture and cook for a few
minutes. Remove from fire and add salt and vanilla.

  Number of servings 75
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


FRUIT SAUCES


APRICOT SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Apricots              |          |3 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |3-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Sort and wash the apricots. Cover with cold water and soak over night.
Cook slowly and when nearly done add the sugar.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CRANBERRY JELLY

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cranberries           |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Pick over and wash the cranberries. Add the water and cook until the
berries are soft. Rub through a puree sieve. Add the sugar and again
bring to the boiling point. Pour into a pan to mold. Cut in small
squares to serve.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount in one serving 2 tbsp.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CRANBERRY SAUCE

 ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
 INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
 ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
 Cranberries           |7-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
 Sugar                 |10 c.     |      |        |         |
 Water                 |3-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
 ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Pick over and wash the cranberries. Add the water and cook until the
berries are soft. Rub through a sieve, add the sugar and bring to a
boil.

  Number of servings 40
  Amount in one serving 1/2 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


DRIED PEACH SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Peaches, dried        |          |3 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |3-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Sort and wash the peaches. Cover with cold water and soak over night.
Cook slowly and when nearly done add the sugar.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PRUNE SAUCE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Prunes                |          |4 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Sort and wash the prunes. Cover with cold water and soak over night.
Cook slowly and when nearly done add the sugar.

  Number of servings 50
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BAKED RHUBARB

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rhubarb               |1-1/2 gal.|      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |9 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemons                |3         |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash the rhubarb and cut in pieces three quarters of an inch in length.
Mix the rhubarb with the sugar and the lemons, which have been cut in
thin slices. Pour into a baking pan and bake in a slow oven until
tender.

  Number of servings 45
  Amount in one serving 1/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CAKES, FILLINGS AND FROSTINGS


APPLE-SAUCE CAKE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Apple sauce           |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |1 lb. |        |         |
  Flour                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Nutmeg                |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Cloves                |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |4 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar. Add the apple sauce, then the dry ingredients
and the raisins. Bake in a slow oven in loaf or sheet pans. This may be
iced with a chocolate icing and cut in squares. This amount makes six
pans eight inches square.

  Number of servings 54
  Amount in one serving 1 square
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BANANA CREAM CAKE

  -------------------+-------------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS        |AMOUNT       |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  -------------------+-------------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cake recipe        |             |      |        |         |
    (see page 169)   |1/2 of recipe|      |        |         |
  Cream pie filling  |             |      |        |         |
    (see page 184)   |1/3 of recipe|      |        |         |
  Bananas            |             |4 lb. |        |         |
  -------------------+-------------+------+--------+---------+----------

Follow the directions for making cake and bake the mixture in a sheet
pan about twenty-four inches square. Make the cream pie filling recipe.
When the cake comes from the oven slice the bananas over the top, pour
the pie filling over it and cover with a meringue made of the egg whites
and sugar provided in the cream pie filling recipe. Brown the meringue
in the oven. Cool and cut in squares.

  Number of servings 100
  Amount in one serving 1 square 2 in. x 2 in.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CAKE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |14        |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Flour, pastry         |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar thoroughly. Add the yolks and vanilla and
continue creaming. Mix the dry ingredients and add alternately with the
milk to the fat, sugar and eggs. Fold in the well-beaten whites last. If
a kitchen mixing machine is used for making the cake, the best results
are obtained by creaming the fat and sugar twenty to thirty minutes on
the machine and completing the remainder of the mixing as quickly as
possible. This makes nine two-layer cakes, each cake nine and one fourth
inches in diameter and cutting sixteen slices.

  Number of servings 144
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CARAMEL CAKE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Fat                   |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |14        |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Flour, pastry         |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Caramelize one cup of the sugar and add two cups of water to dissolve.
Cool this syrup. Cream the fat and remaining sugar, add the egg yolks
and vanilla, and the caramelized syrup. Mix the dry ingredients and add
alternately with the milk. Add the beaten whites of eggs last. This will
make nine two-layer cakes, nine and one fourth inches in diameter.

  Number of servings 144
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE CAKE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |8         |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Flour, pastry         |4-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |5 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |14        |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |6         |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cocoa                 |          |12 oz.|        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a custard of the egg yolks, milk and cocoa, and cool. Cream the fat
and sugar thoroughly, add the egg yolks, the chocolate custard and
vanilla. Mix the dry ingredients and add alternately with the milk. Fold
in the beaten egg whites. This amount will make ten two-layer cakes,
nine and one fourth inches in diameter, each cake to be cut in sixteen
pieces.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SMALL CHOCOLATE CUP CAKES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Chocolate             |          |2 oz. |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Flour, pastry         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |2         |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Nuts, chopped         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Melt the chocolate over hot water and add the butter substitute to it.
Beat the eggs and add the sugar and vanilla and combine with the melted
butter substitute and chocolate. Mix and sift the dry ingredients and
add alternately with the liquid. Add the nuts last.

  Number of servings 36
  Amount in one serving 1
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


**FRUIT OATMEAL CRUMB COOKIES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |6         |      |        |         |
  Sour cream            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |1-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Cake crumbs           |3/4 qt.   |      |        |         |
  Oatmeal               |1-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Nuts                  |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Mapleine              |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar. Add the eggs, sour cream, lemon juice and
mapleine, and the well-mixed dry ingredients. Drop on a well-greased pan
using two tablespoons per cooky and bake in a hot oven; or this mixture
may be spread out on a sheet and when baked cut in squares or bars.

  Number of servings 144
  Amount in one serving 2 tbsp. dough
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


GINGERBREAD

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Molasses              |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |6         |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |1-1/2 tsp.|      |        |         |
  Ginger                |1-1/2 tsp.|      |        |         |
  Flour                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Water, hot            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar thoroughly. Add the eggs and molasses and
continue to beat. Mix the dry ingredients and add alternately with the
water. Bake in well-greased and floured pans. The gingerbread may be
baked in five loaf tins cutting fifteen slices per loaf or as a sheet
cake.

  Number of servings 75
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


ORANGE AND RAISIN CUP CAKES

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |10 c.     |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |14        |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Pastry flour          |5-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Oranges, size 126     |10        |      |        |         |
  Milk and orange juice |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar thoroughly. Add the egg yolks and vanilla. Mix
the dry ingredients and add alternately with the liquid. Chop the
oranges and express the juice, to which is added the milk to make the
required amount of liquid. Add the chopped oranges and raisins and the
stiffly beaten whites. Bake in well-greased muffin tins.

  Number of servings 152
  Amount in one serving 1/4 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SPICE CAKE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |10 c.     |      |        |         |
  Eggs                  |14        |      |        |         |
  Sour cream            |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Soda                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |4 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Cloves                |1-1/2 tbsp|      |        |         |
  Allspice              |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Molasses              |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the sugar and egg yolks and add the sour cream. Add the molasses
and lemon juice. Mix the dry ingredients and add to the mixture. Add the
raisins and the beaten egg whites. Three quarts of sour milk and one and
one half pounds of fat may be used instead of sour cream. This makes ten
two-layer cakes, nine and one fourth inches in diameter.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


SUGAR COOKIES

  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT     |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Brown sugar          |2 qt.      |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute    |           |3 lb. |        |         |
  Flour                |5 qt.      |      |        |         |
  Soda                 |2 tsp.     |      |        |         |
  Vanilla              |2 tbsp.    |      |        |         |
  Water                |3 c.       |      |        |         |
  Salt                 |1-1/2 tbsp.|      |        |         |
  ---------------------+-----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar. Mix the dry ingredients and add with the water
to the fat and sugar. This will make a soft dough which will not roll
out until thoroughly chilled. Keep the dough in the refrigerator and
take out only that portion which may be rolled at one time. Roll very
thin, cut into cookies three and one half inches in diameter and bake on
a floured pan.

  Number of servings 300
  Amount in one serving One 3-1/2 in. cooky
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


WASHINGTON PIE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cake recipe           |12 layers |      |        |         |
    (see page 169)      |          |      |        |         |
  Chocolate filling     |3 qt.     |      |        |         |
    (see page 175)      |          |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Split the layers of cake in half. Spread them with one cup of chocolate
filling. Put the top over the filling and sprinkle with powdered sugar.
Cut each layer in eight wedge-shaped pieces.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1 piece
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


WHITE CAKE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |6 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |          |6 lb. |        |         |
  Milk                  |3-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Baking powder         |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |60        |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |9 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cream the fat and sugar thoroughly. Mix the dry ingredients and add
alternately to the fat and sugar with the milk. Fold in the well-beaten
whites last. This makes eighteen two-layer cakes. If preferred, this
amount may be baked in square tins, twenty-four by twenty-four inches,
and will fill three pans. Where a kitchen mixing machine is used in cake
making the best results are obtained by creaming the fat and sugar in
the machine for from twenty to thirty minutes and then adding the
remainder of the ingredients and completing the mixing quickly.

  Number of servings 288
  Amount in one serving 1 slice
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cornstarch            |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Cocoa                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/4 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |6         |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the cornstarch, sugar, cocoa and salt and add to the hot milk,
stirring constantly. When cornstarch is cooked add the beaten egg yolks,
butter substitute and vanilla.

  Total volume 3 qt.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cream pie filling     |          |      |        |         |
    (see p. 184)        |          |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

See method under recipe for cream pie filling, p. 184.

This filling may be used not only for pie, but for cake, cream puffs,
Washington pie and for similar desserts.

  Number of servings
  Amount of one serving
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LEMON FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Lemon pie filling     |          |      |        |         |
    (see p. 185)        |          |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

This filling may be used not only for pie, but for cake and similar
desserts.

See method under recipe for lemon pie filling, p. 185.

  Number of servings
  Amount of one serving
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CARAMEL FROSTING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Brown sugar           |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  White sugar           |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |10        |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the sugar and water to the soft-ball stage or until it forms a
thread. Pour into the stiffly beaten egg whites, add the vanilla and
continue beating on the machine until the icing is stiff. This amount
will frost nine two-layer cakes, nine and one quarter inches in
diameter.

  Number of servings
  Amount in one serving
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE ICING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cocoa                 |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  Sugar, powdered       |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Butter                |          |2 oz. |        |         |
  Water                 |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |1 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Roll and sift the powdered sugar and cocoa, and mix with the water,
melted butter and vanilla. This amount will make two cups of icing.

  Number of servings
  Amount of one serving
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______



WHITE FROSTING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Granulated sugar      |6 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |10        |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Cook the sugar and water to the soft-ball stage or until it forms a
thread. Pour into the stiffly beaten egg whites, add the vanilla and
continue beating in the machine until the icing is stiff. This amount
will frost nine two-layer cakes, nine and one quarter inches in
diameter.

  Number of servings 144
  Amount in one serving
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PIES


PIE CRUST

  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS          |AMOUNT  |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Flour                |        |3 lb.    |        |         |
  Shortening           |        |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                 |2 tbsp. |         |        |         |
  Iced water           |        |         |        |         |
  ---------------------+--------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Weigh the fat and flour, add the salt and work the fat into the flour
lightly, using the tips of the fingers. Add the iced water a little at a
time, being careful to distribute the water evenly through the mixture.
Avoid getting the dough too wet. For this amount about one and one half
cups of water is sufficient. This amount will make from eleven to twelve
pie shells, using pie tins ten and three quarter inches in diameter, or
it will make from six to seven two-crust pies.

  Number of servings
  Amount in one serving
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


APPLE PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Apples, before peeling|          |16 lb.|        |         |
  Cinnamon              |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Butter substitute     |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Fill the crusts with one quart of apples. Cover with the sugar and
flour. Add the fat and cover with the top crust. Bake in a moderate
oven. This recipe makes fourteen, ten and three quarter inch pies, using
one quart per pie.

  Number of servings 112
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


APRICOT PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Apricots, dry         |          |5 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |6-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/3 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak and cook the apricots in the water. When the apricots are soft add
the well-mixed sugar and cornstarch and cook until thickened. Add the
lemon juice. This amount will make ten pies, ten and three quarter
inches in diameter, using three cups of filling per pie.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BLUEBERRY PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Blueberries, #10 can  |          |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Drain the berries and heat the juice to boiling. Mix the sugar and
cornstarch and sift into boiling juice. When thickened, add the berries
and lemon juice. Fill pie shells, using three cups per pie. This will
make nine, ten and three quarter inch pies.

  Number of servings 72
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CRANBERRY AND RAISIN PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Cranberries, uncooked |3-3/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |2-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |7 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vinegar, spiced       |2-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Nut meats, chopped    |2-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash and pick over the cranberries. Steam the raisins and mix with the
remainder of the ingredients. Fill the pie shells. This recipe makes
ten, ten and three quarter inch pies, using three cups per pie.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


DRIED PEACH PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Peaches, dried        |          |5 lb. |        |         |
  Water                 |6-1/4 qt. |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1-1/2  c. |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Soak and cook the peaches in the water. When soft, add the well-mixed
sugar and cornstarch and cook until thickened. Add the lemon juice and
fill the pie shells. This will fill ten, ten and three quarter inch
pies, using three cups of filling per pie.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount of one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


GOOSEBERRY AND RAISIN PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Gooseberries, #10 can |4         |      |        |         |
  Raisins               |12 c.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Gooseberry juice      |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
    or                  |          |      |        |         |
  Gooseberry juice and  |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
    water               |          |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Drain the gooseberries, retaining one gallon of the juice. Heat the
juice and when it reaches the boiling point add the well-mixed sugar and
cornstarch, stirring constantly. When the mixture has thickened, add the
gooseberries and the raisins. The raisins will be improved by steaming
before adding to the mixture. This quantity makes twenty, ten and three
quarter inch pies, using three cups per pie.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LOGANBERRY PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Berries, #10 can      |4         |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Open the berries and pour into a colander to separate the berries from
the juice. Heat the juice to the boiling point and add the well-mixed
cornstarch and sugar, stirring constantly. When the mixture has
thickened, add the lemon juice and berries. This makes filling for
eighteen pies, ten and three quarter inches in diameter and cutting
eight pieces per pie.

  Number of servings 144
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


RHUBARB PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Rhubarb, diced        |4 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |5-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Wash and dice the rhubarb, and put over a slow fire to cook. When the
mixture is boiling, add the well-mixed cornstarch and sugar, stirring
constantly. When thickened, remove from the fire and fill the pie
crusts, using three cups per pie. This amount makes fourteen pies, ten
and three quarter inches in diameter.

  Number of servings 112
  Amount per serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BANANA CREAM PIE FILLING

  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS         |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                |8 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Sugar               |5 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Cornstarch          |1/2 qt.  |         |        |         |
  Flour               |1-1/2 qt.|         |        |         |
  Egg yolks           |48       |         |        |         |
  Butter substitute   |         |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt                |2 tbsp.  |         |        |         |
  Vanilla             |1/3 c.   |         |        |         |
  Bananas             |20       |         |        |         |
  Egg whites          |48       |         |        |         |
  Sugar               |4-3/4 C. |         |        |         |
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Mix sugar, cornstarch and flour, and add to scalded milk, stirring
constantly. When thickened add well-beaten egg yolks, butter
substitute, salt and vanilla. Cut one banana in pieces over bottom of
crust. Cover with filling, using two and one half cups per pie. Cover
with meringue and brown in a moderate oven. This makes twenty, ten and
three quarter inch pies.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount of one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BUTTERSCOTCH PIE FILLING

  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS         |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                |8 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Brown sugar         |5 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Egg yolks           |48       |         |        |         |
  Flour               |1-1/2 qt.|         |        |         |
  Cornstarch          |1/2 qt.  |         |        |         |
  Butter substitute   |         |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Vanilla             |1/3 c.   |         |        |         |
  Salt                |2 tbsp.  |         |        |         |
  Egg whites          |48       |         |        |         |
  Sugar               |4-3/4 c. |         |        |         |
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk, reserving sufficient to make a thin paste with the flour
and cornstarch. Add the brown sugar to the scalded milk and pour in the
thickening, stirring constantly. If a dark brown sugar is used, a little
soda may be added to the milk to prevent curdling. When the mixture has
thickened add the fat and egg yolks and cook for a few minutes. Remove
from the fire and add the salt and vanilla. This recipe makes twenty
pies, using two and one half cups per pie. See chocolate pie recipe for
method of making meringue.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CHOCOLATE PIE FILLING

  -------------------+----------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS        |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  -------------------+----------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar              |5 qt.     |         |        |         |
  Water              |8 qt.     |         |        |         |
  Yolks              |48        |         |        |         |
  Flour              |1-1/2 qt. |         |        |         |
  Cocoa              |6 c.      |         |        |         |
  Butter substitute  |          |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt               |2 tbsp.   |         |        |         |
  Egg whites         |48        |         |        |         |
  Sugar              |4-3/4 c.  |         |        |         |
  -------------------+----------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the cocoa, flour, salt and sugar together thoroughly. Sift into the
boiling water, stirring constantly. When the mixture has thickened add
the well-beaten egg yolks and let cook three or four minutes. Add the
butter substitute.

Beat the egg whites until they hold their shape. Add the sugar and
continue beating until sugar and egg are thoroughly blended. Avoid
beating the sugar and egg until too stiff to spread. Bake in a moderate
oven. This recipe makes twenty, ten and three quarter inch pies, using
two and one half cups per pie.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CREAM PIE FILLING

  -------------------+----------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS        |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  -------------------+----------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk               |8 qt.     |         |        |         |
  Sugar              |5 qt.     |         |        |         |
  Cornstarch         |1/2 qt.   |         |        |         |
  Flour              |1-1/2 qt. |         |        |         |
  Egg yolks          |48        |         |        |         |
  Butter substitute  |          |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Salt               |2 tbsp.   |         |        |         |
  Vanilla            |1/3 c.    |         |        |         |
  Egg whites         |48        |         |        |         |
  Sugar              |4-3/4 c.  |         |        |         |
  -------------------+----------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar, cornstarch and flour and add to scalded milk, stirring
constantly. When thickened, add the well-beaten egg yolks, butter
substitute, salt and vanilla. Fill the pie shells, using two and one
half cups per pie and cover with meringue. This recipe makes twenty, ten
and three quarter inch pies.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


CUSTARD PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Milk                  |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Eggs, whole           |30        |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |15        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |3 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Nutmeg                |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Scald the milk. Add the eggs, sugar and vanilla, beaten together. Fill
the pie shells and sprinkle the nutmeg over the top. Bake in a slow
oven. This recipe makes twelve, ten and three quarter inch pies, using
three and one half cups per pie.

  Number of servings 96
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LEMON PIE FILLING

  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS         |AMOUNT   |WEIGHT   |CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------
  Water               |8 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Sugar               |5 qt.    |         |        |         |
  Cornstarch          |1/2 qt.  |         |        |         |
  Flour               |1-1/2 qt.|         |        |         |
  Salt                |2 tbsp.  |         |        |         |
  Egg yolks           |48       |         |        |         |
  Butter substitute   |         |1-1/2 lb.|        |         |
  Lemons, grated rind |         |         |        |         |
    and juice         |20       |         |        |         |
  Egg whites          |48       |         |        |         |
  Sugar               |4-3/4 c. |         |        |         |
  --------------------+---------+---------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar, flour and cornstarch and add to the rapidly boiling
water. When thickened, add the fat and egg yolks. Cook for a few
minutes, and when removed from the fire add the lemon juice and grated
rind. Put two and one half cups to each ten and three quarter inch pie
shell and cover with meringue and brown in oven. For method of making
meringue see chocolate pie recipe. This recipe makes twenty pies.

  Number of servings 160
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


PINEAPPLE PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Pineapple, #10 cans   |3         |      |        |         |
  Juice and water       |9 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |5 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |2 c.      |      |        |         |
  Flour                 |1-1/2 qt. |      |        |         |
  Yolks                 |48        |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |2 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Whites                |48        |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |4-3/4 c.  |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar, flour and cornstarch and add to the rapidly boiling
water. When thickened add the egg yolks. Cook for a few minutes, remove
from the fire and add the lemon juice and pineapple. Fill ten and three
quarter inch shells, using two and one half cups of filling per pie.
Cover with meringue and bake in a moderate oven. For method of making
meringue see chocolate pie recipe. This recipe makes twenty-seven pies.

  Number of servings 216
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______

PUMPKIN PIE FILLING

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |5 c.      |      |        |         |
  Ginger                |5 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Cinnamon              |6 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Cloves                |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  Cornstarch            |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1 tbsp.   |      |        |         |
  Pumpkin, #10 can      |1         |      |        |         |
  Egg yolks             |20        |      |        |         |
  Milk, hot             |4 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Egg whites            |20        |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the dry ingredients and add to the pumpkin. Beat the eggs, add the
scalded milk and pour into the pumpkin and spices, and mix thoroughly.
This fills ten, ten and three quarter inch pie shells, using three and
one half cups per shell.

  Number of servings 80
  Amount in one serving 1/8 pie
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


BEVERAGES


FRUIT PUNCH

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Grated pineapple      |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Lemon juice           |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Orange juice          |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Grape juice           |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Tea infusion          |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2-1/2 gal.|      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Mint leaves           |1/2 c.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a syrup of the sugar and a quart of the water. While the syrup is
cooling add the mint leaves. Mix the syrup with the fruit juices and
strain. Serve the punch iced. The volume will be somewhat greater if the
fruit pulp is not strained out.

  Number of servings 62
  Amount in one serving 1 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


GINGER ALE LEMONADE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Lemon juice           |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Ice water             |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Ginger ale            |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Mint leaves           |1 c.      |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a syrup of the sugar and water, and while this is cooling add the
mint leaves. Combine the cold syrup, lemon juice and water, and add the
ginger ale. The ginger ale should not be added until just before the
lemonade is to be served.

  Number of servings 56
  Amount in one serving 1 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


LEMONADE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Lemon juice           |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Sugar                 |2 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Water                 |1 qt.     |      |        |         |
  Ice water             |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Make a syrup of the sugar and the one quart of water, and let cool. Mix
with the lemon juice and add the ice water. While the syrup is cooling,
mint leaves may be added if desired.

  Number of servings 45
  Amount in one serving 1 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


HOT CHOCOLATE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Sugar                 |3/4 c.    |      |        |         |
  Grated chocolate      |1-1/2 c.  |      |        |         |
  Salt                  |1/2 tsp.  |      |        |         |
  Boiling water         |3 c.      |      |        |         |
  Milk                  |1 gal.    |      |        |         |
  Vanilla               |2 tsp.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Mix the sugar, grated chocolate and salt with the boiling water and cook
until smooth. Add the hot milk and cook ten to fifteen minutes to
develop the flavor. Add vanilla and serve. One half teaspoon of cinnamon
may be added for flavor if desired.

  Number of servings 27
  Amount in one serving 2/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______


URN COFFEE

  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  INGREDIENTS           |AMOUNT    |WEIGHT|CALORIES|UNIT COST|TOTAL COST
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------
  Coffee, ground medium |          |      |        |         |
    fine                |4 c.      |      |        |         |
  Water                 |2 gal.    |      |        |         |
  ----------------------+----------+------+--------+---------+----------

Put the ground coffee into an urn sack. Let the boiling water from the
water urn flow over the coffee. Drain the coffee from the faucet of the
urn, and pour the entire amount over the ground coffee twice. This
should make a coffee of good strength. The important points in making
coffee are that the urn should be kept perfectly clean, using clear
water and steel wool or baking soda; the water bags should be kept
washed and well aired; the water used in making the coffee should
always be actively boiling before the coffee is made, and the water in
the jacket should be maintained at boiling temperature.

  Number of servings 48
  Amount in one serving 2/3 c.
  Calories in one serving______
  Cost of one serving______




CHAPTER VII


TABLE OF WEIGHTS AND THEIR APPROXIMATE MEASURES

  +-----------------------------------+-------+---------------+--------+
  |FOOD MATERIAL                      |WEIGHT |MEASURE        |CALORIES|
  +-----------------------------------+-------+---------------+--------+
  |Apples, A. P.,[A] fresh            |6 oz.  |1 apple        |        |
  |                                   |       |100 size       |        |
  |                                   |       |box apples     |        |
  |Apples, diced, half-inch cubes     |1 lb.  |4-1/3 c.       |        |
  |Apricots, dried, A. P.[A]          |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |  1 lb. apricots soaked and cooked |       |               |        |
  |    equals 4-1/2 cups without      |       |               |        |
  |    juice.                         |       |               |        |
  |  1 lb. apricots after soaking and |       |               |        |
  |    cooking weighs 2-1/2 lb.,      |       |               |        |
  |    without juice.                 |       |               |        |
  |Baking powder                      |1 lb.  |2-1/8 c.       |        |
  |Bananas, A. P.[A]                  |1 lb.  |3 medium sized |        |
  |Beans, dried lima, uncooked        |1 lb.  |2-2/3 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. dried lima beans soaked and|       |               |        |
  |    cooked equals 6-1/2 cups       |       |               |        |
  |  1 lb. dried lima beans after     |       |               |        |
  |    soaking and cooking            |       |               |        |
  |    weighs 2 lb. 9 oz.             |       |               |        |
  |Beans, kidney, A. P.[A]            |1 lb.  |2-2/3 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. kidney beans soaked and    |       |               |        |
  |    cooked equals 7 cups.          |       |               |        |
  |  1 lb. kidney beans after soaking |       |               |        |
  |    and cooking weighs             |       |               |        |
  |    2 lb. 6-1/2 oz.                |       |               |        |
  |Beans, navy, A. P.[A]              |1 lb.  |2-1/3 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. navy beans soaked and      |       |               |        |
  |    cooked equals 6 cups.          |       |               |        |
  |  1 lb. navy beans after soaking   |       |               |        |
  |    and cooking weighs 2 lb. 3 oz. |       |               |        |
  |Beets, diced, cooked               |1 lb.  |2-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Bran                               |1 lb.  |10-1/2 c.      |        |
  |Bread, soft, broken                |1 lb.  |9 c.           |        |
  |Bread, broken stale                |1 lb.  |9 c.           |        |
  |Bread crumbs, stale, finely sifted |1 lb.  |3-1/3 c.       |        |
  |Butter                             |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |Cabbage, shredded                  |1 lb.  |5-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Celery, quarter-inch pieces        |1 lb.  |4 c.           |        |
  |Carrots, diced                     |1 lb.  |4 c.           |        |
  |Cheese, cottage, A. P.[A], unmixed |1 lb.  |2-2/3 c.       |        |
  |Cheese, N. Y. or Wisc. cream,      |1 lb.  |2-2/3 c.       |        |
  |  fresh, cubed or cut fine         |       |               |        |
  |Chicken, cooked and cubed          |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |Chocolate, cut fine                |1 lb.  |3-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Cinnamon, ground                   |1 lb.  |4 c.           |        |
  |Cloves, ground                     |1 lb.  |3-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Cocoa                              |1 lb.  |4 c.           |        |
  |Cocoanut, short                    |1 lb.  |7 c.           |        |
  |Coffee, medium ground              |1 lb.  |4-2/3 c.       |        |
  |Corn, canned                       |1 lb.  |1-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Corn meal                          |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |  1 lb. corn meal when cooked      |       |               |        |
  |    equals 3-1/2 qt.               |       |               |        |
  |Cornstarch                         |1 lb.  |3-1/8 c.       |        |
  |Crackers, 2 inches by 2 inches     |1 lb.  |108            |        |
  |Crackers, sodas, whole             |1 lb.  |56             |        |
  |Crackers, broken                   |1 lb.  |10 c.          |        |
  |Cranberries, uncooked              |1 lb.  |5 c.           |        |
  |Eggs, whole in shell               |1 lb.  |8              |        |
  |Egg whites                         |1/2 lb.|8 whites = 1 c.|        |
  |Egg yolks                          |1/2 lb.|12 yolks = 1 c.|        |
  |Farina, uncooked                   |1 lb.  |2-2/3 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. farina when cooked equals  |       |               |        |
  |    3 qts.                         |       |               |        |
  |Figs, layer, whole                 |1 lb.  |2-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Figs, layer, cut fine              |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |Flour, graham                      |1 lb.  |3-2/3 c.       |        |
  |Flour, wheat, unsifted             |1 lb.  |3-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Gelatin, granulated                |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |Ginger                             |1 lb.  |4-1/4 c.       |        |
  |Grapenuts                          |1 lb.  |3-7/8 c.       |        |
  |Grapes, cut and seeded as for salad|1 lb.  |2-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Hamburg steak, raw                 |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |Hominy, pearl                      |1 lb.  |2-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Lard substitute or compound        |1 lb.  |2-1/8 to       |        |
  |                                   |       |2-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Lemons, 300 size                   |1 lb.  |4 lemons       |        |
  |Lemon juice                        |       |4 to           |        |
  |                                   |       |5 lemons = 1 c.|        |
  |Lettuce, average head size         |9 oz.  |1 head or 10-12|        |
  |                                   |       |salad leaves   |        |
  |Macaroni, broken 1-1/2 inch pieces |1 lb.  |5 c.           |        |
  |  1 lb. macaroni when cooked       |       |               |        |
  |    equals 3 qt.                   |       |               |        |
  |Molasses                           |1 lb.  |1-1/3 c.       |        |
  |Mustard                            |1 lb.  |5 c.           |        |
  |Nutmeats, English walnuts, whole   |1 lb.  |4-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Nutmeats, English walnuts, chopped |1 lb.  |4 c.           |        |
  |Nutmeg, ground                     |1 lb.  |3-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Oats, rolled                       |1 lb.  |5-1/2 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. oats when cooked equals    |       |               |        |
  |    2-1/3 qts                      |       |               |        |
  |Oils, cottonseed                   |1 lb   |2-1/8 c.       |        |
  |Oleomargarine                      |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |Oranges, diced                     |1 lb.  |2-1/3 c.       |        |
  |Oranges, whole, 126 size           |8 to   |               |        |
  |                                   |9 oz.  |1 orange       |        |
  |Onions, chopped                    |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |Paprika                            |1 lb.  |3-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Peaches, dried                     |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |  1 lb. peaches soaked and cooked  |       |               |        |
  |    equals 4-1/4 cups without      |       |               |        |
  |    juice.                         |       |               |        |
  |  1 lb. peaches soaked and cooked  |       |               |        |
  |    weighs 2-1/2 lb. without juice.|       |               |        |
  |Peas, canned, drained              |1 lb.  |2-2/3 c.       |        |
  |Pepper, white                      |1 lb.  |4-1/4 c.       |        |
  |Pickles, whole                     |1 lb.  |16 if          |        |
  |                                   |       |3 in. length   |        |
  |                                   |       |22 if          |        |
  |                                   |       |2 in. length   |        |
  |Pickles, chopped                   |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |Pineapple, canned broken pieces    |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |Potatoes, unpeeled                 |1 lb.  |3 medium sized |        |
  |Potatoes, peeled                   |3/4 lb.|1 lb. before   |        |
  |                                   |after  |peeling        |        |
  |                                   |peeling|               |        |
  |Potatoes, diced for creaming       |1 lb.  |2-1/3 c. diced |        |
  |                                   |       |before peeling |        |
  |Prunes, A. P.[A]                   |1 lb.  |2-1/2 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. prunes soaked and cooked   |       |               |        |
  |    equals 3 cups without juice.   |       |               |        |
  |  1 lb. prunes soaked and cooked   |       |               |        |
  |    weighs 1-5/8 lbs. without      |       |               |        |
  |    juice.                         |       |               |        |
  |Pumpkin, canned                    |1 lb.  |1-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Raisins, seeded                    |1 lb.  |2-1/2 c.       |        |
  |Raisins, seedless                  |1 lb.  |3 c.           |        |
  |Rice, whole                        |1 lb.  |2-1/8 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. of rice when cooked        |       |               |        |
  |    equals 2 qt.                   |       |               |        |
  |Salmon                             |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |Salt                               |1 lb.  |2-3/8 c.       |        |
  |Soda                               |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |Spaghetti                          |1 lb.  |5 c.           |        |
  |  1 lb. spaghetti when cooked      |       |               |        |
  |    equals 2-3/4 qt.               |       |               |        |
  |Spinach                            |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |String beans, canned               |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  |Sugar, brown                       |1 lb.  |2-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Sugar, granulated                  |1 lb.  |2-1/8 c.       |        |
  |Sugar, powdered                    |1 lb.  |2-3/4 c.       |        |
  |Tapioca, pearl                     |1 lb.  |2-3/4 c.       |        |
  |  1 lb. of tapioca soaked and      |       |               |        |
  |    cooked equals 7-1/2 c.         |       |               |        |
  |Tea                                |1 lb.  |8 c.           |        |
  |Tuna fish                          |1 lb.  |2 c.           |        |
  +-----------------------------------+-------+---------------+--------+

[Note A: A. P. = As purchased.]




  INDEX


  Appearance of food, 8, 9

  Apple and celery salad, 137

  Apple dumpling, 143

  Apple pie filling, 178-179

  Apple-sauce cake, 168

  Apple tapioca, 154

  Apples, baked, 155

  Apricot pie filling, 179

  Apricot sauce, 165

  Asparagus, 46
    creamed, 108
    creamed fresh, 108-109
    on toast, fresh, 109


  Bacon muffins, 125

  Baked beans, 109

  Banana cream cake, 168-169

  Banana cream pie filling, 182-183

  Banana salad, 137

  Beans, 46
    baked, 109

  Beans, Lima, with green peppers and pimentos, 110
    string, 110-111

  Beef, 42-43
    dried, on toast, 82
    rib roast, 87

  Beef a la mode, 81

  Beets, 47
    buttered, 111

  Beverages for cafeteria menus, 13
    for tea-room menus, 40, 41
    list of, 56
    recipes for, 187-190

  Birds, veal, 95

  Biscuits, baking-powder, 124

  Blanc mange, chocolate, 157
    date nut, 158-159

  Blueberry pie filling, 179-180

  Boiled salad dressing, 141

  Bouillon, 73-74

  Bran muffins, dark, 127

  Bread, brown, 129
    muffins, 125-127
    nut, 129
    quick, 48-49
    rolls, 49, 125, 130-131
    white, 131
    yeast, 49

  Bread for cafeteria menus, 12
    for tea-room menus, 38, 39, 40, 41
    recipes for, 124-132

  Bread pudding, 143-144

  Breaded veal, 93-94

  Brown Betty, 144

  Brown bread, 129

  Browned potatoes, 118

  Buttered beets, 111
    cabbage, 112
    carrots, 112-113
      and peas, 113
    onions, 117
    peas, 117-118

  Butterscotch pie filling, 183


  Cabbage, 47
    buttered, 112
    creamed, 112
    in vinegar, 111

  Cabbage salad, 134

  Cafeteria, menus for, 11, 13-36

  Cake, apple-sauce, 168
    banana cream, 168-169
    caramel, 170
    chocolate, 170-171
    chocolate cup, 171
    orange and raisin cup, 173
    spice, 173-174
    white, 175

  Cakes, list of, 54-55
    recipes for, 168-178

  Carrot and raisin salad, 134

  Carrot plum pudding, 148

  Carrots, 47
    buttered, 112-113
      and peas, 113
    creamed, 113

  Cauliflower, 47

  Caramel Bavarian cream, 156

  Caramel cake, 170

  Caramel frosting, 176-177

  Caramel tapioca, 156

  Celery, 46
    creamed, 114

  Chart of foods, seasonal, 57-59

  Cheese dishes, 45

  Cheese fondue, 102

  Chicken, 44

  Chicken a la king, 89

  Chicken and biscuit, 88

  Chicken croquettes, 89-90

  Chicken salad, 140

  Chicken soup, 74

  Chocolate, hot, 189

  Chocolate blanc mange, 157

  Chocolate bread pudding, 144-145

  Chocolate cake, 170-171

  Chocolate cup cakes, 171

  Chocolate filling, 175-176

  Chocolate frosting, 177

  Chocolate icing, 177

  Chocolate pie filling, 184

  Chocolate pudding, 157

  Chocolate rice pudding, 151

  Chocolate sauce, 152

  Chocolate souffle, 145

  Chops, breaded pork, 91-92
    pork, with dressing, 92

  Cocktails, fruit, 160
    oyster, 99

  Codfish, 44
    balls, 97-98

  Coffee, urn, 189-190

  Color in food, 9

  Combinations of food, 59-61

  Combination vegetable salad, 135

  Cookies, fruit oatmeal crumb, 171-172
    sugar, 174

  Corn, 46
    scalloped, 115

  Corned beef hash, 81-82

  Corn-meal muffins, 126

  Corn pudding, 114

  Cornstarch pudding, 158

  Corn with green peppers and pimentos, 115

  Cost in menu-making, 6

  Cottage cheese croquettes, 102-103

  Cottage cheese salad with celery and green peppers, 138-139

  Cottage cheese salads, 51

  Cottage cheese sandwich filling, 132

  Cottage pudding, 145-146

  Cranberry and raisin pie filling, 180

  Cranberry jelly, 166

  Cranberry sauce, 166

  Creamed asparagus, 108-109
    cabbage, 112
    carrots, 113
    celery, 114
    onions, 117
    peas, 118
    potatoes, 119

  Cream filling, 176

  Cream of celery soup, 76-77

  Cream of corn soup, 77

  Cream of Lima bean soup, 77-78

  Cream of pea soup, 78

  Cream of spinach soup, 78-79

  Cream of tomato soup, 79

  Cream pie filling, 184-185

  Cream soup, 42

  Croquettes, chicken, 89-90
    cottage cheese, 102-103
    meat, 83
    rice, 122

  Crumb muffins, 126-127

  Custard, baked, 155

  Custard pie filling, 185

  Custard sauce, 153

  Cutlets, egg, 105


  Date nut blanc mange, 158-159

  Date torte, 159

  Deviled egg salad, 139-140

  Desserts, list of, 51-56
    for cafeteria menus, 12
    for tea-room menus, 38, 39, 40, 41
    recipes for cold, 154-165
    recipes for hot, 143-154

  Dietetic principles in menus, 1, 3, 5

  Dressings for salad, boiled, 141
    French, 141
    mayonnaise, 142
    Thousand Island, 142

  Dried beef on toast, creamed, 82

  Dried peach pie filling, 180

  Dried peach sauce, 166-167


  Egg cutlets, 105

  Egg hard sauce, 153

  Egg sandwich filling, 132-133

  Eggplant, 47
    fried, 116

  Eggs, 45

  Eggs and ham, scrambled, 105

  Equipment for preparing menus, 5, 6


  Fig tapioca, 159-160

  Filling, apple pie, 178-179
    apricot pie, 179
    banana cream pie, 182-183
    blueberry pie, 179-180
    butterscotch pie, 183
    chocolate, 175-176
    chocolate pie, 184
    cranberry and raisin pie, 180
    cream, 176
    cream pie, 184-185
    custard pie, 185
    dried peach pie, 180
    gooseberry and raisin pie, 181
    lemon, 176
    lemon pie, 185-186
    loganberry pie, 181-182
    pineapple pie, 186
    pumpkin pie, 187
    rhubarb pie, 182

  Fillings for cakes, 168-178
    for pies, 178-187
    for sandwiches, 132-134
    for shortcake, 149-150, 150-151

  Fish, list of, 44
    recipes for, 97-102

  Fish salads, 51

  Flavor of food, 10

  Form of service, 4, 7

  Forms for special dinners, 70-72
    meat order, 66-67
    menu, 67-69
    use of printed, 66

  French fried potatoes, 119

  French salad dressing, 141

  Fried salmon, 100
    oysters, 99

  Fritters, 146

  Frostings, caramel, 176-177
    chocolate, 177
    white, 177-178

  Fruit cobbler, 146-147

  Fruit cocktail, 160

  Fruit gelatin, 160-161

  Fruit oatmeal crumb cookies, 171-172

  Fruit punch, 187-188

  Fruit salad, 138

  Fruit salads, list of, 51

  Fruit sandwich filling, 133

  Fruit sauces, 53
    recipes for, 165-167

  Fruit whip, 161


  Garnishes, 63-65

  Ginger-ale lemonade, 188

  Gingerbread, 172

  Glazed sweet potatoes, 121

  Gooseberry and raisin pie filling, 181

  Graham muffins, 127

  Grapefruit salad, 138

  Grapenut pudding, 147-148


  Halibut, 44
    fried, 98

  Ham, baked, 91

  Hamburg balls, 82

  Ham sandwich filling, 133-134

  Hard sauce, 153-154

  Hash, 83
   corned beef, 81-82

  Hearts, breaded veal, 94
   veal in casserole, 95-96

  Hominy, 47


  Ice creams, 53-54

  Ices, 54


  Lamb, 43
    roast, 90

  Left-overs, 14
    utilization of, 6-7, 61-62, 73

  Lemonade, 188
    ginger-ale, 188

  Lemon filling, 176

  Lemon pie filling, 185-186

  Lemon sauce, 154

  Liver and bacon, 96-97

  Lobster salad, 140

  Loganberry pie filling, 181-182


  Macaroni, 47

  Macaroni and cheese, 103

  Maple nut mold, 161-162

  Mashed potatoes, 119-120
    rutabagas, 122-123

  Mayonnaise dressing, 142

  Measures, use of, 73

  Meat croquettes, 83

  Meat dishes, miscellaneous, 45

  Meat for cafeteria menu, 11
    for tea-room menu, 37, 39, 40, 41

  Meat loaf, 84
    with tomato and celery, 84-85

  Meat order form, 66-67

  Meat pie, 85
    with dressing, 86

  Meat salads, 51

  Meat stew, 86

  Meat substitutes, 45
    recipes for, 102-106

  Meats, list of, 42-44
    recipes for, 81-97

  Menu form, 67-69

  Menu planning, 1-7, 13
    charts and lists for, 42-62
    consideration of patrons in, 2
    dietetic principles in, 1, 3, 5
    equipment in, 5, 6
    for an institution, 1-2, 3, 4, 5, 6
    for a school lunch, 2
    left-overs in, 6-7
    variety of food in, 3, 4, 5

  Menus, breakfast, 14, 16, 18, 20-21, 23, 25, 27-28, 29-30, 32, 34-35
    dinner, 15-16, 17-18, 20, 22-23, 24-25, 26-27, 29, 31-32, 33-34, 36
    lunch, 14-15, 16-17, 19, 21-22, 23-24, 26, 28, 30-31, 32-33, 35, 37
    standard cafeteria, 11
    tea-room, 36-41
    thirty days' menus for cafeteria, 13-36

  Mousse, 53

  Muffins, bacon, 125
    corn-meal, 126
    crumb, 126-127
    dark bran, 127
    graham, 127
    plain, 128
    raised, 127

  Mustard sauce, 106

  Mutton, 43


  Noodle soup, 75

  Norwegian prune pudding, 162-163

  Nut bread, 129


  Odor of food, 9

  Old-fashioned baked rice pudding, 151-152

  Onions, 47
    buttered, 117
    creamed, 117

  Orange and raisin cup cakes, 173

  Oyster cocktail, 99

  Oyster stew, 80

  Oysters, 44
    fried, 99
    scalloped, 100


  Palatability of food, 8

  Parsley buttered potatoes, 120

  Parsnips, 48

  Peanut butter soup, 80

  Peas, 48
    buttered, 117-118
    creamed, 118

  Peppers, 48

  Pie crust, 178

  Pie fillings, 178-179

  Pie, meat, 85
    with dressing, 86
    Washington, 174-175

  Pies, one-crust, 56
    two-crust, 55-56

  Pineapple pie filling, 186

  Pineapple pudding, 162-163

  Pineapple tapioca pudding, 163-164

  Pork, 43
    roast, 92-93

  Pork chops breaded, 91-92
    with dressing, 92

  Potato salad, 135

  Potatoes, 45-46
    browned, 118
    creamed, 119
    French fried, 119
    glazed sweet, 121
    mashed, 119-120
    parsley buttered, 120
    scalloped, 120-121
    stuffed baked, 121

  Potatoes for cafeteria menu, 12

  Prune and cottage cheese salad, 139

  Prunecot filling for shortcake, 149-150

  Prune gelatin, 163

  Prune pudding, 149

  Prune sauce, 167

  Pudding, bread, 143-144
    carrot plum, 148
    chocolate, 157
    chocolate bread, 144-145
    chocolate rice, 151
    cold, 52-53
    corn, 114
    cornstarch, 158
    cottage, 145-146
    grapenut, 147-148
    hot, 51-52
    Norwegian prune, 162
    old-fashioned baked rice, 151-152
    pineapple, 162-163
    pineapple tapioca, 163-164
    prune, 149
    snow, 164-165
    steamed molasses, 148-149

  Pumpkin pie filling, 187

  Punch, fruit, 187-188


  Quality of food, 8

  Quick bread, 48-49


  Raised muffins, 127

  Raisin tapioca, 164

  Recipes, 73-190

  Rhubarb, baked, 167

  Rhubarb pie filling, 182

  Rib roast of beef, 87

  Rice, 48

  Rice and cheese, 104

  Rice and nut loaf, 104

  Rice croquettes, 122

  Rice with hard sauce, 152

  Rolls, 49
    baking-powder cinnamon, 125
    cinnamon, 130
    Parker house, 130-131

  Rutabagas, 48
    mashed, 122-123


  Salad, apple and celery, 137
    banana, 137
    cabbage, 134
    carrot and raisin, 134
    chicken, 140
    combination vegetable, 135
    cottage cheese, 51
      with celery and green peppers, 138-139
    deviled egg, 139-140
    fish, 51
    fruit, 51, 138
    grapefruit, 138
    lobster, 140
    meat, 51
    potato, 135
    prune and cottage cheese, 139
    tomato jelly, 136
    vegetable, 50
      gelatin, 136-137

  Salad dressings, 142-145

  Salads for cafeteria menus, 12
    for tea-room menus, 38, 39, 40, 41
    list of, 50-51
    recipes for, 132-142

  Salmon, 44
    fried, 100
    scalloped, 101

  Salmon loaf, 101

  Sandwiches for tea-room menus, 40, 41
    list of, 49-50
    recipes for, 132-134

  Sausage, 93

  Sauces, apricot, 165
    chocolate, 152
    cranberry, 166
    custard, 153
    dessert, 152-154
    dried peach, 166-167
    egg, hard, 153
    fruit, 53, 165-167
    hard, 153-154
    lemon, 154
    meat, 106-108
    mustard, 106
    prune, 167
    tartare, 106-107
    tomato, 107
    white, 107-108

  Scalloped corn, 115
    potatoes, 120-121
    oysters, 100
    salmon, 101
    tomatoes, 123-124

  Scrambled eggs and ham, 105

  Sequence of foods in menus, 3

  Servings, size of, 8
    arrangement of, 9

  Shapes of food, 9

  Sherbets, 54

  Shortcake, 150
    prunecot filling for, 149-150
    strawberry filling for, 150

  Snow pudding, 164-165

  Soups, recipes for, 73-80
    bouillon, 73-74
    chicken, 74
    cream, 42
    cream of celery, 76-77
    cream of corn, 77
    cream of Lima bean, 77-78
    cream of pea, 78
    cream of spinach, 78-79
    cream of tomato, 79
    noodle, 75
    oyster stew, 80
    peanut butter, 80
    stock, 42
    tomato rice, 75-76
    vegetable, 76

  Soups for tea-room menus, 37, 39, 40, 41

  Spaghetti, 47

  Spice cake, 173-174

  Spinach, 48

  Spinach and egg, 123

  Squash, 48

  Steak, Swiss, 87

  Steamed molasses pudding, 148-149

  Stewed tomatoes, 124

  Stews, meat, 86-87
    oyster, 80

  Stock soups, 42

  Strawberry shortcake filling, 150

  Stuffed baked potatoes, 121

  Succotash, 116

  Sugar cookies, 174

  Sweetbreads, 96

  Swiss steak, 87


  Table of weights and their approximate measures, 191-194

  Tapioca cream, 165

  Tartare sauce, 106-107

  Tea rooms, menus for, 36-41

  Temperature of food, 9

  Thousand Island salad dressing, 142

  Tomato jelly salad, 136

  Tomato rice soup, 75-76

  Tomato sauce, 107

  Tomatoes, 48
    scalloped, 123-124
    stewed, 124

  Trout, 44

  Turnips, 48


  Variety of food, 3, 4, 5, 10

  Veal, 43-44
    breaded, 93-94
    roast, 94

  Veal birds, 95

  Veal hearts, breaded, 94
    en casserole, 95-96

  Vegetable gelatin salad, 136

  Vegetable salads, 50-51
    combination, 135

  Vegetable soup, 76

  Vegetables for cafeteria menus, 12
    for tea-room menus, 38, 39, 40, 41
    list of, 45-48
    recipes for, 108-124


  Washington pie, 174-175

  Weiners, 88

  White breads, 131

  White cake, 175

  White frosting, 177-178

  White sauce, 107-108

  Whitefish, 44


  Yeast breads, 49





End of Project Gutenberg's Quantity Cookery, by Lenore Richards and Nola Treat

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUANTITY COOKERY ***

***** This file should be named 38615.txt or 38615.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/6/1/38615/

Produced by Jason Isbell, David Clarke and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images produced by Core Historical
Literature in Agriculture (CHLA), Cornell University)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
