Project Gutenberg's Montgomery, the Capital City of Alabama, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Montgomery, the Capital City of Alabama
       Her Resources and Advantages

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: January 21, 2012 [EBook #38634]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MONTGOMERY--CAPITAL CITY--ALABAMA ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)









  MONTGOMERY, THE CAPITAL CITY OF ALABAMA.
  HER RESOURCES AND ADVANTAGES.

  Issued under the Auspices of the Montgomery Real Estate Agents'
  Association, Composed of the following Firms,

  KNABE & SCOTT,
  J. B. TRIMBLE & CO.,

  R. P. DEXTER & CO.,
  MOSES BROS. & CO.,

  AGEE & LE BRON,
  DAVIDSON & JOSEPH,

  CHANDLER BROS.,
  RAMSEY & CO.,

  HILL & McMASTER,

  UHLFELDER BROS.,

  J. T. ROBERTS & CO.


  OFFICERS:

  W. T. CHANDLER, Pres.,

  W. C. BIBB, Jr., Sec. and Treas.,

  W. B. DAVIDSON, Vice-Pres.


  1888.

  ILLUSTRATED AND PRINTED BY THE SOUTH PUBLISHING COMPANY,
  76 PARK PLACE, N. Y.




[Illustration: STATE CAPITOL AND SOLDIERS' MONUMENT]




MONTGOMERY, ALABAMA.


The year 1865 saw Montgomery an utterly exhausted little town of some six
thousand people, with three broken-down railroads.

The year 1888 finds her a city of 30,000 people, with six well-equipped
railroads. Her sole resource was trade with the cotton planters of the
surrounding country, and such enterprise as men might exhibit who started
life over without a dollar. This difference between 1865 and 1888 is
stated to show the discerning reader that there is a source of wealth
here, and that the people have utilized it as fast as they could
accumulate capital to develop it.

[Illustration: Residence of W. B. Davidson]

Unaided by the influx of capital and enterprise from the East and from
Europe, that has so rapidly built other sections of the country, she
accomplished so much. What could be done with that aid need not be written
to be appreciated. Both enterprise and capital are turning to the South
now, and both have found Alabama their best field of operation. It is the
purpose of this little pamphlet to show that Montgomery is the place of
places for the enterprise that seeks a field for development, for the
capital that seeks investment, and for the citizen of a more northern
latitude who desires a change of residence to a prosperous city in a
more genial clime.

[Illustration: Government Building]

[Illustration: Court House]

Montgomery is the capital of Alabama, a State whose area is more than
fifty thousand square miles, and whose population is nearly or quite one
million and a half. She is near the geographical center of the State,
exactly in the center of the three great sources of wealth that are giving
such an impetus to Alabama's development, and has such close connection
with every part of the State that, leaving her depot in the morning, every
station on Alabama's nearly 3,000 miles of railroad may be reached before
night. When it is added that the Alabama river, navigable all the year
round, connects her with the Gulf of Mexico, it will be seen that her
facilities as a trade and business center leave little to be desired.

[Illustration: Jos. Goetter's Residence]

[Illustration: I. Pollak's Residence]

No city is more completely equipped with all the conveniences that make
the modern city than Montgomery. Her water works supply her with 5,000,000
gallons of pure artesian water daily. Her streets are lighted by the Brush
electric light, and her dwellings and business houses by the incandescent
electric light and gas. She has a complete system of street railway, and
is just completing a thorough system of sanitary sewerage. That such a
city should have good hotels, churches, free public schools, theatres,
telephones, etc., etc., goes without the saying.

[Illustration: City Hall]

[Illustration: County Jail]

That Montgomery does an annual business of over $30,000,000; that her
manufactures are rapidly becoming an important element of her wealth; that
she has recently expended millions in improvements, and that she offers
the lowest death rate of any city on this continent, is all hereafter set
out in detail. She here invites attention to the claim that she offers the
best location for purposes of business, commercial or manufacturing, that
the developing South affords.

Alabama has three sources of wealth--agricultural, mineral and timber. The
Mineral belt lies across the Northern third of the State, and there more
than a hundred million of dollars have been expended within the last five
years in opening coal and iron deposits that surpass those of
Pennsylvania.

The Timber belt lies across the Southern third of the State, and there
billions of feet of yellow pine stand untouched in the virgin forest,
while a hundred saw mills are humming along the railroads and rivers.

The Agricultural belt lies across the center of the State from East to
West. A belt of prairie, fertile as that of Illinois, is separated from
the Timber belt on the south and the Mineral belt on the north, by wide
stretches of fertile uplands. Along the streams and in the uncleared
forests of this central belt are vast quantities of hard woods, suited to
every purpose of manufacture.

[Illustration: J. W. Dimmick's Residence]

In the heart of this Agricultural belt, sits Montgomery, with her river
and six railroads. She is the commercial emporium of this farming region,
while a few miles north or south brings her to the cheap fuel and the
cheap lumber of the Mineral and Timber regions of a State more richly
endowed in these respects than any State in the American Union.

These rich farming lands, already recovered from the revolution in the
labor system, are still to be had for from $3 to $15 per acre, while vast
bodies of timber lands are still in the hands of the government, at $1.25
per acre.

[Illustration: Residence of O. O. Nelson]

Montgomery only asks that the man of enterprise and the man of capital
shall come and see for himself. Cheap iron, cheap fuel, cheap cotton,
cheap lumber and a consuming population of 500,000 farmers hold out
inducements to the manufacturer, unsurpassed on the American continent.


MONTGOMERY AS A HEALTH RESORT.

We have long believed, and are now prepared to show by facts, figures and
an experience of twenty-one years in the Health Department of Montgomery,
that it is entitled to rank amongst the healthiest cities in America. We
make this assertion in no boastful spirit, but with security born of
experience, and sustained by the following carefully prepared statistical
tables, compiled from data furnished by a number of American and foreign
cities:

                         |             |  ANNUAL DEATH
       AMERICA.          | POPULATION. | RATE PER 1,000.
  -----------------------|-------------|----------------
  Baltimore, Md.         |   400,000   |       19.63
  Brooklyn, N. Y.        |   600,000   |       20.46
  Boston, Mass.          |   375,000   |       19.46
  Buffalo, N. Y.         |   150,000   |       16.52
  Cambridge, Mass.       |    60,000   |       23.51
  Charleston, S. C.      |    60,000   |       28.68
  Chicago, Illinois      |   500,000   |       14.19
  Cincinnati, Ohio       |   300,000   |       12.84
  Cleveland, Ohio        |   170,000   |       21.50
  Elmira, N. Y.          |    20,583   |       18.69
  Erie, Penn.            |   200,000   |       13.35
  Fall River, Mass.      |    50,000   |       20.39
  Lawrence, Mass.        |    40,000   |       23.80
  Lowell, Mass.          |    60,000   |       16.73
  Lynn, Mass.            |    35,000   |       18.96
  Memphis, Tenn.         |    80,000   |       16.08
  Milwaukee, Wis.        |   150,000   |       21.55
  New Haven, Conn.       |    80,000   |       15.50
  Norfolk, Va.           |    25,000   |       19.82
  New Orleans, La.       |   220,000   |       22.78
  New York City          | 2,500,000   |       22.74
  Philadelphia, Pa.      |   100,000   |       19.37
  Providence, R. I.      |   105,000   |       21.20
  Richmond, Va.          |   100,000   |       18.11
  San Francisco, Cal.    |   350,000   |       16.04
  St. Louis, Mo.         |   600,000   |       18.94
  Washington, D. C.      |   175,000   |       31.12
  Worcester, Mass.       |    55,000   |       22.07
  Yonkers, N. Y.         |    20,000   |       15.33
  MONTGOMERY, ALA.       |    30,000   |White   9.50
      "       "          |             |Col'd. 18.00
      "       "          |             |Total  13.00
                         |             |
       FOREIGN.          |             |
  Amsterdam, Holland     |   289,982   |       33.01
  Antwerp, Belgium       |   150,000   |       19.07
  Basle, Switzerland     |    49,158   |       17.
  Belfast, Ireland       |   180,412   |       28.
  Berlin, Germany        |   200,000   |       23.9
  Berne, Switzerland     |    40,168   |       20.2
  Birmingham, England    |   400,436   |       28.5
  Bombay, India          |             |       42.7
  Breslau, Germany       |   260,000   |       25.9
  Brussels, Belgium      |   173,000   |       20.2
  Buda Pesth, Hungary    |    60,000   |       39.6
  Calcutta, India        |   892,000   |       49.4
  Christiana, Norway     |    80,000   |       21.4
  Copenhagen, Denmark    |   200,500   |       24.6
  Cork, Ireland          |   580,076   |       41.6
  Dublin, Ireland        |   334,666   |       31.7
  Dundee, Scotland       |   145,600   |       31.5
  Edingburgh, Scotland   |   220,729   |       28.
  Geneva, Switzerland    |    46,783   |       19.
  Ghent, Belgium         |   127,653   |       32.6
  Glasgow, Scotland      |   560,933   |       24.
  Liverpool, England     |   600,000   |       32.6
  London, England        | 3,560,802   |       25.7
  Madras, India          |   397,352   |       98.6
  Manchester, England    |   360,212   |       19.8
  Messina, Italy         |    80,136   |       16.8
  Munich, Bavaria        |   200,000   |       32.
  Naples, Italy          |   907,000   |       25.7
  Paris, France          | 2,500,000   |       25.4
  Rome, Italy            |   286,000   |       21.3
  Rotterdam, Holland     |   125,097   |       28.2
  Sidney, Australia      |    60,079   |       25.5
  St. Petersburg, Russia |   210,000   |       45.80
  Stockholm, Sweden      |   165,677   |       27.2
  The Hague, Holland     |   105,000   |       29.5
  Treiste, Austria       |   127,936   |       41.1
  Turin, Italy           |   225,488   |       32.2
  Valparaiso, Chili      |   111,500   |       44.3
  Venice, Italy          |   140,796   |       29.8
  Vienna, Austria        | 1,500,000   |       32.24
  Warsaw, Poland         |   300,000   |       21.58

[Illustration: Synagogue]

[Illustration: St. Peters Catholic Church]

It will be seen from the foregoing tables that Montgomery stands first in
the list, the annual death rate being only 9.50 per 1,000 of the white
population, 18 per 1,000 of the colored population, and 13 per 1,000 of
both races. It is from these facts, representing as they do, the vital
changes of a people, that values of health are obtained. Hence they are
not only priceless to us as citizens, but to representatives of our own
and of foreign countries, who, with their families, design making this
city their home. These ask and expect what we hope to give them, namely,
immunity and protection from all influences prejudicial to health.

[Illustration: M. I. Moses' Residence]

It would be well, just here, perhaps, to answer the many questions put to
us about the location, general appearance and sanitary advantages claimed
for Montgomery. This may be done by the following simple illustration.
Take an ordinary soup dish. Cut out one third of the rim, and place the
cut surface due north, and you have the city in miniature. Explanation:
The bottom of the dish represents the business or commercial center; the
rim the hills. From this flat, containing about eighty acres, the ascent
is gradual to the crest or water shed. Back of this is a sweep of green,
undulating country, which Nature seems wisely to have placed there for the
free and unobstructed outlet of storm waste and surface accumulations.
Extending from this water shed to the river, is a net-work of large
underground water mains and conduits, of sufficient capacity and strength
to resist the pressure of the tons of water that flow through them at
every heavy rain fall, thus carrying off the debris, closet refuse and
other matters to be wasted in the Alabama river. The Waring system of
sewerage is now being added to that already in operation. When completed,
the drainage of our city will be as perfect as human ingenuity can make
it. These natural advantages, aided and controlled by a liberal government
and a wise, energetic Health Board, will ever render Montgomery a charming
and safe resort for the tourist, and a home for the invalid. How can this
be otherwise when Nature has bestowed upon us this gift of position, and
invested our city with broad avenues, shaded by endless lines of the water
oak, elm and maple. These give charm to our parks and add beauty and
attractiveness to the many handsome public buildings and private
residences to be seen on every hand.

Apart from these attractive features, and above price, is our exhaustless
supply of pure artesian water. Its constitution, source and chemically
pure composition bear directly and remotely upon the sickness and death
rate of our people. That many disorders, some of grave character, are
justly due to contagion contained in the water we drink, is an established
fact; and we should know this when the question of choosing a home is
under consideration.

Again, Montgomery is wholly exempt from those wasting blizzards, cyclones
and storms so destructive to life and property in other sections of the
country. Such are unknown here, whilst around us, yearly visitations of
wind storms are common. No disease, especially of epidemic kind, as
small-pox, cholera, diphtheria, etc., takes hold here, and we do not dread
them. As a

WINTER RESORT,

Montgomery has superior advantages. Our mild winter, our clean bills of
health, hotel accommodations, churches, schools, and domestic help--the
least annoying of any in the world--are some of the many advantages
offered to those in quest of health and homes.


WATER.

The city is supplied with water, both for domestic consumption and fire
purposes, by "The Capital City Water Co.," with whom a contract was made
for twenty years, late in 1885. The company completed the construction
of this system in June, 1886, and the same was tested to the satisfaction
of all in July. The supply, which appears to be ample for all the wants of
the city for years to come, is obtained from five artesian wells, which
flow into three reservoirs of 4,000,000 gallons capacity. Two of these
reservoirs are kept full of water at all times as a reserve, and in case
of fire. The pumping plant consists of two duplex pumping engines, having
a capacity of 5,000,000 gallons in twenty-four hours, and a battery of six
ninety horse power boilers, together with all the necessary feed pumps,
condensers, etc.

[Illustration: St. Johns Episcopal Church]

[Illustration: Presbyterian Church]

[Illustration: First Baptist Church]

[Illustration: Court St. M. E. Church]

[Illustration: Residence of J. B. Nicrosi]

The water is pumped from the reservoirs to a stand pipe twenty-six feet in
diameter and 105 feet high, holding 417,000 gallons; this is located at a
point where a top elevation of 245 feet above the business portion of the
city is obtained, and an average pressure of 110 pounds per square inch.
The system of pipes ordered laid by the city consisted originally of 26
8-10 miles of the various sizes; to this has been added as follows: During
1886, 3,900 feet of six inch pipe and 4,660 feet of four inch pipe. During
the year 1887, 8,057 feet of six inch pipe, 1,558 feet of four inch pipe
and 2,000 feet of three inch pipe, a total of 3.82 miles. In addition to
the above nearly two miles of smaller pipes have been laid in the various
streets, to supply isolated places. There are located at the present time
nine hydrants on the 3.82 miles of extension.

There has been found at all times when wanted an abundance of water, with
proper pressure at the various hydrants.


WAR DEPARTMENT, SIGNAL SERVICE, U. S. ARMY. DIVISION OF TELEGRAMS AND
REPORTS FOR THE BENEFIT OF COMMERCE AND AGRICULTURE.

The meteorological data given in the tables is taken from the records of
Signal Service kept at Montgomery, Ala., since the establishment of the
station in September, 1872.

TABLE 1, shows the mean temperature for each month and year. The highest
monthly mean temperature, 85 degrees, was July, 1875, and the lowest was
43 degrees in December, 1872, and January, 1873, a range of 42 degrees.
The normal temperature for fifteen years is 65 degrees. The highest
temperature recorded is 106.9 degrees on July 7, 1881, and the lowest 5.4
degrees, January 9, 1886. From 1874 to 1881 the maximum temperature for
the year reached 100 degrees or over, but never more than two or three
times in any one year. From 1882 the maximum reached only 98 degrees until
June, 1887, it reached 102 degrees.

TABLE 2, shows the total rainfall for each month in inches and hundredths
of an inch. The normal precipitation for the fifteen years is 4.44 inches.
The greatest fall occurs in March and the least in October. Occasionally
the rain-belt is late in moving up, and when this is the case, the fall in
April is increased above the normal for that month. The greatest fall in
any twenty-four hours, has been 5.97 inches, April 2, 1876.

TABLE 3, shows the prevailing wind direction and the hourly maximum
velocity. The highest velocity reached in fifteen years was 48 miles,
November, 1873. These maximum velocities are nearly all connected with
thunder storms, which never last more than a few hours. Rarely does a
storm center pass over this section, but is located either east or west,
and passes by without causing heavy gales.

TABLE 4. In this table will be found the dates of first and last frost and
other phenomena of interest and value.


TABLE NO. 1. MEAN TEMPERATURE

  ======================================================================
  Year.|Jan.|Feb.|Mar.|Apr.|May.|Jun.|Jul.|Aug.|Sep.|Oct.|Nov.|Dec.|Mean
  -----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----
  1872 | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | 76 | 63 | 48 | 43 | ..
     3 | 43 | 53 | 54 | 64 | 74 | 78 | 83 | 80 | 75 | 63 | 54 | 49 | 64
     4 | 51 | 54 | 61 | 63 | 73 | 80 | 80 | 82 | 76 | 65 | 58 | 51 | 66
     5 | 47 | 49 | 57 | 62 | 74 | 81 | 85 | 78 | 74 | 60 | 59 | 54 | 65
     6 | 54 | 54 | 54 | 65 | 73 | 80 | 83 | 80 | 75 | 62 | 53 | 41 | 65
     7 | 49 | 52 | 55 | 64 | 72 | 81 | 84 | 81 | 75 | 65 | 54 | 52 | 67
     8 | 46 | 50 | 63 | 67 | 75 | 79 | 84 | 84 | 77 | 65 | 56 | 44 | 66
     9 | 48 | 49 | 60 | 63 | 74 | 79 | 82 | 77 | 74 | 68 | 58 | 54 | 66
  1880 | 58 | 54 | 62 | 67 | 74 | 79 | 81 | 80 | 73 | 65 | 51 | 46 | 66
     1 | 44 | 50 | 53 | 64 | 75 | 82 | 84 | 81 | 78 | 71 | 56 | 54 | 66
     2 | 55 | 57 | 62 | 68 | 70 | 80 | 78 | 79 | 74 | 70 | 54 | 45 | 66
     3 | 50 | 58 | 55 | 66 | 71 | 79 | 82 | 80 | 76 | 71 | 58 | 54 | 67
     4 | 40 | 55 | 60 | 63 | 75 | 76 | 81 | 78 | 79 | 72 | 54 | 51 | 65
     5 | 46 | 45 | 52 | 66 | 70 | 80 | 80 | 80 | 75 | 61 | 54 | 47 | 63
     6 | 42 | 47 | 56 | 64 | 73 | 78 | 80 | 80 | 77 | 66 | 54 | 45 | 63
     7 | 45 | 59 | 58 | 66 | 76 | 80 | 80 | 79 | 76 | 64 | 56 | 48 | 66
     8 | 51 | 54 | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | .. | ..
  -----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----
  Means| 48 | 53 | 57 | 65 | 73 | 79 | 82 | 80 | 76 | 66 | 55 | 49 | 65
  ======================================================================


TABLE NO. 2, PRECIPITATION.

  =======================================================
  Year.|Jan.|Feb.|Mar. |Apr. |May. |June.|Jul.|Aug.|Sep.|
  -----|----|----|-----|-----|-----|-----|----|----|----|
  1872 |....|....| ....| ....| ....| ....|....|....|3.38|
     3 |4.97|9.97| 4.51| 5.57|10.25|11.08|4.17|2.56|3.05|
     4 |3.69|6.57|10.66| 9.45| 2.03| 4.31|3.87|1.25|0.39|
     5 |6.71|7.86|11.56| 3.54| 1.67| 1.94|0.99|2.14|8.13|
     6 |3.70|5.07| 7.33|10.99| 6.55| 4.85|6.24|3.05|1.61|
     7 |6.67|2.68| 7.17|10.36| 0.82| 2.94|3.43|1.07|4.07|
     8 |5.39|2.59| 2.64| 5.91| 4.06| 5.85|4.59|7.67|2.55|
     9 |2.06|2.14| 2.68| 4.50| 3.90| 3.22|5.21|4.54|1.12|
  1880 |1.65|6.11| 9.26| 6.42| 7.07| 0.90|3.17|4.41|2.83|
     1 |3.58|7.05| 5.45| 4.52| 1.41| 3.04|2.18|5.06|4.49|
     2 |4.54|9.27| 6.92| 5.03| 2.94| 3.98|6.29|3.41|4.18|
     3 |7.20|2.00| 3.61| 8.16| 2.62| 5.02|0.87|2.08|0.22|
     4 |4.82|4.80| 9.50| 3.08| 1.18|10.26|2.80|3.05|0.58|
     5 |9.72|3.68| 2.93| 3.92| 8.92| 4.32|1.54|3.93|4.83|
     6 |6.69|4.10| 6.86| 7.38| 2.95| 8.61|3.37|5.37|1.12|
     7 |5.08|7.47| 0.72| 1.18| 2.84| 3.31|8.56|2.04|2.03|
     8 |4.12|7.67| ....| ....| ....| ....|....|....|....|
  -----|----|----|-----|-----|-----|-----|----|----|----|
  Means|5.04|5.56| 6.12| 6.00| 3.95| 4.91|4.22|3.44|2.79|
  =======================================================

        ====================
        Oct. |Nov.|Dec.|Mean
        -----|----|----|----
         0.53|5.73|4.08|....
         0.68|4.58|2.61|5.33
         1.97|2.60|5.14|4.33
         1.68|5.90|6.04|4.85
         0.96|3.42|5.97|4.98
         2.51|3.75|4.79|4.19
         3.49|3.92|6.74|4.62
        10.20|1.47|7.42|4.04
         2.66|4.06|5.68|4.52
         2.72|4.56|9.75|4.48
         2.40|1.91|3.88|4.56
         2.00|1.70|4.23|3.31
         1.87|2.67|4.00|4.05
         2.38|3.59|3.13|4.91
         0.03|6.72|3.05|4.69
         2.47|0.79|8.25|3.73
         ....|....|....|....
        -----|----|----|----
         2.41|3.59|5.30|4.44
        ====================

TABLE NO. 3, PREVAILING WIND AND MAXIMUM VELOCITY.

  ====================================================================
  Year.|January.|Feb'ary.| March. | April. |  May.  |  June. |  July.
  -----|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------
  1872 |.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..
     3 |N. W.|8 |N. W.|14|N. W.|12|S.   |16|S. E.|10|S. E.| 6|S. E.|20
     4 |S. E.|20|N.   |21|S.   |20|N. W.|26|N. W.|18|E.   |17|S. E.|14
     5 |N.   |33|N.   |33|S. E.|28|N. W.|24|S.   |29|S.   |28|S. W.|42
     6 |N.   |25|N.   |33|N. W.|36|S. W.|30|S. E.|30|S. E.|20|S.   |36
     7 |N.   |24|N. W.|24|N. W.|40|N. W.|30|E.   |24|S. W.|24|N.   |24
     8 |W.   |35|N. W.|35|S. E.|36|S. E.|27|W.   |24|N. W.|24|E.   |17
     9 |N. W.|30|N. W.|22|W.   |30|N. W.|36|S. E.|28|W.   |24|W.   |36
  1880 |S.   |20|N.   |26|N.   |28|S.   |28|E.   |20|S.   |21|S. W.|28
     1 |N.   |30|E.   |32|W.   |34|N. W.|28|E.   |30|N.   |26|E.   |24
     2 |S.   |25|S. W.|34|S. W.|30|S. E.|27|S. E.|28|S. W.|30|S. W.|32
     3 |S. E.|23|N. E.|18|S. W.|32|S. E.|26|N. W.|20|S. E.|22|S. W.|22
     4 |N. W.|22|S.   |32|S. E.|28|N. W.|30|S. W.|20|S. E.|28|S. W.|23
     5 |N.   |29|N.   |27|N. W.|23|N. W.|20|N. W.|23|N.   |23|N. E.|28
     6 |N. W.|30|W.   |22|S.   |25|E.   |24|S. W.|28|S. E.|32|S. W.|16
     7 |S.   |31|S. E.|28|S.   |24|W.   |22|S. E.|40|E.   |20|S. W.|28
     8 |W.   |25|E.   |25|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..
  -----|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--
  Means|N.   |35|N.   |35|N. W.|40|N. W.|36|S. E.|40|S. E.|32|S. W.|42
  ====================================================================

        =====================================================
        August. |  Sept. |October.|Nov'ber.|Dec'ber.|  Mean.
        --------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------
        .....|..|.....|..|N. W.|..|N. W.|..|N. W.|..|.....|..
        S. E.|28|W.   |16|.....|..|S. E.|48|N. W.|16|S. E.|48
        E.   |12|E.   |18|N. W.|18|E.   |25|N.   |20|E.   |26
        S. W.|25|N. E.|27|N. W.|20|E.   |25|S.   |24|S.   |42
        S. E.|24|N.   |22|N.   |30|N. W.|25|N.   |36|N.   |36
        N. E.|24|N. E.|25|E.   |25|N. W.|27|E.   |28|N. W.|40
        S. W.|16|N. E.|18|S. E.|18|N.   |20|N. W.|34|N. W.|36
        N.   |18|E.   |22|E.   |25|E.   |20|S.   |17|W.   |36
        E.   |26|E.   |25|E.   |18|E.   |28|N.   |24|E.   |28
        E.   |20|E.   |18|E.   |20|E.   |23|E.   |28|E.   |34
        W.   |16|N. W.|16|E.   |16|N. W.|21|N. W.|19|S. W.|34
        N.   |26|E.   |17|E.   |23|S. E.|20|N. W.|22|S. E.|32
        N. E.|27|S. E.|16|N. E.|20|N. W.|24|S. E.|22|S. E.|32
        N. W.|24|N. E.|22|N. W.|24|N. W.|23|N. W.|32|N. W.|32
        S. E.|20|E.   |20|E.   |24|S.   |25|N. W.|25|E.   |32
        N. E.|24|E.   |23|N. E.|24|N. E.|24|E.   |24|N. E.|40
        .....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..|.....|..
        -----|--|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--|-----|--
        N. E.|28|E.   |27|E.   |30|N. W.|48|N. W.|36|S. E.|48
        =====================================================


TABLE NO. 4, MISCELLANEOUS PHENOMENA.

  ======================================================================
          FROST.       ||       THERMOMETER.       ||    PRECIPIT'N.   |
  ---------------------||--------------------------||------------------|
  Year.|First. | Last. || Max.| Date. |Min.| Date. ||Greatest.|  Date. |
  -----|-------|-------||-----|-------|----|-------||---------|--------|
  1872 |Oct. 15| ..... || Observation   Commenced   Sept. 5th, 1872    |
     3 | "   29|Mar.  6|| 97.0|July  5|14.0|Jan. 19||   3.47  |May    1|
     4 |Dec. 15|Feb. 11||103.0|Aug. 13|27.0| "   15||   4.67  |Mar.  16|
     5 |Oct.  8|Apr.  3||102.0|July 16|18.0| "   10||   3.34  |Sept. 27|
     6 |Nov. 10|Mar. 13||100.5| "   11|20.0|Dec.  2||   5.97  |April  2|
     7 | "   14| "   11||102.5| "    4|16.0|Jan.  9||   4.65  |  "    7|
     8 |Oct. 19| "    5||100.0| "   22|22.0|Dec. 18||   4.03  |June  13|
     9 | "   24|Apr.  6||101.0| "   13|14.5|Jan.  6||   3.46  |Oct.  17|
  1880 | "   24| "   13||100.0| "    4| 8.0|Dec. 30||   3.33  |May   27|
     1 |Nov.  4|Apr. 15||106.9|July  7|24.0|Jan.  2||   3.63  |Dec.  14|
     2 | "   14|Mar. 23|| 97.6|June 28|19.2|Dec.  8||   3.13  |Feb.   8|
     3 |Oct. 26| "   28|| 98.6|July 17|25.0|Jan. 12||   3.41  |April  9|
     4 | "   17| "   16|| 97.1|Aug. 29| 8.0| "    6||   3.62  |June  30|
     5 | "   14| "   16|| 98.0|July 31|15.5|Feb. 11||   3.13  |Jan.  23|
     6 | "   28|Apr.  6|| 97.8|Aug. 16| 5.4|Jan.  9||   3.66  |April 28|
     7 | "   31| "    6||102.0|June 19|12.9| "   31||   2.25  |July  27|
     8 |.......|.......||.....|.......|....|.......||   ....  |........|
  ======================================================================

        ============================
        |           DAYS.
        |---------------------------
        |Clear. Fair. Cloudy. Rainy.
        |------|-----|-------|------
        |  ... | ... |  ...  | ...
        |   73 | 132 |  129  | 112
        |  104 | 125 |  136  | 115
        |  101 | 148 |  116  | 123
        |  133 | 125 |  108  | 107
        |  117 | 122 |  126  | 105
        |  140 | 140 |   85  | 106
        |  122 | 151 |   92  | 135
        |   75 | 172 |  119  | 132
        |  123 | 130 |  112  | 120
        |  105 | 179 |   81  | 124
        |  137 | 145 |   84  | 112
        |  141 | 139 |   86  | 126
        |  114 | 153 |   98  | 140
        |  125 | 143 |   97  |  99
        |  139 | 126 |  100  | 103
        |  ... | ... |  ...  | ...
        ============================

[Illustration: Girl's High School]

[Illustration: Swayne College, Colored School]

[Illustration: Boy's High School]

[Illustration: City Infirmary]

[Illustration: Women's Home]

[Illustration: Morris Eye Infirmary]


FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF MONTGOMERY.

  CITY--LIABILITIES.

  Bonded Indebtedness April 30th, 1888        $ 572,050
  Bonds issued since for Sanitary Sewerage      150,000
                                              ---------
  Total Bonded Indebtedness                                 $722,050


  ASSETS.

  Total Assets April 30th, 1888                             $221,745
  Assessed value of Real Estate               5,500,000
     "       "   "  Personal Property         3,090,000
                                              ---------
  Total Assessed value of Real and Personal
        Property                                          $8,590,000


  COUNTY--LIABILITIES.

  Total Bonded Indebtedness                                  $35,000


  ASSETS.

  Total Assets                                              $100,000

  Assessed value of Real Estate              10,063,374
     "       "   "  Personal Property         5,175,133
                                              ---------
  Total Assessed value of Real and Personal
       Property                                          $15,238,507


  TAXES.

  State Tax Rate                                 50 cts.
  County Tax Rate                                35 cts.
  City Tax Rate                               $1.12-1/2
                                              ---------
  Total Taxes for all purposes                             $1.97-1/2


  INSURANCE.

  Basis Rate for Standard Store Building           1 per cent.
    "    "    "  Brick Metal-Roofed Dwelling      50 cents
    "    "    "  Frame, Shingle-Roofed Dwelling   75   "

Industries rated according to the tariff of South Eastern Tariff
Association.


STATEMENT SHOWING THE AMOUNT OF CAPITAL INVESTED IN MONTGOMERY, AND AMOUNT
OF BUSINESS DONE, TOGETHER WITH THE TOTAL OUTBOUND TICKET SALES AND
FREIGHT TONNAGE FORWARDED AND RECEIVED FROM JAN. 1, 1887 TO DEC. 31, 1887.

                                      CAPITAL.    AMT. OF BUS.
  Cotton Factors and Warehouses      $2,490,000    $6,750,000
  Cotton Mills and Factories          1,380,000     2,450,000
  Groceries                           1,680,000     6,900,000
  General Stores                        440,000     1,200,000
  Hardware, China and Glassware         345,000       850,000
  Foundries and Machine Shops           120,000       350,000
  Plumbing                               60,000       150,000
  Carriages and Harness                  70,000       220,000
  Clothing, Hats, Caps, etc.             90,000       320,000
  Dry Goods                             960,000     2,850,000
  Furniture                             140,000       350,000
  Paper, Twine, etc.                     80,000       175,000
  Coal, Wood and Lumber                 160,000       750,000
  Boots, Shoes and Leather              260,000       550,000
  Drugs, Paints, etc.                   285,000       450,000
  Flour and Grist Mills                 245,000     1,200,000
  Cigars and Tobacco                     80,000       450,000
  Builders and Building Material        325,000     1,150,000
  Printing and Stationery               140,000       270,000
  Jewelry                                70,000       100,000
  Insurance Companies                   300,000       250,000
  Sundry Establishments, including
    Theatres, Hotels, Saloons,
    Auction Houses, Fancy Goods,
    Bakeries, Pickeries, Junk,
    Live Stock, etc.                    260,000     2,200,000
  Fertilizer Works                       75,000       250,000
  Residences and Business Houses        550,000
  Oil Mills                             250,000
  Street Railroad                       130,000
  Furnace                               175,000
  Ochre Mines and Mills                  20,000
  Highland Park Improvement Co.         600,000
  Riverside Improvement Co.             750,000
  Banking Capital                     2,600,000
  Steam Boat Line                        50,000
  Water Works                           450,000
  Ice Factories                          50,000
                                    -----------   -----------
                                    $15,680,000   $30,185,000

  Total Passenger Ticket Sales                    $272,279.45
    "  Freight Tonnage forwarded by Rail              151,315 tons.
    "     "       "    received  by Rail              354,570   "
    "     "       "        "     "  Trade Co's Boats   16,381   "

[Illustration: Capital City Water Works]


MONTGOMERY'S TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.

A glance at the State map must convince even the most casual observer that
Montgomery possesses rail and water transportation facilities, which not
only bring her in easy reach of the varied resources of the State, but
also connect her with the large commercial cities of this land, and with
foreign ports.

The Alabama river, which is navigable from Montgomery the entire year, is
her water way to the Gulf, and is an important factor in the question of
freights. Connecting her with New York and foreign ports, it is a
perpetual check to freight discriminations against her by railroads. When
the obstructions to the Coosa river are removed, a matter now engaging the
attention of Congress, Montgomery will have water communication as far
north as Rome, Ga., which will open up to her a country rich in mineral
and agricultural wealth.

The great Louisville and Nashville system, which has contributed so
largely to the development of the State, reaches out from Montgomery in
two directions. It connects her with the markets of the entire country,
north, northeast, northwest and south, and supplies her with coal and
other products of the mineral districts of the State, and lumber from the
timber belts.

[Illustration: Residence of John R. Tyson]

The Western Railroad of Alabama, from Montgomery to Atlanta, connecting
with the Kennesaw and Piedmont Air Lines, is a link in the great line from
New York to the Gulf. At Atlanta it connects with the Georgia Railroad,
giving it a through line to Charleston, and at Opelika with the Central
Railroad system, forming a direct route to Savannah, two of the most
important ports on the Atlantic.

[Illustration: Opera House]

[Illustration: Montgomery Theatre]

[Illustration: Views from Highland Park]

[Illustration: Club House Montgomery Shooting Club]

[Illustration: A Glimpse of Jackson's Lake]

[Illustration: Exchange Hotel]

[Illustration: Windsor Hotel]

The Montgomery and Selma division opens up to her the rich agricultural
districts of West Alabama and Mississippi, giving her a valuable trade.

The Montgomery and Eufaula Railroad, runs southeast from Montgomery,
through rich, black prairie lands to Eufaula, where it connects with
steamers on the Chattahoochee river. This road is a part of the Georgia
Central system, and forms a direct line from Montgomery to Savannah. It
offers unsurpassed facilities to Montgomery shippers, giving through bills
of lading over its own rail and steamship lines, to New York and Europe.
It is the most popular through route from the West to all Florida resorts.

The Florida and Northwest Railroad is being built south from Montgomery,
and is now running fifty miles through a rich agricultural section to
Luvern. From Luvern it will pass through the finest timber belt in the
country, to some point on the Chattahoochee river. While this road will be
a great feeder to Montgomery, it will also form the most direct route to
Florida. Its extension from Montgomery, northwest to Maplesville, is
generally conceded, where it will connect with the East Tennessee,
Virginia and Georgia system, that great artery of commerce, that stretches
its arms of steel from the Atlantic to the lakes, and from the mountains
of Virginia to the plains of Texas. This system now enters Montgomery over
the track of the Louisville and Nashville road.

The above is but a meager statement of Montgomery's transportation
facilities.

[Illustration: Residence of Judge D. Clopton]


PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

Our public schools consist of the Boys' High School, the Girls' High
School, the Capital Hill Grammar School and the Sayre Street Grammar
School for white children, and Swayne College and Cemetery Hill School for
colored children.

There are employed in the white schools, twenty-six regular teachers and
one supernumerary, and in the colored schools, ten teachers.

There has been an attendance during this year of about nine hundred and
fifty white children, a larger number than ever before, and about four
hundred and fifty colored children. The expenditures for the session
1887-8 have been about twenty-three thousand dollars, besides about four
thousand dollars for buildings and repairs.

The income of the schools is derived from an annual appropriation by the
city, an annual appropriation from the State, regulated by the number of
school children in this school district, and from the poll tax collected
from the citizens in this district.

The schools are in a flourishing condition. The Superintendent is a
competent, painstaking gentleman, and his assistants are for the most part
well adapted and fitted to be his coadjutors in the good work.

[Illustration: Residence of A. A. Wiley]

The schools begin on the first Monday in October and end on the last
Thursday in May, thus having an eight months' session. The children within
the district who are able to pay it, are required to pay a fee of two
dollars per session of eight months; those who are unable to pay this fee
are admitted free. The students in the Boys' High School and in the
highest class of the Girls' High School pay a fee of ten dollars per
session of eight months, if able to do so.

We have every prospect of continued prosperity in the schools.

[Illustration: Moses Building]

[Illustration: The Adams Cotton Mill

OFFICERS ADAMS COTTON MILL: J. R. ADAMS, PRESIDENT; J. B. SHERROD,
SECRETARY AND TREASURER; W. L. DOLPHYN, SUPERINTENDENT. CAPACITY 5000
SPINDLES AND 150 LOOMS.]

[Illustration: Noble Boykin & Clopton Bldg.]

[Illustration: Hobbie Building]

[Illustration: Griel Building]


INDUSTRIES THAT WILL PAY IN MONTGOMERY.

Cotton Mills,--As shown elsewhere.

Bagging Factory,--From absence of any here, and the immense trade that
Montgomery has in bagging for wrapping cotton, amounting to something like
$200,000 per annum.

Iron Works of all Kinds,--As a furnace of fifty tons capacity will soon be
completed in Montgomery, giving cheap charcoal iron of best grade; and
unexcelled transportation facilities to reach the home and foreign
markets.

Variety Wood Working,--Owing to cheap lumber of every kind, as shown
elsewhere.

Paper Factory,--Owing to the large amount of cotton seed hulls to be
secured from our three large oil mills, which hulls will make a most
beautiful white paper; and unexcelled facilities for securing cotton
stalks and other good paper stock, and inexhaustible water supply.

Tan Yard,--Owing to large number of good hides shipped from this point and
towns in easy reach, and ease of securing barks, bitter weed and other
material for tanning leather.

Plows and Agricultural Implements,--Owing to large home demand and
cheapness of raw material, with splendid shipping facilities.

[Illustration: Residence of J. C. Hurter]

Glass Factory,--Owing to large deposit of excellent sand near Montgomery,
and the absence of such a factory in this section.

Shoe Factory,--Owing to large trade, amounting to half a million dollars.

Cheap Clothing,--Owing to immense wholesale trade, supplying Middle and
South Alabama and part of Florida.

Terra Cotta and Tiles,--Owing to large deposits of fine clays suitable for
making such articles.

Flouring Mill,--As this is a large wholesale market for flour, and there
is a good opening, with promise of large return, for such an enterprise.

[Illustration: Brewery]

[Illustration: The Montgomery Iron Works]

Paint Factory,--Owing to the large beds of fine ochre within ten miles of
the city, which ochre is now being shipped in the raw state to other
points.

Paper Box Factory, Wool Factory, Hat Factory and Knitting Factory.

The above-mentioned enterprises are only named to suggest to the minds of
business men a few of the manufacturing establishments that will pay a
large profit on capital invested in Montgomery, while the field is open
for sundry others that are two numerous to give in detail. Montgomery
stands at the head of commercial cities of the South, with almost
undisputed control of a large territory occupied by half a million
consumers, and unequaled railroad and river transportation facilities for
collecting all raw material to this point and delivery of manufactured
articles to foreign and domestic markets.

For further information as to facts in detail in regard to the above
manufacturing enterprises, write to any member of the Montgomery Real
Estate Agents' Association, who will take pleasure in furnishing
information and will secure donation of site for plant.


MONTGOMERY'S AGRICULTURAL ADVANTAGES.

The City of Montgomery is surrounded by a greater variety of valuable
agricultural lands than any city in the South, being situated on the south
bank of the Alabama river, just below the confluence of the Coosa and
Talapoosa rivers, all of which streams are bordered by very rich farming
lands. Some of the alluvial bottoms are subject to occasional overflows,
but the second bottoms are above the effects of freshets and form
beautiful flats, in some places several miles wide, of sandy loam with
clay subsoil, making a most valuable land for general farm purposes, as it
is easily tilled and susceptible of great improvement by manuring and a
good system of farming.

The rich black prairie belt touches us on the south and certainly contains
some of the finest and most productive lands in the Union. It is just
undulating enough to afford good drainage. The prairie soil is naturally
so rich that fertilizers have been used very little, and the all-cotton
system of farming which has been practiced almost to the exclusion of
every other crop since 1865, has impoverished the farmers to such an
extent that large prairie farms have been turned over entirely to negro
tenants. This has resulted in a complete failure as a system, as the negro
without a white man for a director, is not capable of making a living for
himself or rents for his landlord. These magnificent lands can now be
bought for about $10 to $15 per acre, and are certainly better adapted to
stock raising than any other section of the continent, being splendid
grain lands for such crops as oats and corn, yielding from twenty-five to
100 bushels per acre.

[Illustration: Alabama Oil Mill]

[Illustration: Montgomery Oil Mill]

Johnson grass flourishes here as a hay grass, yielding from one and a half
to two tons per acre, without any trouble of re-seeding, and sells in home
market for $15 per ton.

Bermuda grass for pasturage is unsurpassed by any grass in the world, as
it affords good grazing for eight months in the year, and will keep fat
one horse or cow per acre for that length of time. Another valuable
characteristic of the Bermuda grass is that it never runs out as a
pasture. Some pastures are now in fine condition that were sodded thirty
years ago.

Another important advantage of this section, for stock raising, is that
our winters are so mild that stock does not need housing, except that it
is better to provide open sheds for protection from rain, and they feed on
the cane which grows on all branches and streams, staying green all the
year. When a specialty is made of stock raising it is well to provide some
ensilage to feed at night through the winter, in connection with the cane
pasturage.

While some of our farmers are paying more attention each year to stock
raising, as a general thing the prairie farms are rented to negro tenents,
and now is a splendid opportunity to buy them cheap and devote to grass
and stock.

[Illustration: The Southern Cotton Oil Co.'s Mill at Riverside Park.

HENRY C. BUTCHER, Pres.; JOHN OLIVER, Sec. and Treas., of Philadelphia; E.
W. THOMPSON, Local Manager. Capacity, 150 tons cotton seed daily.]

[Illustration: Old Compress]

[Illustration: Hurter & Co's New Compress]

While 250 pounds of lint cotton, twenty bushels of corn and thirty bushels
of oats per acre are considered fair crops for our white farmers, below
will be shown what can be done with our lands under the intensive
system of farming. The figures show the results on a four mule farm of 320
acres of our good land.

                                                   DR.          CR.
  Wear and tear of mules, tools, etc.,           $200 00
  Feed of mules,                                  200 00
  Wages and rations 10 hands,                   1,250 00
  Extra labor during harvest,                     200 00
  Fertilizers, cotton seed meal and acid
      phosphate as adjunct to home manure,      2,000 00
  Yield of 80 acres of cotton, 160 bales
      at $40                                                 $6,400 00
  Yield of 60 acres of corn, 3,000 bushels
      at 50 cents,                                            1,500 00
  Yield of 80 acres of oats, 4,000 bushels
      at 40 cents,                                            1,600 00
  Yield of 5 acres of cane, 2,000 gallons
      syrup at 35 cts.,                                         700 00
  Showing net profit of,                        6,350 00
                                              ----------    ----------
                                              $10,200 00    $10,200 00

The above estimate shows the possibilities of good farming. It is not
overdrawn, as five bales of cotton and one hundred bushels of corn and
oats, respectively, have been grown on single acres. These figures show
225 acres under cultivation, leaving ninety-five acres of the farm to be
devoted to pasture, orchards, etc.

[Illustration: Residence of W. H. Graves]


MARKET GARDENING.

Market gardening, or truck farming, around Montgomery, offers a number of
advantages over other sections. As stated elsewhere, we have a great
variety of soils that are suited to growing fruits and vegetables, while
our climate is all that could be asked, with a mean annual temperature of
64 degrees, the last frost occurring from the 5th to the 25th of
April, and earliest killing frost in the fall, in November, with an annual
mean precipitation of rain of 55 inches. The conditions are therefore
favorable for growing all fruits and vegetables not natives of extreme
northern or tropical climates, and we can have some crop growing all the
year round for marketing.

[Illustration: Charcoal Furnaces & Chemical Works]

[Illustration: Masonic Temple]

[Illustration: Liverpool & London & Glob and A. P. Tyson Buildings]

[Illustration: Alabama State Fair Grounds]

With the good railroad connections that we have with such points as
Louisville, Cincinnati and Chicago, and advantage in rates by being two
hundred miles nearer to these markets than the Gulf coast, the Montgomery
gardener is favorably situated to make his business successful.


LUMBER AND TIMBER TRADE OF MONTGOMERY.

Montgomery is favorably located for being one of the largest lumber marts
in the South, owing to her close proximity to the immense body of long
leaf pine in South Alabama, which, with good rail connections in operation
and in course of construction, will enable her to control any amount of
splendid yellow pine lumber for manufacturing into sash, doors, blinds,
etc. On all the rivers and streams in this section abound hard woods of
every kind, suitable for manufacture into furniture, wagons, tool handles
and for every variety of wood working. These can be laid down in
Montgomery at such a low cost that she is destined to become a great
center for wood working establishments.


COTTON FACTORIES.

As a financial investment, cotton mills in the South, under proper
management, offer as good promise of dividends on capital invested as any
industry or branch of business. The average profits from cotton mills
South, for years have been fully equal to those of other business, and in
many instances, far greater. In selecting a site for a mill, there are
localities that offer greater inducements for such an enterprise than
others, and among those cities that offer the greatest attractions is
Montgomery. We believe a careful review of her facilities will convince
capitalists that she is the most available city in the South for
operating a cotton mill, and that she must become sooner or later the
center for cotton manufacture. In counting the cost of a plant, the
question of a site would not have to be considered, as a good railroad
site will be donated by either the Riverside or the Highland Park Company.
Building material, and skilled and unskilled labor required to convert it
into mill buildings, can be secured at a very reasonable rate. The
proximity of the city to the Alabama coal fields settles all questions as
to the cost of fuel for power. Coal at a little over $2 per ton affords
power to propel a cotton mill, which under the ordinary natural conditions
attached to water power, makes it impossible to compete with steam. The
city is a trade center for the distribution of large quantities of staple
goods of every kind over a large territory, which in turn supplies her
with the raw material, and in such quantities that she enjoys great
prominence as a cotton market. The supply of cotton for the mills could be
readily obtained, and many of the goods produced would find a ready home
market, while the competing lines of railway and the Alabama river insure
low freight rates for the products and for all material and supplies used
in building and running a mill.

[Illustration: Residence of H. C. Moses]

Fully 80 per cent. of the operatives of a cotton mill are females and
minors, and Montgomery has a large class of this population who are now
practically without employment, the majority of the industries now in
operation here being unsuitable for such labor. In many families the adult
males are compelled to support by their labors the remaining members of
their households, owing to the difficulty of the class mentioned above
finding suitable and profitable employment. For this, at present, surplus
labor, there is no fixed value. It seeks employment wherever there is an
opportunity, and is satisfied with very moderate pay. Should a cotton mill
be built in Montgomery, an ample supply of this labor would be certain to
volunteer before the completion of the building.

[Illustration: Carr's Cracker Factory]

[Illustration: Standard Club Building]

The South is the field for the manufacture of coarse cotton goods, and no
other section of the country can compete with it on these products. This
has been fully determined, and is no longer an open question. These goods
are standard and the demand for them world wide. Thousands of bales of
domestic goods have been shipped during the year from Southern mills to
China and Japan. As stated above, the South is the field for cotton mills,
and Montgomery is the most available point in the South for the
establishment of such industries.


TALLASSEE FALLS MANUFACTURING COMPANY.

The Tallassee Falls Manufacturing Co's Cotton Mills are situated at
Tallassee, a small town contiguous to and contributory to Montgomery. The
main building, of stone, is 220 feet long by 50 feet wide, five stories,
with an L 60 feet, six stories, and a wing 116 feet by 60 feet, four
stories high, containing about 20,000 spindles and 330 looms.

These mills manufacture cotton brown goods, consuming 7,500 to 8,000 bales
cotton annually.

The officers of the company are, John W. Durr, President; James A. Farley,
Treasurer, and Wm. H. Micou, Jr., Secretary. Their residences are at
Montgomery, where the principal office of the company is located. The
officers at the mills are, A. J. Milstead, Superintendent; A. J. Noble,
Assistant Treasurer, Tallassee, Ala.

The mills are run by water-power, are equipped with the latest improved
machinery, and lighted by an 800 light Edison electric light plant.

[Illustration: Cotton Mills of the Tallassee Falls Manufacturing Co.]

[Illustration: Montgomery Ala. and Its Surroundings]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Montgomery, the Capital City of Alabama, by 
Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MONTGOMERY--CAPITAL CITY--ALABAMA ***

***** This file should be named 38634.txt or 38634.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/6/3/38634/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
