The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Walk and a Drive., by Thomas Miller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Walk and a Drive.

Author: Thomas Miller

Release Date: January 24, 2012 [EBook #38661]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WALK AND A DRIVE. ***




Produced by Emmy, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the University of Florida Digital Collections.)









[Illustration: "She was very pleased to have her mug filled--the mug
which she had brought on purpose."]

[Illustration: New York.

Sheldon & Company.]




        LITTLE ROSY'S TRAVELS.

        SIX VOLUMES.


        ON THE JOURNEY.
        A WALK AND A DRIVE.
        THE DUCKS AND PIGS.
        THE WOUNDED BIRD.
        A SAD ADVENTURE.
        THE DOCTOR'S VISIT.




Little Rosy's Travels.

A WALK AND A DRIVE.

ILLUSTRATED.

        New York:
        SHELDON AND COMPANY.
        1870.




        Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1868,
        By SHELDON AND COMPANY,
        In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the
                Southern
        District of New York.


        Electrotyped at the
        BOSTON STEREOTYPE FOUNDRY,
        No. 19 Spring Lane.




A Walk and a Drive.




VISIT TO THE DAIRY.


WHEN Rosy opened her eyes the next morning the sun was shining so
brightly that she was obliged to shut them again. But a great many
thoughts came into her little head, and she was in a great hurry to get
up.

Nurse said it was not time yet, and that she was very sleepy; but when
the little girl had climbed into her bed, and given her a great many
soft kisses, and told her how much she wanted to take a walk before
breakfast, the kind nursey first rubbed her eyes, then opened them, and
then got out of bed.

While she was dressing, Rosy began to put on her own shoes and stockings
and some of her clothes; for she had already learnt to do a great deal
for herself.

She peeped out of window to look for the birds, but for some time she
could not see any.

Rosy thought this very strange, for she remembered how she used to hear
the dear little birdies sing when she had been in the country in
England; but nurse could not explain the puzzle; so Rosy settled that it
was to be a question for her papa. Of course he would know; he always
knew everything.

When they were quite ready, nurse said,--

"Now, my darling, if you like, we will go and get your milk for
breakfast; for I know where it is to be had, and nice, new, good milk I
hope it may be, to make my little Trotty very fat."

"Is not Rosy fat now?" asked the little girl, in surprise, and feeling
first her plump cheeks and then her round arms with her stumpy little
fingers.

"O, pretty well," said nurse laughing, "but you may be fatter yet, and I
like fat little girls."

They had not to walk far before they came to the place where the milk
was sold. It was called a farm; and nurse took Rosy in, and said she
should see the dairy if the good woman would let her.

Rosy did not know what a dairy meant; but she supposed that it was
something curious, and tripped merrily along, wondering what she should
see, till they came to a room which had a floor made of red tiles, on
which stood at least ten or twelve large open bowls full of new milk.

Now Rosy happened to be very fond of milk; and as she was just then
quite ready for her breakfast, she was very pleased to have her mug
filled,--the mug which she had brought on purpose, as nurse told
her,--and then take a good drink.

"Ah, nurse, how good it is!" she cried; "but what is all this sticking
to my lips? It is not white like our milk. See, there is something on
the top of it!" and she held out her mug to show her.

"Ah, that's cream, good cream. We did not get milk like this in Paris,"
said nurse; "and I'm sure we don't in London. There's no water here, is
there, madame?"

But madame did not understand English; so nurse was obliged, by looking
very pleased, to make her see that she thought her milk very good.

"But it's very bad of the other people to put water in my milk," said
Rosy, frowning. "I shall ask my papa to scold them when we go home; and
I shall take a great mugful of this nice milk to show my grandmamma."

"Well, now say good by prettily in French, as your papa teaches you,"
said nurse, "and then we'll go home, and I dare say we shall find some
more milk there."

"Adieu, madame," said the little girl, and off she trotted again, as
ready to go as she had been to come.

They say "madame" to every one in France, you know, and not to rich
ladies only.

Now there are beautiful hills all round the back of Cannes, and a little
way up one of these was the house where Rosy was going to live. She did
so like running up and down hills! and there were two or three little
ones between the farm and this house, which was called a villa.

When she got on to the top of one, she cried out,--

"Ah, there's the sea, I do declare! and there's a boat on it with a
white sail! Shall we go in a boat some day?"

"I don't know," said nurse, "you must ask your mamma; but you don't want
to be sick, do you?"

"I won't be sick," cried the little girl. "Rosy is never sick in a
beau'ful boat like that. I'll ask my mamma," and she bustled on.

"Stay, stay!" cried nurse, "you're going too far, my pet; this is the
way; look, who stands up there?"

Rosy looked up, and there was the villa with its green blinds high up
over her head; and some one stood outside the door calling her by name.

O, what a number of steps there were for those little legs to climb
before she reached her papa!

They went up by the side of a garden, which was itself like a lot of
wide steps, and on each step there was a row of vines, not trained
against a wall as we train our vines in England, but growing on the
ground like bean plants.

Rosy saw lots of such nice grapes that her little mouth quite watered,
and she would have liked to have stopped to pick some; but then she knew
that would be stealing, because they were not hers. And I hope that Rosy
would not have stolen even if nurse had not been following her, or her
papa watching her.

She got the grapes, too, without picking them; for when she had climbed
up to the very top, there was papa waiting for her with a beautiful
bunch in his hand. And he said,--

"Come in, Rosy; mamma wants her breakfast very badly. See, mamma, what a
pair of roses your little girl has been getting already!"

Rosy knew very well what that meant, for she rubbed her cheeks with her
little fat hands, and then tumbled her merry little head about her
mamma's lap to "roll the roses off," as she said.

But that little head was too full of thoughts to stay there long.

There was so much to tell and to talk about, and that dairy took a long
time to describe. Then when papa asked if she had seen the dear cows
that gave the milk, she thought that that would be a capital little
jaunt for to-morrow, and clapped her hands with glee.

"So you are going to find some new pets, Rosy," he said, "to do instead
of Mr. Tommy and the kittens?"

"Ah, papa, but there are no dickies here--I mean, hardly any," she
answered. "We looked so for the birdies all, all the time; but only two
came, and went away again directly."

"We must go out and see the reason of that," said papa, smiling,--"you
and I, Rosy, directly after breakfast. We must go and tell the dear
birds that Rosy has come."

[Illustration]




A WALK AND A DRIVE.


ROSY made such haste to finish her bread and milk, that she was ready to
go out before any one else had done breakfast. But her papa was not long
before he was ready too, and she was soon tripping along by his side.

They went only a little way up the road, and then they came to a field,
on one side of which were some high bushes. Rosy knew where to look for
birds, and peeped very anxiously amidst the boughs till she saw
something hopping. Then she pulled her papa's hand, and let him know
that she wanted him to stoop down and look too.

He looked, and then whispered,--

"Yes, Rosy. There is a pretty little robin; let us go round the other
side and see if we can make him come out with these crumbs which I have
brought with me."

So they went softly to the gate, and were just going in, when papa
said,--

"Stop, Rosy; look what that man has got in his hand."

Then she looked, and saw a man with a very long gun and two dogs.

"What is he going to do, papa?" asked the little girl, drawing back;
"will he shoot us if we go in?"

"O, no, Rosy; don't be afraid. It is the robin that he wants to shoot
and not us. So now you see how it is that the dicky-birds don't sing
much at Cannes. It is because they shoot so many of them."

Poor little Rosy! She loved so much to watch the little birds and hear
them sing! And when she thought of this dear robin being shot quite
dead, and that perhaps there was a nest somewhere with little ones who
would have no mamma, she began to cry, and to call the man "a cruel
fellow."

She was not much comforted by being told that such little birds were
eaten there; so that if the man could shoot one, he would get some money
for it which might buy bread for his little ones. But she was rather
glad to hear that the little robins must be able by that time of year to
take care of themselves, and had left the nest some time; and much more
pleased, when, soon after, she saw the dear robin fly right away, so
that the man with the gun was not likely to shoot that one at any rate.

Then papa said, "I shouldn't wonder if mamma would like to go out this
morning. Shall we go back and see?"

[Illustration: "Rosy was very much pleased when soon after she saw the
robin fly right away."]

Rosy thought that would be very nice; and then her papa lifted up his
little girl, and showed her all the beautiful hills that were behind
them. There were some that had peaked tops, and some rather roundish;
and just in one place she could see some hills a very long way off, that
seemed to climb right up into the sky and were all white on the top. He
told her that those hills were called mountains, because they were so
very high,--a great deal too high for Rosy to walk up, and that the
white stuff which she saw was snow.

"We don't have snow when it is warm in England, Rosy, do we?" said
papa, "nor yet here, but up there, you see, it is so cold that the snow
never melts. Those are called 'the snow Alps.'"

Rosy had nearly forgotten the poor birds now, because there were so many
other things to think about. She saw some poppies a little way off, and
then some blue flowers; and they were so pretty that she was quite
obliged to stop a good many times to pick some for dear mamma. The wind
was very high too, and it blew little Rosy's hat right off, so that papa
and she had both to run after it.

Mamma was ready for a walk when they got in, but she staid to put
Rosy's flowers in water; and they looked very gay and pretty. Nurse and
every one admired them; and Rosy said that she was not a bit tired, and
was quite sure that she could go for another long, long walk.

But papa said that though Rosy might be a little horse, her mamma was
not, and that it was a long way to the town and to the shops where she
wanted to go; so he would go and get a carriage for them.

Now, though Rosy certainly was very tired of trains, she found a basket
pony-carriage a very different thing, and enjoyed her ride so much that
she was obliged to change pretty often from her mamma's lap to her
papa's and back again, just because she was too happy to sit still.

The ponies went along merrily too, as if they were nearly as happy. They
had bells on their necks which jingled delightfully, and every now and
then they met a carriage, or even a cart, the horses of which had bells
too. So they had plenty of music.

They went up one hill and down another, and the ponies ran so fast, and
turned round the corners of the roads so quickly, that sometimes mamma
was afraid that the carriage would be upset, and that they would all be
"tipped out in a heap." Rosy thought it would be good fun if they were.
She often rolled about herself, like a little ball, without hurting
herself; and she thought that papa and mamma would only get a little
dusty, and that it would be a nice little job for her to brush the dust
off when she got home.

Just then a number of boys and girls came along the road to meet them,
and Rosy saw that all the little ones wore caps, not hats or bonnets.
There was one baby with large black eyes, whom she would have liked to
kiss and hug. It was so fat and pretty. But it was dressed in a way that
she had never seen any baby dressed before, for its feet and legs were
put into a sort of large bag, so that it could not kick like other
children; and Rosy wondered how it could laugh so merrily.

When the carriage came near this little party the man did not hold the
reins of his horses tight as an English coachman would have done. He
only screamed out to the children, "Gare! gare!" which Rosy's papa told
her meant "Get out of the way."

And when they were all past there came next a great wagon, piled up with
the trunks of trees. The horses which drew this had no bells; but they
had a funny sort of post sticking up high between their ears, with lots
of things hanging on to it. They had also three pink tassels hanging on
their faces, one in front and one on each side. These tassels shook as
they went along, and looked so pretty that Rosy thought to herself that
if ever she had a toy horse again she would ask nurse to make some
little tassels for it just like them. Her papa had told her, too, that
they were to keep off the flies, which teased the poor horses very often
dreadfully. And of course Rosy would not like her horse to be teased.

But the carriage went on while she was thinking this; and soon they saw
four old women coming along the road with large baskets, full of some
green stuff, on their heads. The little girl did not say anything as
they went by, but she looked very particularly to see how they were
dressed.

Now I must tell you why she did this.

In the first place, then, she had never seen any old women a bit like
them before.

They walked all in a row with their baskets on their heads, and with
their hands stuck into their sides, and they talked very fast as they
came along. On their heads they wore very, very large hats, with small
crowns. Rosy had never seen such hats before, and she heard her mamma
say that she had never seen them either. Under these great hats they had
nice white caps, with colored handkerchiefs over them, which hung down
behind. They had, besides, other colored handkerchiefs over their
shoulders, and two of them had red gowns.

Now Rosy had had a present given her in Paris. It was a piece of French
money, worth ten English pennies; and with this money she had bought ten
Dutch dolls, which nursey was going to dress for her. At first she
meant them to make an English school; but now that she had seen so many
funny people she thought she would like her dolls to be dressed like the
people in Cannes, because then they would just show her dear grandmamma
how very nice they looked, and how very different to English people.

She was very quiet for a little while, because she was making this grand
plan; but they soon turned out of the narrow street, and all at once she
saw the sea again.

They had come now to what was called the "port," and there were all the
great ships which had come home lately, and were waiting to go out
again,--one, two, three, four, five, six, all in a row, quite quiet, and
"taking their naps," as Rosy's papa said, "after all their hard work."

He lifted Rosy out first, and said that they would go and look at them,
while mamma went into the shops.

Rosy was not quite sure whether she was pleased at that, because
sometimes her mamma bought her very nice things, such as toys, or
sugar-plums, or cakes, when she took her out shopping. But they soon
found plenty to look at, and some funny men with blue coats and cocked
hats amused the little girl very much. Her papa wondered why she looked
at them so often; but then he did not know Rosy's grand scheme, and how
she was thinking of asking nurse to dress one doll just like them. She
kept this little plan quite a secret till she got back to her nurse.

It was half the fun to have a secret.

[Illustration]




ROSY'S VISIT TO THE COWS.


THE dear, good nursey did not forget about the cows next morning, for
when Rosy opened her little blue peepers there she was half dressed.

Rosy jumped up in a minute, crying out,--

"The cows! the cows! Shall we go and see them?"

"If you will make great haste," said the nurse; "but it is getting
late."

Rosy never got dressed more quickly. She did not much like even to wait
for her morning splash; and while her curls were being combed, she kept
saying, "Won't it do, nurse?" and then rather hindering by holding up
her little face for a kiss.

As soon as she was quite ready she bustled off, and got down stairs
first. Whom should she see there but papa himself, with his hat on?

He said that he would take her to see the cows, and even carry her a
little way if she got tired.

How very kind that was! But would such a great girl as Rosy get tired?

O, dear, no; at least, so she said, for Rosy did not like to be thought
a baby now, though somehow or other it did sometimes happens that after
a long walk her feet would ache a little bit, and then papa's shoulder
made a very comfortable seat.

She was half afraid now that nursey might be sorry not to see the cows,
and ran back to whisper that if she liked she might dress one of the
dollies instead. That was meant for a treat, you know; and nursey
laughed, and said,--

"Perhaps, we shall see;" and gave her another kiss.

Then Rosy showed her papa where the farm was; and when they came near,
they saw the farmer's wife standing at the door, as if she expected her
little visitor.

Rosy did not forget to say,--

"Bon jour, madame," which means "Good morning" in English, you know.

Papa asked in French if they could see the cows, and the good woman was
kind enough to take them round to the water where they were drinking.

There was a black one, and a black and white one, and a red one, and
another with red spots. We cannot find room for them all in the
picture; but you will see the one which was drinking.

Rosy admired them very much, and wanted to go as near as she could that
she might see them well; for although they were so very big and had such
long legs, she was not a bit afraid of them. She never was afraid of
anything when her papa was by, because he was so very strong--stronger
than all the world she thought.

"Who made the cows, Rosy?" asked her papa, when she had looked at them a
little while.

"God," said Rosy, softly; "God made everything, didn't he, papa? Why did
he make the cows?" she asked, after thinking a minute.

"To give us good milk, such as you had yesterday, Rosy, and to make you
and other little girls and boys fat and strong. Was not that very good
of God!"

"Yes, papa," said Rosy, again.

"Then will you remember that, my little one, when you say, by and by, 'I
thank God for my nice bread and milk'?"

Rosy said she would, and then she asked,--

"And do the pretty cows give us coffee, too, papa?"

[Illustration: "And do the pretty cows give us coffee, too, papa."]

"No, no, my silly little Rosy; don't you recollect that we buy that at
the grocer's shop? We must go some day and ask him to let you see it
ground up to powder. The coffee comes from a long, long way off. It
grows on a tree in a very hot country, and looks like little berries
till they put it into a mill and turn a handle. Then the berries are
ground up to powder, and we put some boiling water over the powder, and
when it gets cool we drink it. Haven't you seen mamma pour it out into
the cup and put some sugar and milk in for herself and papa?"

Rosy remembered now; but she had not taken much notice before, because
she did not like coffee at all. She liked her nice milk much better; and
so when she went away with her papa she called out,--

"Good by, dear cowies, and thank you very much for my nice milk."

Rosy wanted to walk round the other side where there was a very gentle,
kind-looking cow, that was not in the water, because she thought that
she would like to stroke her; but her papa told her to look at those two
great horns. And he said that cows did not like little girls to take
liberties with them unless they knew them, and that this cow did not
know her, and might think her very saucy, and poke out her horns to
teach her to keep a proper distance. If she did, he said he thought Rosy
would not like that poke, for it might hurt her, so he advised her to
keep quite out of the good cow's way.

Then she stood at a little distance to watch her drinking, and Rosy's
papa said,--

"See how she enjoys it! Cows like to come here sometimes, like little
girls; but French cows don't get out of their houses so often as English
ones."

"Don't they, papa?" said Rosy. "Then I should think they must often wish
to go to England."

Papa laughed, and said,--

"Perhaps they would wish it if they knew how their English cousins enjoy
themselves; but I think they look pretty happy; don't you, Rosy?"

Rosy said,--

"Yes, papa; but how funnily the cow drinks! She puts her head into the
water."

"And you think that if she were a polite cow she would not think of
doing such a vulgar thing, but would wait till they gave her a glass;
eh, Rosy?"

"She hasn't got any hands, papa," cried Rosy, "so she couldn't, I
'spose."

"No," said papa; "so I think that we must excuse and forgive the poor
thing, until Rosy can teach her a better plan."

And Rosy trotted home by his side, thinking how much she should like to
try drinking after the cow's fashion.

[Illustration]




ROSY'S VISIT TO THE HENS.


ROSY was very hungry when she got home to breakfast, for the fresh
morning air had given her an appetite.

Her mamma took off her hat and her little jacket, and said,--

"So, Rosy, you have brought me two more roses."

"But my roses don't smell, mamma," said Rosy, laughing and patting her
own fat cheeks, as she always did when mamma said that. Then she made
haste to scramble up on to her little chair, and pull her nice basin of
bread and milk close to her. She looked at her papa after she had said
her little grace, and said,--

"I didn't forget, papa."

Then she began to eat away as if she liked it very much; and when she
had eaten a little, her mamma said,--

"Look here, Rosy."

And Rosy turned round and saw a whole spoonful of egg waiting for her to
eat it. Mamma was holding it for her; and it looked so yellow and so
delicious!

Rosy opened her mouth, but she did not take it all in at once. It was
too good for that, and she thought it better to make it last a little.

But some of the yellow would stick on Rosy's lips; so mamma wiped it
off, and then Rosy put her arms round her neck and kissed her, and
said,--

"So nice, dear mamma."

Then mamma said,--

"At the end of the garden, Rosy, there lives the good hen that gave us
this nice egg, and a great many other hens, and very fine cocks
too,--the cocks that you heard crowing this morning. Shall we go and see
them after breakfast?"

"O, yes, yes, yes!" cried Rosy, clapping her hands, "that will be fun.
I've almost done mine;" and the little girl made great haste to finish
her bread and milk; but mamma said,--

"Ah, but not quite directly. I've not done my breakfast. If you have
done yours, you had better go and see what nurse is doing, and ask her
to get ready to come and hear papa read about Daniel in the lions' den."

Rosy did not mind waiting for that, for she was never tired of hearing
that story. I dare say that some of her young friends know it too.

Her mamma got ready soon after, and they both went round to a part of
the garden which Rosy had not seen before.

There they saw that one piece was railed off from all the rest, and that
a hen-house was inside it.

Rosy's mamma opened a gate in the railing, and took her little girl into
the enclosure amongst all the cocks and hens.

The cocks did not seem much to like this, and they both made a great
crowing, and then marched off into the farthest corner, with a lot of
hens after them.

Rosy said,--

"O, mamma, show them the nice seed, and then they won't go away!"

But her mamma answered,--

"Not yet, Rosy; let us go first and look at these good ladies that are
walking about inside their house. We can have a good look at them before
they get away. See, they can't get out if we stand at the door."

"Ah, look at these beauties, all over speckly feathers," cried Rosy, as
she ran forward to catch one.

She put out her little arms to seize her; but the hen seemed to think
this a great liberty from so small a child, and instead of running away,
she turned and opened her beak in a very angry manner.

"Take care, Rosy," said her mamma, as the little girl drew back half
frightened. "This hen seems rather a fierce lady. I will give her some
seed to persuade her to be quiet. Perhaps she has got something there
that she does not choose us to see. I wonder what it can be."

Rosy took one more peep, and then called out,--

"O, mamma, mamma, some little chickens, I do declare! If you stoop down
you can see them running about behind her,--such dear, pretty, soft
little creatures! Do get me one to play with."

"Little chickens!" said mamma; "why, they must have come out of their
shells very late in the year if they are little ones still, and I am
afraid their mother won't let me touch them."

"Do chickens come out of shells?" said Rosy, making very large eyes, and
looking quite puzzled.

"Yes, Rosy, out of just such shells as our eggs had this morning; and if
in the summer we had given this good hen five or six of her own eggs in
this little house of hers, she would have sat upon them, and spread her
wings over them to keep them warm; and there she would have staid so
patiently all day long, and day after day, until the dear little
chickens were ready to come too."

"And wouldn't the hen get tired?" said Rosy. "I shouldn't like to stay
still so long."

"No, I don't think you would," said her mamma, chucking her little girl
under the chin; "but then, you see, you are like the little chickens,
and not like the mamma hen. I think you will find that she has not got
tired even yet, for if you peep down again you will see that she is
keeping two of the little chickens warm under her even now. Little
chickens are like little babies, and they very soon get cold, so they
like keeping very close to their mammas."

"Are the little chickens naughty sometimes?" asked Rosy.

[Illustration: "If you stoop down you will see that she is keeping two
of the little chickens warm under her."]

"Well, I don't know, Rosy; but I know that I have often thought it very
pretty to see how they will all run to their mother when the great hen
clucks for them."

"O, mamma, I should _so_ like to hear her cluck," cried Rosy, clapping
her hands.

"Well, Rosy, you go a little way off, and keep quite quiet; and then I
will see if I can tempt the good lady out of her nest with some of this
nice seed."

So Rosy ran away, and her mamma stepped back a few paces and threw down
some of the seed. The hen saw it directly, and looked for an instant as
if she would like some very much; and she did not wait long, but soon
stepped out of her house, and began picking up the seed.

Just at that moment a cat came creeping along the outside of the paling,
and watching to see if she could pounce on one of the little chickens.
The hen saw the cat, and began to stretch out her neck very fiercely, as
if she meant to fly at its eyes, and then began to cluck for her little
ones, which all came running to her as fast as their legs would carry
them.

Rosy's little eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she went up and put her
hand into her mamma's, and said softly,--

"Wasn't it nice?"

"Yes, Rosy," said her mamma, "and I hope that my little chicken will
always run to my side as quickly as these did to their mother. You see
she knew that they were in danger when they didn't themselves; and so do
I sometimes when my Rosy thinks she is quite safe."

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 7, "the" changed to "she" (so that she)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Walk and a Drive., by Thomas Miller

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WALK AND A DRIVE. ***

***** This file should be named 38661.txt or 38661.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/6/6/38661/

Produced by Emmy, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the University of Florida Digital Collections.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
