Project Gutenberg's A Vindication of Natural Diet., by Percy Bysshe Shelley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Vindication of Natural Diet.

Author: Percy Bysshe Shelley

Release Date: January 31, 2012 [EBook #38727]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VINDICATION OF NATURAL DIET. ***




Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Martin Pettit and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)






A VINDICATION OF NATURAL DIET.

BY PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY.

A NEW EDITION.

     "Our simple life wants little, and true taste
     Hires not the pale drudge Luxury to waste
     The scene it would adorn, and therefore still
     Nature, with all her children, haunts the hill."

     _Epipsychidion._

LONDON: F. PITMAN, 20, PATERNOSTER ROW.
MANCHESTER: JOHN HEYWOOD, RIDGEFIELD; AND OFFICES
OF THE VEGETARIAN SOCIETY, 75, PRINCESS STREET.
1884.




PREFATORY NOTICE.


Shelley's "Vindication of Natural Diet" was first written as part of the
notes to "Queen Mab," which was privately issued in 1813. Later in the
same year the "Vindication" was separately published as a pamphlet, and
it is from this later publication that the present reprint is made. The
original pamphlet is now exceedingly scarce, but it is said to have been
reprinted in 1835, as an appendix to an American medical work, the
"Manual on Health," by Dr. Turnbull, of New York. Two copies only are
known to have been preserved of this excessively rare pamphlet, though
possibly others may be hidden in unfrequented libraries and out of the
way country houses. One copy is in the British Museum, and the other is
in the possession of Mr. H. Buxton Forman, who has reprinted it in his
great edition of Shelley, where it forms the opening part of the second
volume of the "Prose Works."

The main object of Shelley's pamphlet was to show that a vegetable diet
is the most _natural_, and therefore the best for mankind. It is not an
appeal to humanitarian sentiment, but an argument based on individual
experience, concerning the intimate connection of health and morality
with food. It has no claim to originality in the arguments adduced; its
materials being avowedly drawn from the works of Dr. Lambe and Mr.
Newton, of whom an account may be read in Mr. Howard Williams' "Catena,"
but the style is Shelley's own, and the pamphlet is in many ways one of
the most interesting and characteristic of his prose works. Perhaps its
most remarkable feature is to be found in the very pertinent remarks as
to the bearing of Vegetarianism on those questions of economy and social
reform, which are now forcing themselves more and more on the attention
of the English people.[1]


At the time of writing his "Vindication of Natural Diet," Shelley had
himself, for some months past, adopted a Vegetarian diet, chiefly, no
doubt, through his intimacy with the Newton family. There seems no
reason to doubt that he continued to practise Vegetarianism during the
rest of his stay in England, that is from 1813 to the spring of 1818.
Leigh Hunt's account of his life at Marlow, in 1817, is as
follows:--"This was the round of his daily life. He was up early,
breakfasted sparingly, wrote this 'Revolt of Islam' all the morning;
went out in his boat, or in the woods, with some Greek author or the
Bible in his hands; came home to a dinner of vegetables (for he took
neither meat nor wine); visited, if necessary, the sick and fatherless,
whom others gave Bibles to and no help; wrote or studied again, or read
to his wife and friends the whole evening; took a crust of bread or a
glass of whey for his supper, and went early to bed."

In 1818, he left England for Italy, and during his last four years, the
most dreamy and speculative period of his life, he seems to have been
less strict in his observance of Vegetarian practice. It is not true
however, as has sometimes been asserted, that Shelley lost faith in the
principles of Vegetarianism; for his change in diet was owing partly to
his well-known carelessness about his food, which became more marked at
this time, and partly to a desire to avoid giving trouble to the other
members of his household, which, as we see from a line in his letter to
Maria Gisborne, written in 1820, "Though we eat little flesh and drink
no wine" was not entirely a Vegetarian one. Yet, even at this period of
his life, he himself was practically, if not systematically, a
Vegetarian, for all his biographers agree in informing us that bread was
literally his "staff of life." We cannot doubt that if he had lived in
the present time he would have taken a leading part in the movement
towards Food Reform. As it is, he has left us an invaluable legacy in
his "Vindication of Natural Diet," perhaps the most powerful and
eloquent plea ever put forward in favour of the Vegetarian cause.

He found in this the presage of his ideal future. To his enthusiastic
faith in the transforming effect of the Vegetarian principle, we owe
some of the finest passages in his poetry. In the close of the eighth
canto of "Queen Mab," we have a picture of a time when man no more


     Slays the lamb that looks him in the face.


It is the same ideal of bloodless innocence as that of Israel's
prophet-poet, who declares that in the Holy Mountain they shall not hurt
nor destroy. Never did sage or singer, prophet or priest, or poet, see a
brighter vision of the future than that which is imaged in the
description of a glorified earth, from which cruelty, bloodshed, and
tyranny, have been banished.


     "My brethren, we are free! The fruits are glowing
     Beneath the stars, and the night-winds are flowing
     O'er the ripe corn. The birds and beasts are dreaming.
       Never again may blood of bird or beast
       Stain with its venomous stream a human feast,

     To the pure skies in accusation steaming;
       Avenging poisons shall have ceased
         To feed disease and fear and madness;
           The dwellers of the earth and air
         Shall throng around our steps in gladness,
           Seeking their food or refuge there.
     Our toil from thought all glorious forms shall cull,
     To make this earth, our home, more beautiful;
     And Science, and her sister Poesy,
     Shall clothe in light the fields and cities of the free!"

            *       *       *       *       *

     Over the plain the throngs were scattered then
       In groups around the fires, which from the sea
     Even to the gorge of the first mountain-glen
       Blazed wide and far. The banquet of the free
       Was spread beneath many a dark cypress-tree;
     Beneath whose spires which swayed in the red flame
       Reclining as they ate, of liberty,
     And hope, and justice, and Laone's name,
     Earth's children did a woof of happy converse frame.

     Their feast was such as Earth, the general mother,
       Pours from her fairest bosom, when she smiles
     In the embrace of Autumn. To each other
       As when some parent fondly reconciles
       Her warring children, she their wrath beguiles
     With her own sustenance; they relenting weep:--
       Such was this festival, which, from their isles
     And continents and winds and oceans deep,
     All shapes might throng to share that fly or walk or creep.


That this was no mere poetic sentiment is proved by this pamphlet, which
is an earnest vindication of Vegetarianism.

H. S. S.
W. E. A. A.


[ORIGINAL TITLE PAGE.]


A VINDICATION OF NATURAL DIET.

BEING ONE IN A SERIES OF NOTES TO QUEEN MAB

(A PHILOSOPHICAL POEM).

[Greek: Iapetionide, panton peri medea eidos,
Chaireis pur klepsas, kai emas phrenas eperopeusas;
Soit' auto mega pema kai andrasin essomenoisi.
Toisd'ego anti puros doso kakon, o ken apantes
Terpontai kata thumon, eon kakon amphagapontes.]

[Greek: ESIOD.] Op. et Dies. 1, 54.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR J. CALLOW, MEDICAL BOOKSELLER, CROWN COURT,
PRINCE'S STREET, SOHO,
BY SMITH & DAVY, QUEEN STREET, SEVEN DIALS.
1813.

_PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE._




A VINDICATION OF NATURAL DIET.


I hold that the depravity of the physical and moral nature of man
originated in his unnatural habits of life. The origin of man, like that
of the universe of which he is a part, is enveloped in impenetrable
mystery. His generations either had a beginning, or they had not. The
weight of evidence in favour of each of these suppositions seems
tolerably equal; and it is perfectly unimportant to the present argument
which is assumed. The language spoken, however, by the mythology of
nearly all religions seems to prove, that at some distant period man
forsook the path of nature, and sacrificed the purity and happiness of
his being to unnatural appetites. The date of this event seems to have
also been that of some great change in the climates of the earth, with
which it has an obvious correspondence. The allegory of Adam and Eve
eating of the tree of evil, and entailing upon their posterity the wrath
of God, and the loss of everlasting life, admits of no other explanation
than the disease and crime that have flowed from unnatural diet. Milton
was so well aware of this, that he makes Raphael thus exhibit to Adam
the consequence of his disobedience:--


                     ... Immediately a place
     Before his eyes appeared: sad, noisome, dark:
     A lazar-house it seemed; wherein were laid
     Numbers of all diseased: all maladies
     Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
     Of heart-sick agony, all feverous kinds,
     Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs;
     Intestine stone and ulcer, cholic pangs,
     Daemoniac frenzy, moping melancholy,
     And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy,
     Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence,
     Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums.


And how many thousands more might not be added to this frightful
catalogue!

The story of Prometheus is one likewise which, although universally
admitted to be allegorical, has never been satisfactorily explained.
Prometheus stole fire from heaven, and was chained for this crime to
Mount Caucasus, where a vulture continually devoured his liver, that
grew to meet its hunger. Hesiod says, that, before the time of
Prometheus, mankind were exempt from suffering; that they enjoyed a
vigorous youth, and that death, when at length it came, approached like
sleep, and gently closed their eyes. Again, so general was this opinion,
that Horace, a poet of the Augustan age, writes:--


     Audax omnia perpeti,
     Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas,
     Audax Iapeti genus
     Ignem fraude mala gentibus intulit,
     Post ignem aetherea domo
     Subductum, macies et nova febrium
     Terris incubuit cohors
     Semotique prius tarda necessitas
     Lethi corripuit gradum.


How plain a language is spoken by all this. Prometheus (who represents
the human race) effected some great change in the condition of his
nature, and applied fire to culinary purposes; thus inventing an
expedient for screening from his disgust the horrors of the shambles.
From this moment his vitals were devoured by the vulture of disease. It
consumed his being in every shape of its loathsome and infinite variety,
inducing the soul-quelling sinkings of premature and violent death. All
vice arose from the ruin of healthful innocence. Tyranny, superstition,
commerce, and inequality, were then first known, when reason vainly
attempted to guide the wanderings of exacerbated passion. I conclude
this part of the subject with an extract from Mr. Newton's Defence of
Vegetable Regimen, from whom I have borrowed this interpretation of the
fable of Prometheus.

"Making allowance for such transposition of the events of the allegory
as time might produce after the important truths were forgotten, which
this portion of the ancient mythology was intended to transmit, the
drift of the fable seems to be this: Man at his creation was endowed
with the gift of perpetual youth; that is, he was not formed to be a
sickly suffering creature as we now see him, but to enjoy health, and to
sink by slow degrees into the bosom of his parent earth without disease
or pain. Prometheus first taught the use of animal food (primus bovem
occidit Prometheus)[2] and of fire, with which to render it more
digestible and pleasing to the taste. Jupiter, and the rest of the gods,
foreseeing the consequences of these inventions, were amused or
irritated at the short-sighted devices of the newly-formed creature, and
left him to experience the sad effects of them. Thirst, the necessary
concomitant of a flesh diet," (perhaps of all diet vitiated by culinary
preparation) "ensued; water was resorted to, and man forfeited the
inestimable gift of health which he had received from heaven; he became
diseased, the partaker of a precarious existence and no longer descended
slowly to his grave."[3]


     But just disease to luxury succeeds,
     And every death its own avenger breeds;
     The fury passions from that blood began,
     And turned on man a fiercer savage--Man.


Man and the animals whom he has infected with his society, or depraved
by his dominion, are alone diseased. The wild hog, the mouflon, the
bison, and the wolf are perfectly exempt from malady, and invariably die
either from external violence or natural old age. But the domestic hog,
the sheep, the cow, and the dog are subject to an incredible variety of
distempers; and, like the corrupters of their nature, have physicians
who thrive upon their miseries. The supereminence of man is like
Satan's, a supereminence of pain; and the majority of his species,
doomed to penury, disease, and crime, have reason to curse the untoward
event that, by enabling him to communicate his sensations, raised him
above the level of his fellow animals. But the steps that have been
taken are irrevocable. The whole of human science is comprised in one
question--How can the advantages of intellect and civilisation be
reconciled with the liberty and pure pleasures of natural life? How can
we take the benefits and reject the evils of the system which is now
interwoven with all the fibres of our being? I believe that abstinence
from animal food and spirituous liquors would in a great measure
capacitate us for the solution of this important question.

Comparative anatomy teaches us that man resembles frugivorous animals in
everything, and carnivorous in nothing: he has neither claws wherewith
to seize his prey, nor distinct and pointed teeth to tear the living
fibre. A mandarin of the first class, with nails two inches long, would
probably find them alone inefficient to hold even a hare. After every
subterfuge of gluttony, the bull must be degraded into the ox, and the
ram into the wether, by an unnatural and inhuman operation, that the
flaccid fibre may offer a fainter resistance to rebellious nature. It is
only by softening and disguising dead flesh by culinary preparation that
it is rendered susceptible of mastication or digestion, and that the
sight of its bloody juices and raw horror does not excite intolerable
loathing and disgust. Let the advocate of animal food force himself to a
decisive experiment on its fitness, and, as Plutarch recommends, tear a
living lamb with his teeth, and plunging his head into its vitals, slake
his thirst with the steaming blood; when fresh from the deed of horror,
let him revert to the irresistible instincts of nature that would rise
in judgment against it, and say, Nature formed me for such work as this.
Then, and then only, would he be consistent.

Man resembles no carnivorous animal. There is no exception, except man
be one, to the rule of herbivorous animals having cellulated colons.

The orang-outang perfectly resembles man both in the order and number of
his teeth. The orang-outang is the most anthropomorphous of the ape
tribe, all of which are strictly frugivorous. There is no other species
of animals in which this analogy exists.[4] In many frugivorous animals,
the canine teeth are more pointed and distinct than those of man. The
resemblance also of the human stomach to that of the orang-outang is
greater than to that of any other animal.

The intestines are also identical with those of herbivorous animals,
which present a large surface for absorption, and have ample and
cellulated colons. The caecum also, though short, is larger than that of
carnivorous animals; and even here the orang-outang retains its
accustomed similarity.

The structure of the human frame then is that of one fitted to a pure
vegetable diet, in every essential particular. It is true that the
reluctance to abstain from animal food, in those who have been long
accustomed to its stimulus, is so great in some persons of weak minds,
as to be scarcely overcome; but this is far from bringing any argument
in its favour. A lamb which was fed for some time on flesh by a ship's
crew, refused its natural diet at the end of the voyage. There are
numerous instances of horses, sheep, oxen, and even wood-pigeons, having
been taught to live upon flesh, until they have loathed their natural
aliment. Young children evidently prefer pastry, oranges, apples, and
other fruit, to the flesh of animals, until, by the gradual depravation
of the digestive organs, the free use of vegetables has, for a time,
produced serious inconveniences; _for a time_, I say, since there never
was an instance wherein a change from spirituous liquors and animal food
to vegetables and pure water, has failed ultimately to invigorate the
body, by rendering its juices bland and consentaneous, and to restore to
the mind that cheerfulness and elasticity, which not one in fifty
possesses on the present system. A love of strong liquors is also with
difficulty taught to infants. Almost every one remembers the wry faces
the first glass of port produced. Unsophisticated instinct is
invariably unerring; but to decide on the fitness of animal food, from
the perverted appetites which its constrained adoption produce, is to
make the criminal a judge in his own cause; it is even worse, it is
appealing to the infatuated drunkard in a question of the salubrity of
brandy.

What is the cause of morbid action in the animal system? Not the air we
breathe, for our fellow denizens of nature breathe the same uninjured;
not the water we drink, if remote from the pollutions of man and his
inventions, for the animals drink it too; not the earth we tread upon;
not the unobscured sight of glorious nature, in the wood, the field, or
the expanse of sky and ocean; nothing that we are or do in common with
the undiseased inhabitants of the forest. Something then wherein we
differ from them; our habit of altering our food by fire, so that our
appetite is no longer a just criterion for the fitness of its
gratification. Except in children there remains no traces of that
instinct which determines, in all other animals, what aliment is natural
or otherwise; and so perfectly obliterated are they in the reasoning
adults of our species, that it has become necessary to urge
considerations, drawn from comparative anatomy, to prove that we are
naturally frugivorous.

Crime is madness. Madness is disease. Whenever the cause of disease
shall be discovered, the root, from which all vice and misery have so
long overshadowed the globe, will lie bare to the axe. All the exertions
of man, from that moment, may be considered as tending to the clear
profit of his species. No sane mind in a sane body resolves upon a real
crime. It is a man of violent passions, bloodshot eyes, and swollen
veins, that alone can grasp the knife of murder. The system of a simple
diet promises no Utopian advantages. It is no mere reform of
legislation, whilst the furious passions and evil propensities of the
human heart, in which it had its origin, are still unassuaged. It
strikes at the root of all evil, and is an experiment which may be tried
with success, not alone by nations, but by small societies, families,
and even individuals.

In no cases has a return to vegetable diet produced the slightest
injury: in most it has been attended with changes undeniably beneficial.
Should ever a physician be born with the genius of Locke, I am persuaded
that he might trace all bodily and mental derangements to our unnatural
habits, as clearly as that philosopher has traced all knowledge to
sensation. What prolific sources of disease are not those mineral and
vegetable poisons that have been introduced for its extirpation? How
many thousands have become murderers and robbers, bigots and domestic
tyrants, dissolute and abandoned adventurers, from the use of fermented
liquors; who had they slaked their thirst only at the mountain stream,
would have lived but to diffuse the happiness of their own unperverted
feelings. How many groundless opinions and absurd institutions have not
received a general sanction from the sottishness and intemperance of
individuals? Who will assert that, had the populace of Paris drank at
the pure source of the Seine, and satisfied their hunger at the
ever-furnished table of vegetable nature that they would have lent their
brutal suffrage to the proscription-list of Robespierre? Could a set of
men, whose passions were not perverted by unnatural stimuli, look with
coolness on an _auto da fe_? Is it to be believed that a being of gentle
feelings, rising from his meal of roots, would take delight in sports of
blood?

Was Nero a man of temperate life? Could you read calm health in his
cheek, flushed with ungovernable propensities of hatred for the human
race? Did Muley Ismael's pulse beat evenly, was his skin transparent,
did his eyes beam with healthfulness, and its invariable concomitants,
cheerfulness and benignity? Though history has decided none of these
questions, a child could not hesitate to answer in the negative. Surely
the bile-suffused cheek of Buonaparte, his wrinkled brow, and yellow
eye, the ceaseless inquietude of his nervous system, speak no less
plainly the character of his unresting ambition than his murders and his
victories. It is impossible had Bonaparte descended from a race of
vegetable feeders, that he could have either the inclination or the
power to ascend the throne of the Bourbons. The desire of tyranny could
scarcely be excited in the individual; the power to tyrannise would
certainly not be delegated by a society neither frenzied by inebriation,
nor rendered impotent or irrational by disease. Pregnant, indeed, with
inexhaustible calamity is the renunciation of instinct, as it concerns
our physical nature; arithmetic cannot enumerate, nor reason perhaps
suspect, the multitudinous sources of disease in civilised life. Even
common water, that apparently innoxious _pabulum_, when corrupted by the
filth of populous cities, is a deadly and insidious destroyer.[5] Who
can wonder that all the inducements held out by God himself in the Bible
to virtue should have been vainer than a nurse's tale; and that those
dogmas, apparently favourable to the intolerant and angry passions,
should have alone been deemed essential; whilst Christians are in the
daily practice of all those habits which have infected with disease and
crime, not only the reprobate sons, but these favoured children of the
common Father's love. Omnipotence itself could not save them from the
consequences of this original and universal sin.


There is no disease, bodily or mental, which adoption of vegetable diet
and pure water has not infallibly mitigated, wherever the experiment has
been fairly tried. Debility is gradually converted into strength,
disease into healthfulness: madness, in all its hideous variety, from
the ravings of the fettered maniac, to the unaccountable irrationalities
of ill-temper, that make a hell of domestic life, into a calm and
considerable evenness of temper, that alone might offer a certain pledge
of the future moral reformation of society. On a natural system of diet,
old age would be our last and our only malady: the term of our existence
would be protracted; we should enjoy life, and no longer preclude others
from the enjoyment of it; all sensational delights would be infinitely
more exquisite and perfect; the very sense of being would then be a
continued pleasure, such as we now feel it in some few and favoured
moments of our youth. By all that is sacred in our hopes for the human
race, I conjure those who love happiness and truth, to give a fair trial
to the vegetable system. Reasoning is surely superfluous on a subject
whose merits an experience of six months would set for ever at rest. But
it is only among the enlightened and benevolent that so great a
sacrifice of appetite and prejudice can be expected, even though its
ultimate excellence should not admit of dispute.

It is found easier, by the short-sighted victims of disease, to
palliate their torments by medicine, than to prevent them by regimen.
The vulgar of all ranks are invariably sensual and indocile; yet I
cannot but feel myself persuaded, that when the benefits of vegetable
diet are mathematically proved; when it is as clear, that those who live
naturally are exempt from premature death, as that nine is not one, the
most sottish of mankind will feel a preference towards a long and
tranquil, contrasted with a short and painful life. On the average, out
of sixty persons, four die in three years. In April, 1814, a statement
will be given that sixty persons, all having lived more than three years
on vegetables and pure water, are then _in perfect health_. More than
two years have now elapsed; _not one of them has died_; no such example
will be found in any sixty persons taken at random. Seventeen persons of
all ages (the families of Dr. Lambe and Mr. Newton) have lived for seven
years on this diet without a death, and almost without the slightest
illness. Surely, when we consider that some of these were infants, and
one a martyr to asthma, now nearly subdued, we may challenge any
seventeen persons taken at random in this city to exhibit a parallel
case. Those who may have been excited to question the rectitude of
established habits of diet, by these loose remarks, should consult Mr.
Newton's luminous and eloquent essay.[6] It is from that book, and from
the conversation of its excellent and enlightened author, that I have
derived the materials which I here present to the public.

When these proofs come fairly before the world, and are clearly seen by
all who understand arithmetic, it is scarcely possible that abstinence
from aliments demonstrably pernicious should not become universal.

In proportion to the number of proselytes, so will be the weight of
evidence; and when a thousand persons can be produced, living on
vegetables and distilled water, who have to dread no disease but old
age, the world will be compelled to regard animal flesh and fermented
liquors as slow but certain poison. The change which would be produced
by simpler habits on political economy is sufficiently remarkable. The
monopolising eater of animal flesh would no longer destroy his
constitution by devouring an acre at a meal, and many loaves of bread
would cease to contribute to gout, madness, and apoplexy, in the shape
of a pint of porter or a dram of gin, when appeasing the long-protracted
famine of the hard-working peasant's hungry babes. The quantity of
nutritious vegetable matter consumed in fattening the carcase of an ox,
would afford ten times the sustenance, undepraving indeed, and incapable
of generating disease, if gathered immediately from the bosom of the
earth.

The most fertile districts of the habitable globe are now actually
cultivated by men for animals, at a delay and waste of aliment
absolutely incapable of calculation. It is only the wealthy that can, to
any great degree, even now, indulge the unnatural craving for dead
flesh, and they pay for the greater licence of the privilege, by
subjection to supernumerary diseases. Again, the spirit of the nation
that should take the lead in this great reform would insensibly become
agricultural: commerce, with all its vice, selfishness, and corruption,
would gradually decline; more natural habits would produce gentler
manners, and the excessive complication of political relations would be
so far simplified that every individual might feel and understand why he
loved his country, and took a personal interest in its welfare. How
would England, for example, depend on the caprices of foreign rulers, if
she contained within herself all the necessaries, and despised whatever
they possessed of the luxuries of life? How could they starve her into
compliance with their views? Of what consequence would it be that they
refused to take her woollen manufactures, when large and fertile tracts
of the island ceased to be allotted to the waste of pasturage? On a
natural system of diet, we should require no spices from India; no wines
from Portugal, Spain, France, or Madeira; none of those multitudinous
articles of luxury, for which every corner of the globe is rifled, and
which are the causes of so much individual rivalship, such calamitous
and sanguinary national disputes.

In the history of modern times, the avarice of commercial monopoly, no
less than the ambition of weak and wicked chiefs, seems to have fomented
the universal discord, to have added stubbornness to the mistakes of
cabinets, and indocility to the infatuation of the people. Let it ever
be remembered, that it is the direct influence of commerce to make the
interval between the richest and the poorest man wider and more
unconquerable. Let it be remembered that it is a foe to every thing of
real worth and excellence in the human character. The odious and
disgusting aristocracy of wealth, is built upon the ruins of all that is
good in chivalry or republicanism; and luxury is the forerunner of a
barbarism scarce capable of cure. Is it impossible to realize a state of
society, where all the energies of man shall be directed to the
production of his solid happiness?

Certainly, if this advantage (the object of all political speculation)
be in any degree attainable, it is attainable only by a community which
holds out no factitious incentives to the avarice and ambition of the
few, and which is internally organized for the liberty, security, and
comfort of the many. None must be entrusted with power (and money is the
completest species of power) who do not stand pledged to use it
exclusively for the general benefit. But the use of animal flesh and
fermented liquors, directly militates with this equality of the rights
of man. The peasant cannot gratify these fashionable cravings without
leaving his family to starve. Without disease and war, those sweeping
curtailers of population, pasturage would include a waste too great to
be afforded. The labour requisite to support a family is far lighter[7]
than is usually supposed. The peasantry work, not only for themselves,
but for the aristocracy, the army, and the manufacturers.

The advantage of a reform in diet is obviously greater than that of any
other. It strikes at the root of the evil. To remedy the abuses of
legislation, before we annihilate the propensities by which they are
produced, is to suppose, that by taking away the effect, the cause will
cease to operate. But the efficacy of this system depends entirely on
the proselytism of individuals, and grounds its merits, as a benefit to
the community, upon the total change of the dietetic habits in its
members. It proceeds securely from a number of particular cases to one
that is universal, and has this advantage over the contrary mode, that
one error does not invalidate all that has gone before.

Let not too much, however, be expected from this system. The healthiest
among us is not exempt from hereditary disease. The most symmetrical,
athletic, and long-lived, is a being inexpressibly inferior to what he
would have been, had not the unnatural habits of his ancestors
accumulated for him a certain portion of malady and deformity. In the
most perfect specimen of civilized man something is still found wanting
by the physiological critic. Can a return to nature, then,
instantaneously eradicate predispositions that have been slowly taking
root in the silence of innumerable ages? Indubitably not. All that I
contend for is, that from the moment of the relinquishing all unnatural
habits, no new disease is generated; and that the predisposition to
hereditary maladies gradually perishes for want of its accustomed
supply. In cases of consumption, cancer, gout, asthma, and scrofula,
such is the invariable tendency of a diet of vegetables and pure water.

Those who may be induced by these remarks to give the vegetable system a
fair trial, should, in the first place, date the commencement of their
practice from the moment of their conviction. All depends upon the
breaking through a pernicious habit resolutely and at once. Dr.
Trotter[8] asserts that no drunkard was ever reformed by gradually
relinquishing his dram. Animal flesh, in its effects on the human
stomach, is analogous to a dram. It is similar in the kind, though
differing in the degree, of its operation. The proselyte to a pure diet
must be warned to expect a temporary diminution of muscular strength.
The subtraction of a powerful stimulus will suffice to account for this
event. But it is only temporary, and is succeeded by an equable
capability for exertion far surpassing his former various and
fluctuating strength. Above all, he will acquire an easiness of
breathing, by which the same exertion is performed with a remarkable
exemption from that painful and difficult panting now felt by almost
every one after hastily climbing an ordinary mountain. He will be
equally capable of bodily exertion or mental application after as before
his simple meal. He will feel none of the narcotic effects of ordinary
diet. Irritability, the direct consequence of exhausting stimuli, would
yield to the power of natural and tranquil impulses. He will no longer
pine under the lethargy of _ennui_, that unconquerable weariness of
life, more dreaded than death itself. He will escape the epidemic
madness that broods over its own injurious notions of the Deity, and
"realizes the hell that priests and beldams feign." Every man forms, as
it were, his god from his own character; to the divinity of one of
simple habits, no offering would be more acceptable than the happiness
of his creatures. He would be incapable of hating or persecuting others
for the love of God. He will find, moreover, a system of simple diet to
be a system of perfect epicurism. He will no longer be incessantly
occupied in blunting and destroying those organs from which he expects
his gratification.

The pleasures of taste to be derived from a dinner of potatoes, beans,
peas, turnips, lettuces, with a dessert of apples, gooseberries,
strawberries, currants, raspberries, and in winter, oranges, apples,
and pears, is far greater than is supposed. Those who wait until they
can eat this plain fare with the sauce of appetite will scarcely join
with the hypocritical sensualist at a lord mayor's feast, who declaims
against the pleasures of the table. Solomon kept a thousand concubines,
and owned in despair that all was vanity. The man whose happiness is
constituted by the society of one amiable woman would find some
difficulty in sympathising with the disappointment of this venerable
debauchee.

I address myself not only to the young enthusiast, the ardent devotee of
truth and virtue, the pure and passionate moralist, yet unvitiated by
the contagion of the world. He will embrace a pure system, from its
abstract truth, its beauty, its simplicity and its promise of
wide-extended benefit; unless custom has turned poison into food, he
will hate the brutal pleasures of the chase by instinct; it will be a
contemplation full of horror and disappointment to his mind, that beings
capable of the gentlest and most admirable sympathies, should take
delight in the death-pangs and last convulsions of dying animals. The
elderly man whose youth has been poisoned by intemperance, or who has
lived with apparent moderation, and is afflicted with a variety of
painful maladies, would find his account in a beneficial change,
produced without the risk of poisonous medicines.[9]The mother, to whom
the perpetual restlessness of disease, and unaccountable deaths
incident to her children, are the causes of incurable unhappiness, would
on this diet experience the satisfaction of beholding their perpetual
health and natural playfulness.

The most valuable lives are daily destroyed by diseases, that it is
dangerous to palliate and impossible to cure by medicine. How much
longer will man continue to pimp for the gluttony of death, his most
insidious, implacable, and eternal foe? The proselyte to a simple and
natural diet, who desires health, must from the moment of his conversion
attend to these rules--


     NEVER TAKE ANY SUBSTANCE INTO THE STOMACH THAT ONCE HAD LIFE.

     DRINK NO LIQUID BUT WATER RESTORED TO ITS ORIGINAL PURITY BY
     DISTILLATION.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Shelley's pamphlet appeared in 1813. The Vegetarian Society was not
founded until 1847. Information as to this Society, with list of its
publications, can be had free on application to the Secretary, 75,
Princess Street, Manchester.

[2] "Plin. Nat Hist.," Lib. vii, Soc. 57.

[3] "Return to Nature." Cadell, 1811.

[4] Cuvier, Lecons d'Anat. Comp. tom. iii., pages 169, 373, 448, 465,
and 480. Rees's Cyclopaedia, article Man.

[5] See Dr. Lambe's "Report on Cancer."

[6] Return to Nature, or Defence of Vegetable Regimen. Cadell, 1811.

[7] It has come under the author's experience that some of the workmen
on an embankment in North Wales who, in consequence of the inability of
the proprietor to pay them, seldom received their wages, have supported
large families by cultivating small spots of sterile ground by
moonlight. In the notes to Pratt's Poem, "Bread for the Poor," is an
account of an industrious labourer, who by working in a small garden,
before and after his day's task, attained to an enviable state of
independence.

[8] See Trotter on "The Nervous Temperament."

[9] See Mr. Newton's book. His children are the most beautiful and
healthy creatures it is possible to conceive; the girls are perfect
models for a sculptor; their dispositions are also the most gentle and
conciliating; the judicious treatment which they experience in other
points, may be a correlative cause of this. In the first five years of
their life, of 18,000 children that are born, 7,500 die of various
diseases; and how many more of those that survive are rendered miserable
by maladies not immediately mortal? The quality and quantity of a
woman's milk are materially injured by the use of dead flesh. In an
island, near Iceland, where no vegetables are to be got, the children
invariably die of tetanus, before they are three weeks old, and the
population is supplied from the mainland.--_Sir G. Mackenzie's History
of Iceland._ See also _Emile_, chap, i., p. 53, 55, 56.




APPENDIX.


Persons on vegetable diet have been remarkable for longevity. The first
Christians practised abstinence from animal flesh, on a principle of
self mortification. Other instances are, Old Parr 152; Mary Patten 136;
A Shepherd in Hungary 126; Patrick O'Neale 113; Joseph Elkins 103;
Elizabeth de Val 101; Aurungzebe 100; St. Anthony 105; James, the Hermit
104; Arsenius 120; St. Epiphanius 115; Simeon 112; and Rombald 120.


Mr. Newton's mode of reasoning on longevity is ingenious and conclusive.
"Old Parr, healthy as the wild animals, attained to the age of 152
years. All men might be as healthy as the wild animals. Therefore all
men might attain to the age of 152 years." The conclusion is
sufficiently modest. Old Parr cannot be supposed to have escaped the
inheritance of disease, amassed by the unnatural habits of his
ancestors. The term of human life may be expected to be infinitely
greater, taking into the consideration all the circumstances that must
have contributed to abridge even that of Parr.


It may be here remarked, that the author and his wife have lived on
vegetables for eight months. The improvements of health and temper here
stated, is the result of his own experience.




ADVERTISEMENTS


THE ETHICS OF DIET.

A CATENA OF AUTHORITIES DEPRECATORY OF THE PRACTICE OF FLESH-EATING.

348 pp., 8vo.

BY HOWARD WILLIAMS, M.A.


"I consider it a very valuable work."--COLONEL J. M. EARLE.

"THE CATENA is good and useful."--FRANCES E. HOGGAN, M.D.

"'The Ethics of Diet' much pleases me."--T. K. CHEYNE, M.A.


Price Five Shillings; Post free from the Office of the Vegetarian
Society, 75, Princess Street, Manchester.


ESSAYS ON DIET, BEING
Collected Lectures and Papers on Vegetarian Diet.

BY FRANCIS WILLIAM NEWMAN.

LONDON: KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, AND CO.; AND THE VEGETARIAN
SOCIETY, 75, PRINCESS STREET, MANCHESTER.

PRICE ONE FLORIN.


THE PERFECT WAY IN DIET:

A TREATISE ADVOCATING A RETURN TO THE NATURAL AND
ANCIENT FOOD OF OUR RACE.

By ANNA KINGSFORD,

Doctor of Medicine of the Faculty of Paris.

London: Kegan Paul, Trench, and Co., 1, Paternoster Square; or
from the Vegetarian Society, 75, Princess Street, Manchester.

PRICE ONE FLORIN.


Price 6d. 64pp., 8vo. Post free, 7d.

"ALMONDS AND RAISINS" FOR 1884.

Edited by R. BAILEY WALKER, F.S.S.


CONTAINS:--

Mushrooms and Toadstools. By H. S. S.
A Hunting of the Deer. By E. Dudley Warner.
A Christmas Ghost. By E. Grenville Waller.
The Ribblesdale Papers--Nos. I.-IV. By "Dora."
Rubies from Ruskin.
The Ministry of Food. By R. Bailey Walker.
The Abbot's Reply. By W. E. A. Axon.
Almonds and Raisins. By E. J. Baillie.
The Torquoise Ring. A Story by Mrs. Anna Kingsford, M.D.
Kalendar and Notes for 1884.
Fruits in Season for each Month, &c., &c.

75, Princess Street, Manchester.


PRICE SIXPENCE. POST FREE, SEVENPENCE.

THE HYGEIAN HOME COOK-BOOK:

HEALTHFUL AND PALATABLE FOOD WITHOUT CONDIMENTS.

By R. T. TRALL, M.D.

First English Edition, with Chapters on Bread, Pies, Puddings, Soups,
Sauces, Vegetables, Fruits, &c. Also with Appendix on

Hygienic Bread-Making, Fruit Preserving, &c.

By Mrs. MATTIE JONES.


VEGETIST'S DIETARY

AND MANUAL OF VEGETABLE COOKERY.

By "Domestica."

Fourth Edition. Revised. Price Sixpence. Cloth, One Shilling.


PRICE SIXPENCE.

OUT-DOOR FRUIT FOR THE MILLION:

HOW TO GROW IT IN LARGE AND CONTINUOUS QUANTITY, BY SIMPLE AND
INEXPENSIVE MEANS.

FIFTH, AND AUTHORISED EDITION, REVISED AND ILLUSTRATED.

By "Head Gardener."

Manchester: Offices of the Vegetarian Society, 75, Princess Street.


THE SHELLEY SOCIETY

_PUBLICATIONS FOR 1886._


The Society's Publications for 1886 will be at least twelve of the
following fourteen:--


     1. Shelley's _Adonais_: an Elegy on the Death of John Keats. Pisa,
     4to, 1821. A Facsimile Reprint on hand-made Paper, edited, with a
     Bibliographical Introduction, by Thomas J. Wise. (_Second Edition,
     Revised._) 10s.

_Issued._


     2. Shelley's Review of Hogg's novel, "Memoirs of Prince Alexy
     Haimatoff." Now first reprinted from _The Critical Review_, Dec.
     1814, on hand-made Paper, with an Extract from Prof. Dowden's
     article, "Some Early Writings of Shelley" (_Contemp. Rev._, Sept.
     1884). Edited, with an Introductory Note, by Thos. J. Wise.
     (_Second Edition, Revised._) 2s. 6d.

_Issued._


     3. Shelley's _Alastor_, or The Spirit of Solitude; and other Poems.
     London, fcap. 8vo., 1816. A Facsimile Reprint on hand-made Paper,
     with a new Preface by Bertram Dobell. (_Second Edition, Revised._)
     6s.

_Issued._


     4. _A Shelley Bibliography_, or "The Shelley Library." Part I.
     First Editions and their Reproductions. By H. Buxton Forman.

_Issued._


     5. Shelley's _Vindication of Natural Diet_. London, 12mo, 1813. A
     Reprint, 1882, with a Prefatory Note by H. S. Salt and W. E. A.
     Axon. Presented by Mr. Axon. (_Second Edition._)

_Issued._


     6. _A Memoir of Shelley_, with a fresh Preface, by William Michael
     Rossetti; a Portrait of Shelley; and an engraving of his Tomb.

_Issued._


     7. Shelley's _Cenci_, (for the Society's performance in May), with
     a prologue by Dr. John Todhunter, and an Introduction and Notes by
     Harry Buxton Forman and Alfred Forman; and a Portrait of Beatrice
     Cenci. 2s. 6d.

_Issued._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Vindication of Natural Diet., by
Percy Bysshe Shelley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VINDICATION OF NATURAL DIET. ***

***** This file should be named 38727.txt or 38727.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/7/2/38727/

Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Martin Pettit and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
