The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dance of Death, by Francis Douce

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Dance of Death
       Exhibited in Elegant Engravings on Wood with a Dissertation
       on the Several Representations of that Subject but More
       Particularly on Those Ascribed to Macaber and Hans Holbein

Author: Francis Douce

Illustrator: Hans Holbein

Release Date: January 31, 2012 [EBook #38724]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DANCE OF DEATH ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive. Additional images courtesy of Google
Books.)









THE DANCE OF DEATH.




[Illustration]




  The Dance of Death

  EXHIBITED IN ELEGANT ENGRAVINGS ON WOOD

  WITH A DISSERTATION
  ON THE SEVERAL REPRESENTATIONS OF THAT SUBJECT
  BUT MORE PARTICULARLY ON THOSE ASCRIBED TO
  Macaber and Hans Holbein


  BY FRANCIS DOUCE ESQ. F. A. S.
  AND A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES OF NORMANDY
  AND OF THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES ETC. AT CAEN

  Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas
  Regumque turres.                 HORAT. lib. i. od. 4.


  LONDON
  WILLIAM PICKERING
  1833


  C. Whittingham, Tooks Court, Chancery Lane.




PREFACE.


The very ample discussion which the extremely popular subject of the Dance
of Death has already undergone might seem to preclude the necessity of
attempting to bestow on it any further elucidation; nor would the present
Essay have ever made its appearance, but for certain reasons which are
necessary to be stated.

The beautiful designs which have been, perhaps too implicitly, regarded as
the invention of the justly celebrated painter, Hans Holbein, are chiefly
known in this country by the inaccurate etchings of most of them by
Wenceslaus Hollar, the copper-plates of which having formerly become the
property of Mr. Edwards, of Pall Mall, were published by him, accompanied
by a very hasty and imperfect dissertation; which, with fewer faults, and
considerable enlargement, is here again submitted to public attention. It
is appended to a set of fac-similes of the above-mentioned elegant
designs, and which, at a very liberal expense that has been incurred by
the proprietor and publisher of this volume, have been executed with
consummate skill and fidelity by Messrs. Bonner and Byfield, two of our
best artists in the line of wood engraving. They may very justly be
regarded as scarcely distinguishable from their fine originals.

The remarks in the course of this Essay on a supposed German poet, under
the name of Macaber, and the discussion relating to Holbein's connection
with the Dance of Death, may perhaps be found interesting to the critical
reader only; but every admirer of ancient art will not fail to be
gratified by an intimate acquaintance with one of its finest specimens in
the copy which is here so faithfully exhibited.

In the latest and best edition of some new designs for a Dance of Death,
by Salomon Van Rusting, published by John George Meintel at Nuremberg,
1736, 8vo. there is an elaborate preface by him, with a greater portion of
verbosity than information. He has placed undue confidence in his
predecessor, Paul Christian Hilscher, whose work, printed at Dresden in
1705, had probably misled the truly learned Fabricius in what he has said
concerning Macaber in his valuable work, the "Bibliotheca mediae et infimae
aetatis." Meintel confesses his inability to point out the origin or the
inventor of the subject. The last and completest work on the Dance, or
Dances of Death, is that of the ingenious M. Peignot, so well and
deservedly known by his numerous and useful books on bibliography. To this
gentleman the present Essay has been occasionally indebted. He will,
probably, at some future opportunity, remove the whimsical misnomer in his
engraving of Death and the Ideot.

The usual title, "The Dance of Death," which accompanies most of the
printed works, is not altogether appropriate. It may indeed belong to the
old Macaber painting and other similar works where Death is represented in
a sort of dancing and grotesque attitude in the act of leading a single
character; but where the subject consists of several figures, yet still
with occasional exception, they are rather to be regarded as elegant
emblems of human mortality in the premature intrusion of an unwelcome and
inexorable visitor.

It must not be supposed that the republication of this singular work is
intended to excite the lugubrious sensations of sanctified devotees, or of
terrified sinners; for, awful and impressive as must ever be the
contemplation of our mortality in the mind of the philosopher and
practiser of true religion, the mere sight of a skeleton cannot, as to
them, excite any alarming sensation whatever. It is chiefly addressed to
the ardent admirers of ancient art and pictorial invention; but
nevertheless with a hope that it may excite a portion of that general
attention to the labours of past ages, which reflects so much credit on
the times in which we live.

The widely scattered materials relating to the subject of the Dance of
Death, and the difficulty of reconciling much discordant information, must
apologize for a few repetitions in the course of this Essay, the regular
progress of which has been too often interrupted by the manner in which
matter of importance is so obscurely and defectively recorded; instances
of which are, the omission of the name of the painter in the otherwise
important dedication to the first edition of the engravings on wood of the
Dance of Death that was published at Lyons; the uncertainty as to locality
in some complimentary lines to Holbein by his friend Borbonius, and the
want of more particulars in the account by Nieuhoff of Holbein's painting
at Whitehall.

The designs for the Dance of Death, published at Lyons in 1538, and
hitherto regarded as the invention of Holbein, are, in the course of this
Dissertation, referred to under the appellation of _the Lyons wood-cuts_;
and with respect to the term _Macaber_, which has been so mistakenly used
as the name of a real author, it has been nevertheless preserved on the
same principle that the word _Gothic_ has been so generally adopted for
the purpose of designating the pointed style of architecture in the middle
ages.

F. D.




CONTENTS.


                                                                      Page

  CHAPTER I.

  Personification of Death, and other modes of representing it
  among the Ancients.--Same subject during the Middle Ages.--
  Erroneous notions respecting Death.--Monumental
  absurdities.--Allegorical pageant of the Dance of Death
  represented in early times by living persons in churches and
  cemeteries.--Some of these dances described.--Not unknown to
  the Ancients.--Introduction of the infernal, or dance of
  Macaber                                                                1


  CHAPTER II.

  Places where the Dance of Death was sculptured or depicted.--
  Usually accompanied by verses describing the several
  characters.--Other metrical compositions on the Dance                 17


  CHAPTER III.

  Macaber not a German or any other poet, but a nonentity.--
  Corruption and confusion respecting this word.--Etymological
  errors concerning it.--How connected with the Dance.--Trois
  mors et trois vifs.--Orgagna's painting in the Campo Santo at
  Pisa.--Its connection with the trois mors et trois vifs, as
  well as with the Macaber Dance.--Saint Macarius the real
  Macaber.--Paintings of this dance in various places.--At
  Minden; Church-yard of the Innocents at Paris; Dijon; Basle;
  Klingenthal; Lubeck; Leipsic; Anneberg; Dresden; Erfurth;
  Nuremberg; Berne; Lucerne; Amiens; Rouen; Fescamp; Blois;
  Strasburg; Berlin; Vienna; Holland; Italy; Spain                      28


  CHAPTER IV.

  Macaber Dance in England.--St. Paul's.--Salisbury.--
  Wortley-hall.--Hexham.--Croydon.--Tower of London.--Lines in
  Pierce Plowman's Vision supposed to refer to it                       51


  CHAPTER V.

  List of editions of the Macaber Dance.--Printed Horae that
  contain it.--Manuscript Horae.--Other Manuscripts in which it
  occurs.--Various articles with letter-press, not being single
  prints, but connected with it                                         55


  CHAPTER VI.

  Hans Holbein's connection with the Dance of Death.--A dance
  of peasants at Basle.--Lyons edition of the Dance of Death,
  1538.--Doubts as to any prior edition.--Dedication to the
  edition of 1538.--Mr. Ottley's opinion of it examined.--
  Artists supposed to have been connected with this work.--
  Holbein's name in none of the old editions.--Reperdius                78


  CHAPTER VII.

  Holbein's Bible cuts.--Examination of the claim of Hans
  Lutzenberger as to the design or execution of the Lyons
  engravings of the Dance of Death.--Other works by him                 94


  CHAPTER VIII.

  List of several editions of the Lyons work on the Dance of
  Death with the mark of Lutzenberger.--Copies of them on
  wood.--Copies on copper by anonymous artists.--By Wenceslaus
  Hollar.--Other anonymous artists.--Nieuhoff Picard.--
  Rusting.--Mechel.--Crozat's drawings.--Deuchar.--Imitations
  of some of the subjects                                              103


  CHAPTER IX.

  Further examination of Holbein's title.--Borbonius.--
  Biographical notice of Holbein.--Painting of a Dance of Death
  at Whitehall by him                                                  138


  CHAPTER X.

  Other Dances of Death                                                146


  CHAPTER XI.

  Dances of Death, with such text only as describes the subjects       160


  CHAPTER XII.

  Books in which the subject is occasionally introduced                168


  CHAPTER XIII.

  Books of emblems and fables.--Frontispieces and title-pages
  in some degree connected with the Dance of Death                     179


  CHAPTER XIV.

  Single prints connected with the Dance of Death                      188


  CHAPTER XV.

  Initial or capital Letters with the Dance of Death                   213


  CHAPTER XVI.

  Paintings.--Drawings.--Miscellaneous                                 221


  CHAPTER XVII.

  Trois vifs et trois morts.--Negro figure of Death.--Danse aux
  Aveugles                                                             228


  CHAPTER XVIII.

  Errors of various writers who have introduced the subject of
  the Dance of Death                                                   233




ERRATA.


  Page 7, line 25, for _Boistuan_ read _Boistuau_.
       7,  ... 26, for _Prodigeuses_ read _Prodigieuses_.
      28,  ... 14, read _in Holland_, &c.
      32,  ... 23, for _Lamorensi_ read _Zamorensi_.
      81,  ...  4, for _fex_ read _sex_.
      88,  ... 10, after _difficulty_ add ?
      89,  ... 21, after _works_ add "
     180,  ... 23, for _Typotia_ read _Typotii_.
     197,  ...  8, for _Stradamus_ read _Stradanus_.




THE Dance of Death.




CHAPTER I.

    _Personification of Death, and other modes of representing it among
    the Ancients.--Same subject during the Middle Ages.--Erroneous notions
    respecting Death.--Monumental absurdities.--Allegorical pageant of the
    Dance of Death represented in early times by living persons in
    churches and cemeteries.--Some of these dances described.--Not unknown
    to the Ancients.--Introduction of the infernal, or dance of Macaber._


The manner in which the poets and artists of antiquity have symbolized or
personified Death, has excited considerable discussion; and the various
opinions of Lessing, Herder, Klotz, and other controversialists have only
tended to demonstrate that the ancients adopted many different modes to
accomplish this purpose. Some writers have maintained that they
exclusively represented Death as a mere skeleton; whilst others have
contended that this figure, so frequently to be found upon gems and
sepulchral monuments, was never intended to personify the extinction of
human life, but only as a simple and abstract representation. They insist
that the ancients adopted a more elegant and allegorical method for this
purpose; that they represented human mortality by various symbols of
destruction, as birds devouring lizards and serpents, or pecking fruits
and flowers; by goats browsing on vines; cocks fighting, or even by a
Medusa's or Gorgon's head. The Romans seem to have adopted Homer's[1]
definition of Death as the eldest brother of Sleep; and, accordingly, on
several of their monumental and other sculptures we find two winged genii
as the representatives of the above personages, and sometimes a genius
bearing a sepulchral vase on his shoulder, and with a torch reversed in
one of his hands. It is very well known that the ancients often symbolized
the human soul by the figure of a butterfly, an idea that is extremely
obvious and appropriate, as well as elegant. In a very interesting
sepulchral monument, engraved in p. 7 of Spon's Miscellanea Eruditae
Antiquitatis, a prostrate corpse is seen, and over it a butterfly that has
just escaped from the _mouth_ of the deceased, or as Homer expresses it,
"from the teeth's inclosure."[2] The above excellent antiquary has added
the following very curious sepulchral inscription that was found in Spain,
HAEREDIBVS MEIS MANDO ETIAM CINERE VTMEO VOLITET EBRIVS PAPILIO OSSA IPSA
TEGANT MEA, &c. Rejecting this heathen symbol altogether, the painters and
engravers of the middle ages have substituted a small human figure
escaping from the mouths of dying persons, as it were, breathing out their
souls.

We have, however, the authority of Herodotus, that in the banquets of the
Egyptians a person was introduced who carried round the table at which
the guests were seated the figure of a dead body, placed on a coffin,
exclaiming at the same time, "Behold this image of what yourselves will
be; eat and drink therefore, and be happy."[3] Montfaucon has referred to
an ancient manuscript to prove that this sentiment was conveyed in a
Lacedaemonian proverb,[4] and it occurs also in the beautiful poem of
Coppa, ascribed to Virgil, in which he is supposed to invite Maecenas to a
rural banquet. It concludes with these lines:--

  Pone merum et talos; pereat qui crastina curat,
  Mors aurem vellens, vivite ait, venio.

The phrase of pulling the ear is admonitory, that organ being regarded by
the ancients as the seat of memory. It was customary also, and for the
same reason, to take an oath by laying hold of the ear. It is impossible
on this occasion to forget the passage in Isaiah xxii. 13, afterwards used
by Saint Paul, on the beautiful parable in Luke xii. Plutarch also, in his
banquet of the wise men, has remarked that the Egyptians exhibited a
skeleton at their feasts to remind the parties of the brevity of human
life; the same custom, as adopted by the Romans, is exemplified in
Petronius's description of the feast of Trimalchio, where a jointed
puppet, as a skeleton, is brought in by a boy, and this practice is also
noticed by Silius Italicus:

                    ... AEgyptia tellus
  Claudit odorato post funus stantia Saxo
  Corpora, et a mensis exsanguem haud separat umbram.[5]

Some have imagined that these skeletons were intended to represent the
larvae and lemures, the good and evil shadows of the dead, that
occasionally made their appearance on earth. The larvae, or lares, were of
a beneficent nature, friendly to man; in other words, the good demon of
Socrates. The lemures, spirits of mischief and wickedness. The larva in
Petronius was designed to admonish only, not to terrify; and this is
proved from Seneca: "Nemo tam puer est ut Cerberum timeat et tenebras, et
larvarum habitum nudis ossibus cohaerentium."[6] There is, however, some
confusion even among the ancients themselves, as to the respective
qualities of the larvae and lemures. Apuleius, in his noble and interesting
defence against those who accused him of practising magic, tells them,
"Tertium mendacium vestrum fuit, macilentam vel omnino evisceratam formam
diri cadaveris fabricatam prorsus horribilem et larvalem;" and afterwards,
when producing the image of his peculiar Deity, which he usually carried
about him, he exclaims, "En vobis quem scelestus ille sceletum nominabat!
Hiccine est sceletus? Haeccine est larva? Hoccine est quod appellitabatis
Daemonium."[7] It is among Christian writers and artists that the
personification of Death as a skeleton is intended to convey terrific
ideas, conformably to the system that Death is the punishment for original
sin.

The circumstances that lead to Death, and not our actual dissolution, are
alone of a terrific nature; for Death is, in fact, the end and cure of all
the previous sufferings and horrors with which it is so frequently
accompanied. In the dark ages of monkish bigotry and superstition, the
deluded people, seduced into a belief that the fear of Death was
acceptable to the great and beneficent author of their existence, appear
to have derived one of their principal gratifications in contemplating
this necessary termination of humanity, yet amidst ideas and impressions
of the most horrible and disgusting nature: hence the frequent allusions
to it, in all possible ways, among their preachers, and the
personification of it in their books of religious offices, as well as in
the paintings and sculptures of their ecclesiastical and other edifices.
They seemed to have entirely banished from their recollection the
consolatory doctrines of the Gospel, which contribute so essentially to
dissipate the terrors of Death, and which enable the more enlightened
Christian to abide that event with the most perfect tranquillity of mind.
There are, indeed, some exceptions to this remark, for we may still trace
the imbecility of former ages on too many of our sepulchral monuments,
which are occasionally tricked out with the silly appendages of Death's
heads, bones, and other useless remains of mortality, equally repulsive to
the imagination and to the elegance of art.

If it be necessary on any occasion to personify Death, this were surely
better accomplished by means of some graceful and impressive figure of the
Angel of Death, for whom we have the authority of Scripture; and such
might become an established representative. The skulls and bones of
modern, and the entire skeletons of former times, especially during the
middle ages, had, probably, derived their origin from the vast quantities
of sanctified human relics that were continually before the eyes, or
otherwise in the recollection of the early Christians. But the favourite
and principal emblem of mortality among our ancestors appears to have been
the moral and allegorical pageant familiarly known by the appellation of
the _Dance of Death_, which it has, in part, derived from the grotesque,
and often ludicrous attitudes of the figures that composed it, and
especially from the active and sarcastical mockery of the ruthless tyrant
upon its victims, which may be, in a great measure, attributed to the
whims and notions of the artists who were employed to represent the
subject.

It is very well known to have been the practice in very early times to
profane the temples of the Deity with indecorous dancing, and ludicrous
processions, either within or near them, in imitation, probably, of
similar proceedings in Pagan times. Strabo mentions a custom of this
nature among the Celtiberians,[8] and it obtained also among several of
the northern nations before their conversion to Christianity. A Roman
council, under Pope Eugenius II. in the 9th century, has thus noticed it:
"Ut sacerdotes admoneant viros ac mulieres, qui festis diebus ad ecclesiam
occurrunt, ne _ballando_ et turpia verba decantando choros teneant, ac
ducunt, similitudinem Paganorum peragendo." Canciani mentions an ancient
bequest of money for a dance in honour of the Virgin.[9]

These riotous and irreverent tripudists and caperers appear to have
possessed themselves of the church-yards to exhibit their dancing
fooleries, till this profanation of consecrated ground was punished, as
monkish histories inform us, with divine vengeance. The well-known
Nuremberg Chronicle[10] has recorded, that in the time of the Emperor
Henry the Second, whilst a priest was saying mass on Christmas Eve, in the
church of Saint Magnus, in the diocese of Magdeburg, a company of eighteen
men and ten women amused themselves with dancing and singing in the
church-yard, to the hindrance of the priest in his duty. Notwithstanding
his admonition, they refused to desist, and even derided the words he
addressed to them. The priest being greatly provoked at their conduct,
prayed to God and Saint Magnus that they might remain dancing and singing
for a whole year without intermission, and so it happened; neither dew nor
rain falling upon them. Hunger and fatigue were set at defiance, nor were
their shoes or garments in the least worn away. At the end of the year
they were released from their situation by Herebert, the archbishop of the
diocese in which the event took place, and obtained forgiveness before
the altar of the church; but not before the daughter of a priest and two
others had perished; the rest, after sleeping for the space of three whole
nights, died soon afterwards. Ubert, one of the party, left this story
behind him, which is elsewhere recorded, with some variation and
additional matter. The dance is called St. Vitus's, and the girl is made
the daughter of a churchwarden, who having taken her by the arm, it came
off, but she continued dancing. By the continual motion of the dancers
they buried themselves in the earth to their waists. Many princes and
others went to behold this strange spectacle, till the bishops of Cologne
and Hildesheim, and some other devout priests, by their prayers, obtained
the deliverance of the culprits; four of the party, however, died
immediately, some slept three days and three nights, some three years, and
others had trembling in their limbs during the whole of their lives. The
Nuremberg Chronicle, crowded as it is with wood-cut embellishments by the
hand of Wolgemut, the master of Albert Durer, has not omitted to exhibit
the representations of the above unhappy persons, equally correct, no
doubt, as the story itself, though the same warranty cannot be offered for
a similar representation, in Gottfried's Chronicle and that copious
repertory of monstrosities, Boistuau and Belleforest's Histoires
Prodigieuses. The Nuremberg Chronicle[11] has yet another relation on this
subject of some persons who continued dancing and singing on a bridge
whilst the eucharist was passing over it. The bridge gave way in the
middle, and from one end of it 200 persons were precipitated into the
river Moselle, the other end remaining so as to permit the priest and his
host to pass uninjured.

In that extremely curious work, the Manuel de Peche, usually ascribed to
Bishop Grosthead, the pious author, after much declamation against the
vices of the times, has this passage:--

  Karoles ne lutes ne deit nul fere,
  En seint eglise ki me voil crere;
  Kas en cimetere karoler,
  Utrage est grant u lutter.[12]

He then relates the story in the Nuremberg Chronicle, for which he quotes
the book of Saint Clement. Grosthead's work was translated about the year
1300 into English verse by Robert Mannyng, commonly called Robert de
Brunne, a Gilbertine canon. His translation often differs from his
original, with much amplification and occasional illustrations by himself.
As the account of the Nuremberg story varies so materially, and as the
scene is laid in England, it has been thought worth inserting.

  Karolles wrastelynges or somour games,
  Whosoever haunteth any swyche shames,
  Yn cherche other yn cherche yerd,
  Of sacrilage he may be aferd;
  Or entyrludes or syngynge,
  Or tabure bete or other pypynge;
  All swyche thyng forboden es,
  Whyle the prest stondeth at messe;
  But for to leve in cherche for to daunce,
  Y shall you telle a full grete chaunce,
  And y trow the most that fel,
  Ys sothe as y you telle.
  And fyl thys chaunce yn thys londe,
  Yn Ingland as y undyrstonde,
  Yn a kynges tyme that hyght Edward,
  Fyl this chaunce that was so hard.
  Hyt was upon crystemesse nyzt
  That twelve folys a karolle dyzt,
  Yn Wodehed, as hyt were yn cuntek,[13]
  They come to a toune men calle Cowek:[14]
  The cherche of the toune that they to come,
  Ys of Seynt Magne that suffred martyrdome,
  Of Seynt Bukcestre hyt ys also,
  Seynt Magnes suster, that they come to;
  Here names of all thus fonde y wryte,
  And as y wote now shal ye wyte
  Here lodesman[15] that made hem glew,[16]
  Thus ys wryte he hyzte[17] Gerlew;
  Twey maydens were yn here coveyne,
  Mayden Merswynde[18] and Wybessyne;
  All these came thedyr for that enchesone,} doghtyr
  Of the prestes of the toune.             }
  The prest hyzt Robert as y can ame,
  Azone hyzt hys sone by name,
  Hys doghter that there men wulde have,
  Thus ys wryte that she hyzt Ave.
  Echone consented to o wyl,
  Who shuld go Ave out to tyl,
  They graunted echone out to sende,
  Bothe Wybessyne and Merswynde:
  These women zede and tolled[19] her oute,
  Wyth hem to karolle the cherche aboute,
  Benne ordeyned here karollyng,
  Gerlew endyted what they shuld syng.
  Thys ys the karolle that they sunge,
  As telleth the Latyn tunge,
  Equitabat Bevo per sylvam frondosam,}
  Ducebat secum Merwyndam formosam,   }
  Quid stamus cur non imus.           }
  By the levede[20] wode rode Bevolyne,
  Wyth hym he ledde feyre Merwyne,
  Why stonde we why go we noght:
  Thys ys the karolle that Grysly wroght,
  Thys songe sung they yn chercheyerd,
  Of foly were they nothyng aferd.

The party continued dancing and carolling all the matins time, and till
the mass began; when the priest, hearing the noise, came out to the church
porch, and desired them to leave off dancing, and come into the church to
hear the service; but they paid him no regard whatever, and continued
their dance. The priest, now extremely incensed, prayed to God in favour
of St. Magnes, the patron of the church:

  That swych a venjeaunce were on hem sent,
  Are they out of that stede[21] were went,
  That myzt ever ryzt so wende,
  Unto that tyme twelvemonth ende.
  Yn the Latyne that y fonde thore,
  He seyth not twelvemonth but evermore.

The priest had no sooner finished his prayer, than the hands of the
dancers were so locked together that none could separate them for a
twelvemonth:

  The preste yede[22] yn whan thys was done,
  And comaunded hys sone Azone,
  That shuld go swythe after Ave,
  Oute of that karolle algate to have;
  But al to late that wurde was sayde,
  For on hem alle was the venjeaunce leyd.
  Azonde wende weyl for to spede
  Unto the karolle asswythe he yede;
  Hys syster by the arme he hente,
  And the arme fro the body wente;
  Men wundred alle that there wore,
  And merveyle nowe ye here more;
  For seythen he had the arme yn hand,
  The body yode furth karoland,
  And nother body ne the arme
  Bled never blode colde ne warme;
  But was as drye with al the haunche,
  As of a stok were ryve a braunche.

Azone carries his sister's arm to the priest his father, and tells him the
consequences of his rash curse. The priest, after much lamentation, buries
the arm. The next morning it rises out of the grave; he buries it again,
and again it rises. He buries it a third time, when it is cast out of the
grave with considerable violence. He then carries it into the church that
all might behold it. In the meantime the party continued dancing and
singing, without taking any food or sleeping, "only a lepy wynke;" nor
were they in the least affected by the weather. Their hair and nails
ceased to grow, and their garments were neither soiled nor discoloured;
but

  Sunge that songge that the wo wrozt,
  "Why stond we, why go we nozt."

To see this curious and woful sight, the emperor travels from Rome, and
orders his carpenters and other artificers to inclose them in a building;
but this could not be done, for what was set up one day fell down on the
next, and no covering could be made to protect the sinners till the time
of mercy that Christ had appointed arrived; when, at the expiration of the
twelvemonth, and in the very same hour in which the priest had pronounced
his curse upon them, they were separated, and "in the twynklyng of an eye"
ran into the church and fell down in a swoon on the pavement, where they
lay three days before they were restored. On their recovery they tell the
priest that he will not long survive:

  For to thy long home sone shalt thou wende,
  All they ryse that yche tyde,
  But Ave she lay dede besyde.

Her father dies soon afterwards. The emperor causes Ave's arm to be put
into a vessel and suspended in the church as an example to the spectators.
The rest of the party, although separated, travelled about, but always
dancing; and as they had been inseparable before, they were now not
permitted to remain together. Four of them went hopping to Rome, their
clothes undergoing no change, and their hair and nails not continuing to
grow:

  Bruning the Bysshope of Seynt Tolous,
  Wrote thys tale so merveylous;
  Setthe was hys name of more renoun,
  Men called him the Pope Leon;
  Thys at the courte of Rome they wyte,
  And yn the kronykeles hyt ys write;
  Yn many stedys[23] beyounde the see,
  More than ys yn thys cuntre:
  Tharfor men seye an weyl ys trowed,
  The nere the cherche the further fro God.
  So fare men here by thys tale,
  Some holde it but a trotevale,[24]
  Yn other stedys hyt ys ful dere,
  And for grete merveyle they wyl hyt here.

In the French copies the story is said to have been taken from the
itinerary of St. Clement. The name of the girl who lost her arm is
Marcent, and her brother's John.[25]

Previously to entering upon the immediate subject of this Essay, it may be
permitted to observe, that a sort of Death's dance was not unknown to the
ancients. It was the revelry of departed souls in Elysium, as may be
collected from the end of the fourth ode of Anacreon. Among the Romans
this practice is exemplified in the following lines of Tibullus.

  Sed me, quod facilis tenero sum semper Amori,
    Ipsa Venus campos ducit in Elysios.
  Hic _choreae_ cantusque vigent ...[26]

And Virgil has likewise alluded to it:

  Pars pedibus plaudunt _choreas_ et carmina dicunt.[27]

In the year 1810 several fragments of sculptured sarcophagi were
accidentally discovered near Cuma, on one of which were represented three
dancing skeletons,[28] indicating, as it is ingeniously supposed, that the
passage from death to another state of existence has nothing in it that is
sorrowful, or capable of exciting fear. They seem to throw some light on
the above lines from Virgil and Tibullus.

At a meeting of the Archaeological Society at Rome, in December, 1831, M.
Kestner exhibited a Roman lamp on which were three dancing skeletons, and
such are said to occur in one of the paintings at Pompeii.

In the Grand Duke of Tuscany's museum at Florence there is an ancient gem,
that, from its singularity and connexion with the present subject, is well
deserving of notice. It represents an old man, probably a shepherd,
clothed in a hairy garment. He sits upon a stone, his right foot resting
on a globe, and is piping on a double flute, whilst a skeleton dances
grotesquely before him. It might be a matter of some difficulty to explain
the recondite meaning of this singular subject.[29]

Notwithstanding the interdiction in several councils against the practice
of dancing in churches and church-yards, it was found impossible to
abolish it altogether; and it therefore became necessary that something of
a similar, but more decorous, nature should be substituted, which, whilst
it afforded recreation and amusement, might, at the same time, convey with
it a moral and religious sensation. It is, therefore, extremely probable,
that, in furtherance of this intention, the clergy contrived and
introduced the Dance or Pageant of Death, or, as it was sometimes called,
the Dance of Macaber, for reasons that will hereafter appear. Mr. Warton
states, "that in many churches of France there was an ancient show, or
mimickry, in which all ranks of life were personated by the ecclesiastics,
who danced together, and disappeared one after another."[30] Again,
speaking of Lydgate's poem on this subject, he says, "these verses,
founded on a sort of spiritual masquerade antiently celebrated in
churches, &c."[31] M. Barante, in his History of the Dukes of Burgundy,
adverting to the entertainments that took place at Paris when Philip le
Bon visited that city in 1424, observes, "that these were not solely made
for the nobility, the common people being likewise amused from the month
of August to the following season of Lent with the Dance of Death in the
church yard of the Innocents, the English being particularly gratified
with this exhibition, which included all ranks and conditions of men,
Death being, morally, the principal character."[32] Another French
historian, M. de Villeneuve Bargemont, informs us that the Duke of Bedford
celebrated his victory at Verneuil by a festival in the centre of the
French capital. The rest of what this writer has recorded on the subject
before us will be best given in his own words, "Nous voulons parler de
cette fameuse _procession_ qu'on vit defiler dans les rues de Paris, sous
le nom de _danse Macabree ou infernale_, epouvantable divertissement,
auquel presidoit un squelette ceint du diademe royal, tenant un sceptre
dans ses mains decharnees et assis sur un trone resplendissant d'or et de
pierreries. Ce spectacle repoussant, melange odieux de deuil et de joie,
inconnu jusqu'alors, et qui ne s'est jamais renouvelle, n'eut guere pour
temoins que des soldats etrangers, ou quelques malheureux echappes a tous
les fleaux reunis, et qui avoient vu descendre tous leurs parens, tous
leurs amis, dans ces sepulchres qu'on depouilloit alors de leurs
ossemens."[33] A third French writer has also treated the Dance of Death
as a spectacle exhibited in like manner to the people of Paris.[34] M.
Peignot, to whom the reader is obliged for these historical notices in his
ingenious researches on the present subject, very plausibly conceives that
their authors have entirely mistaken the sense of an old chronicle or
journal under Charles VI. and VII. which he quotes in the following
words.--"Item. L'an 1424 fut faite la Danse Maratre (pour Macabre) aux
Innocens, et fut comencee environ le moys d'Aoust et achevee au karesme
suivant. En l'an 1429 le cordelier Richard preschant aux Innocens estoit
monte sur ung hault eschaffaut qui estoit pres de toise et demie de hault,
le dos tourne vers les charniers encontre la charounerie, a l'endroit de
la danse Macabre." He observes, that the Dance of Death at the Innocents,
having been commenced in August and finished at the ensuing Lent, could
not possibly be represented by living persons, but was only a painting,
the large dimensions of which required six months to complete it; and that
a single Death must, in the other case, have danced with every individual
belonging to the scene.[35] He might have added, that such a proceeding
would have been totally at variance with the florid, but most inaccurate,
description by M. Bargemont. The reader will, therefore, most probably
feel inclined to adopt the opinion of M. Peignot, that the Dance of Death
was not performed by living persons between 1424 and 1429.

But although M. Peignot may have triumphantly demonstrated that this
subject was not exhibited by living persons at the above place and period,
it by no means follows that it was not so represented at some other time,
and on some other spot. Accordingly, in the archives of the cathedral of
Besancon, there is preserved an article respecting a delivery made to one
of the officers of Saint John the Evangelist of four measures of wine, to
be given to those persons who performed the Dance of Death after mass was
concluded. This is the article itself, "Sexcallus [seneschallus] solvat D.
Joanni Caleti matriculario S. Joannis quatuor simasias vini per dictum
matricularium exhibitas illis qui choream Machabeorum fecerunt 10 Julii,
1453, nuper lapsa hora misse in ecclesia S. Joannis Evangeliste propter
capitulum provinciale fratrum Minorum."[36] This document then will set
the matter completely at rest.

At what time the personified exhibition of this pageant commenced, or when
it was discontinued cannot now be correctly ascertained. If, from a moral
spectacle, it became a licentious ceremony, as is by no means improbable,
in imitation of electing a boy-bishop, of the feast of fools, or other
similar absurdities, its termination may be looked for in the authority of
some ecclesiastical council at present not easily to be traced.




CHAPTER II.

    _Places where the Dance of Death was sculptured or depicted.--Usually
    accompanied by verses describing the several characters.--Other
    Metrical Compositions on the Dance._


The subject immediately before us was very often represented, not only on
the walls, but in the windows of many churches, in the cloisters of
monasteries, and even on bridges, especially in Germany and Switzerland.
It was sometimes painted on church screens, and occasionally sculptured on
them, as well as upon the fronts of domestic dwellings. It occurs in many
of the manuscript and illuminated service books of the middle ages, and
frequent allusions to it are found in other manuscripts, but very rarely
in a perfect state, as to the number of subjects.

Most of the representations of the Dance of Death were accompanied by
descriptive or moral verses in different languages. Those which were added
to the paintings of this subject in Germany appear to have differed very
materially, and it is not now possible to ascertain which among them is
the oldest. Those in the Basle painting are inserted in the editions
published and engraved by Mathew Merian, but they had already occurred in
the Decennalia humanae peregrinationis of Gaspar Landismann in 1584. Some
Latin verses were published by Melchior Goldasti at the end of his edition
of the Speculum omnium statuum, a celebrated moral work by Roderic, Bishop
of Zamora, 1613, 4to. He most probably copied them from one of the early
editions of the Danse Macabre, but without any comment whatever, the
above title page professing that they are added on account of the
similarity of the subject.

A Provencal poet, called _Marcabres_ or _Marcabrus_, has been placed among
the versifiers, but none of his works bear the least similitude to the
subject; and, moreover, the language itself is an objection. The English
metrical translation will be noticed hereafter. Whether any of the
paintings were accompanied by descriptive verses that might be considered
as anterior to those ascribed to the supposed Macaber, cannot now be
ascertained.

There are likewise some Latin verses in imitation of those
above-mentioned, which, as well as the author of them, do not seem to have
been noticed by any biographical or poetical writer. They occur at the end
of a Latin play, intitled Susanna, Antverp. apud Michaelem Hillenium,
MDXXXIII. As the volume is extremely rare, and the verses intimately
connected with the present subject, it has been thought worth while to
reprint them. After an elegy on the vanity and shortness of human life,
and a Sapphic ode on the remembrance of Death, they follow under this
title, "Plausus luctificae mortis ad modum dialogi extemporaliter ab
Eusebio Candido lusus. Ad quem quique mortales invitantur omnes,
cujuscujus sint conditionis: quibusque singulis Mors ipsa respondet."

  Luctificae mortis plausum bene cernite cuncti.
  Dum res laeta, mori et viventes discite, namque
  Omnes ex aequo tandem huc properare necessum.

Hic inducitur adolescens quaerens, et mors vel philosophus respondens.

  Vita quid est hominis? Fumus super aream missus.
  Vita quid est hominis? Via mortis, dura laborum
  Colluvies, vita est hominis via longa doloris
  Perpetui. Vita quid est hominis? cruciatus et error,
  Vita quid est hominis? vestitus gramine multo,
  Floribus et variis campus, quem parva pruina
  Expoliat, sic vitam hominum mors impia tollit.
  Quamlibet illa alacris, vegeta, aut opulenta ne felix,
  Icta cadit modica crede aegritudine mortis.
  Et quamvis superes auro vel murice Croesum,
  Longaevum aut annis vivendo Nestora vincas,
  Omnia mors aequat, vitae meta ultima mors est.


  IMPERATOR.

  Quid fers? Induperator ego, et moderamina rerum
  Gesto manu, domuit mors impia sceptra potentum.


  REX RHOMANUS.

  Quid fers? en ego Rhomulidum rex. Mors manet omnes.


  PAPA.

  En ego Pontificum primus, signansque resignans.
  Et coelos oraque locos. Mors te manet ergo.


  CARDINALIS.

  Cardineo fulgens ego honore, et Episcopus ecce
  Mors manet ecce omnes, Phrygeus quos pileus ornat.


  EPISCOPUS.

  Insula splendidior vestit mea, tempora latum
  Possideo imperium, multi mea jura tremiscunt.
  Me dicant fraudis docti, producere lites.
  Experti, aucupium docti nummorum, et averni
  Causidici, rixatores, rabulaeque forenses.
  Hos ego respicio, nihil attendens animarum,
  Ecclesiae mihi commissae populive salutem
  Sed satis est duros loculo infarcisse labores
  Agricolum, et magnis placuisse heroibus orbis.
  Non tamen effugies mortis mala spicula durae.


  ECCLESIAE PRAELATUS.

  Ecclesiae praelatus ego multis venerandus
  Muneribus sacris, proventibus officiorum.
  Comptior est vestis, popina frequentior aede
  Sacra, et psalmorum cantus mihi rarior ipso
  Talorum crepitu, Veneris quoque voce sonora.
  Morte cades, annos speras ubi vivere plures.


  CANONICUS.

  En ego melotam gesto. Mors saeva propinquat.


  PASTOR.

  En parochus quoque pastor ego, mihi dulce falernum
  Notius aede sacra: scortum mihi charius ipsa
  Est animae cura populi. Mors te manet ergo.


  ABBAS.

  En abbas venio, Veneris quoque ventris amicus.
  Coenobii rara est mihi cura, frequentior aula
  Magnorum heroum. Chorea saltabis eadem.


  PRIOR.

  En prior, ornatus longa et splendente cuculla,
  Falce cades mortis. Mors aufert nomina honoris.


  PATER VESTALIUM.

  Nympharum pater ecce ego sum ventrosior, offis
  Pinguibus emacerans corpus. Mors te manet ipsa.


  VESTALIS NYMPHA.

  En monialis ego, Vestae servire parata.
  Non te Vesta potest mortis subducere castris.


  LEGATUS.

  Legatus venio culparum vincla resolvemus
  Omnia pro auro, abiens coelum vendo, infera claudo
  Et quicquid patres sanxerunt, munere solvo
  Juribus a mortis non te legatio solvet.


  DOMINUS DOCTOR.

  Quid fers? Ecce sophus, divina humanaque jura
  Calleo, et a populo doctor Rabbique salutor,
  Te manet expectans mors ultima linea rerum.


  MEDICUS.

  En ego sum medicus, vitam producere gnarus,
  Venis lustratis morborum nomina dico,
  Non poteris durae mortis vitare sagittas.


  ASTRONOMUS.

  En ego stellarum motus et sydera novi,
  Et fati genus omne scio praedicere coeli.
  Non potis es mortis durae praescire sagittas.


  CURTISANUS.

  En me Rhoma potens multis suffarsit onustum
  Muneribus sacris, proventibus, officiisque
  Non potes his mortis fugiens evadere tela.


  ADVOCATUS.

  Causarum patronus ego, producere doctus
  Lites, et loculos lingua vacuare loquaci
  Non te lingua loquax mortis subducet ab ictu.


  JUDEX.

  Justitiae judex quia sum, sub plebe salutor.
  Vertice me nudo populus veneratur adorans.
  Auri sacra fames pervertere saepe coegit
  Justitiam. Mors te manet aequans omnia falce.


  PRAETOR.

  Praetor ego populi, me praetor nemo quid audet.
  Accensor causis, per me stant omnia, namque
  Et dono et adimo vitam, cum rebus honorem.
  Munere conspecto, quod iniquum est jure triumphat
  Emitto corvos, censura damno columbas.
  Hinc metuendus ero superis ereboque profundo.
  Te manet expectans Erebus Plutoque cruentus.


  CONSUL.

  Polleo consiliis, Consul dicorque salutor.
  Munere conspecto, quid iniquum est consulo rectum
  Quod rectum est flecto, nihil est quod nesciat auri
  Sacra fames, hinc ditor et undique fio opulentus
  Sed eris aeternum miser et mors impia tollet.


  CAUSIDICUS.

  Causidicus ego sum, causas narrare peritus,
  Accior in causas, sed spes ubi fulserit auri
  Ad fraudes docta solers utor bene lingua.
  Muto, commuto, jura inflecto atque reflecto.
  Et nihil est quod non astu pervincere possim.
  Mors aequa expectat properans te fulmine diro.
  Nec poteris astu mortis praevertere tela.


  SCABINUS.

  Ecce Scabinus ego, scabo bursas, prorogo causas.
  Senatorque vocor, vulgus me poplite curvo,
  Muneribusque datis veneratur, fronte retecta.
  Nil mortem meditor loculos quando impleo nummis
  Et dito haeredes nummis, vi, fraude receptis,
  Justitiam nummis, pro sanguine, munere, vendo.
  Quod rectum est curvo, quod curvum est munere rectum
  Efficio, per me prorsus stant omnia jura.
  Non poteris durae mortis transire sagittas.


  LUDIMAGISTER.

  En ego pervigili cura externoque labore.
  Excolui juvenum ingenia, et praecepta Minervae
  Tradens consenui, cathedraeque piget sine fructu.
  Quid dabitur fructus, tanti quae dona laboris?
  Omnia mors aequans, vitae ultima meta laboris.


  MILES AURATUS.

  Miles ego auratus, fulgenti murice et auro
  Splendidus in populo. Mors te manet omnia perdens.


  MILES ARMATUS.

  Miles ego armatus, qui bella ferocia gessi.
  Nullius occursum expavi, quam durus et audax.
  Ergo immunis ero. Mors te intrepida ipsa necabit.


  MERCATOR.

  En ego mercator dives, maria omnia lustro
  Et terras, ut res crescant. Mors te metet ipsa.


  FUCKARDUS.

  En ego fuckardus, loculos gesto aeris onustos,
  Omnia per mundum coemens, vendo atque revendo.
  Heroes me solicitant, atque aera requirunt.
  Haud est me lato quisquam modo ditior orbe.
  Mortis ego jura et frameas nihil ergo tremisco
  Morte cades, mors te rebus spoliabit opimis.


  QUAESTOR.

  Quaestor ego, loculos suffersi arcasque capaces
  Est mihi praenitidis fundata pecunia villis.
  Hac dives redimam durae discrimina mortis
  Te mors praeripiet nullo exorabilis auro.


  NAUCLERUS.

  En ego nauclerus spaciosa per aequora vectus,
  Non timui maris aut venti discrimina mille.
  Cymba tamen mortis capiet te quaeque vorantis.


  AGRICOLA.

  Agricola en ego sum, praeduro saepe labore,
  Et vigili exhaustus cura, sudore perenni,
  Victum praetenuem quaerens, sine fraude doloque
  Omnia pertentans, miseram ut traducere possim
  Vitam, nec mundo me est infelicior alter.
  Mors tamen eduri fiet tibi meta laboris.


  ORATOR.

  Heroum interpres venio, fraudisque peritus,
  Bellorum strepitus compono, et bella reduco,
  Meque petunt reges, populus miratur adorans.
  Nulla abiget fraudi lingueve peritia mortem.


  PRINCEPS BELLI.

  Fulmen ego belli, reges et regna subegi,
  Victor ego ex omni praeduro quamlibet ecce
  Marte fui, vitae hinc timeo discrimina nulla.
  Te mors confodiet cauda Trigonis aquosi,
  Atque eris exanimis moriens uno ictu homo bulla.


  DIVES.

  Sum rerum felix, foecunda est prolis et uxor,
  Plena domus, laetum pecus, et cellaria plena
  Nil igitur metuo. Quid ais? Mors te impia tollet.


  PAUPER.

  Iro ego pauperior, Codroque tenuior omni,
  Despicior cunctis, nemo est qui sublevet heu heu.
  Hinc parcet veniens mors: nam nihil auferet a me,
  Non sic evades, ditem cum paupere tollit.


  FOENERATOR.

  Ut loculi intument auro, vi, fraude, doloque,
  Foenore nunc quaestum facio, furtoque rapinaque,
  Ut proles ditem, passim dicarque beatus,
  Per fas perque nefas corradens omnia quaero.
  Mors veniens furtim praedabitur, omnia tollens.


  ADOLESCENS.

  Sum juvenis, forma spectabilis, indole gaudens
  Maturusque aevi, nullus praestantior alter,
  Moribus egregiis populo laudatus ab omni.
  Pallida, difformis mors auferet omnia raptim.


  PUELLA.

  Ecce puellarum pulcherrima, mortis iniquae
  Spicula nil meditor, juvenilibus et fruor annis,
  Meque proci expectant compti, facieque venusti.
  Stulta, quid in vana spe jactas? Mors metet omnes
  Difformes, pulchrosque simul cum paupere dices.


  NUNCIUS.

  Nuncius ecce ego sum, qui nuncia perfero pernix
  Sed retrospectans post terga, papae audio quidnam?
  Me tuba terrificans mortis vocat. Heu moriendum est.


  PERORATIO.

  Mortales igitur memores modo vivite laeti
  Instar venturi furis, discrimine nullo
  Cunctos rapturi passim ditesque inopesque.
  Stultus et insipiens vita qui sperat in ista,
  Instar quae fumi perit et cito desinit esse.
  Fac igitur tota virtuti incumbito mente,
  Quae nescit mortem, sed scandit ad ardua coeli.
  Quo nos a fatis ducat rex Juppiter, Amen.

  Plaudite nunc, animum cuncti retinete faventes.

  FINIS.

  Antwerpiae apud Michaelem Hillenium M.D.XXXIIII. Mense Maio.

A very early allusion to the Dance of Death occurs in a Latin poem, that
seems to have been composed in the twelfth century by our celebrated
countryman Walter de Mapes, as it is found among other pieces that carry
with them strong marks of his authorship. It is intitled "Lamentacio et
deploracio pro Morte et consilium de vivente Deo."[37] In its construction
there is a striking resemblance to the common metrical stanzas that
accompany the Macaber Dance. Many characters, commencing with that of the
Pope, are introduced, all of whom bewail the uncontrolable influence of
Death. This is a specimen of the work, extracted from two manuscripts:

  Cum mortem meditor nescit mihi causa doloris,
  Nam cunctis horis mors venit ecce cito.
  Pauperis et regis communis lex moriendi,
  Dat causam flendi si bene scripta leges.
  Gustato pomo missus transit sine morte
  Heu missa sorte labitur omnis homo.

  Vado mori Papa qui jussu regna    | Vado mori, Rex sum, quod honor,
    subegi                          |   quod gloria regum,
  Mors mihi regna tulit eccine vado | Est via mors hominis regia vado
    mori.                           |   mori.

Then follow similar stanzas, for presul, miles, monachus, legista,
jurista, doctor, logicus, medicus, cantor, sapiens, dives, cultor,
burgensis, nauta, pincerna, pauper.

In Sanchez's collection of Spanish poetry before the year 1400,[38]
mention is made of a Rabbi Santo as a good poet, who lived about 1360. He
was a Jew, and surgeon to Don Pedro. His real name seems to have been
Mose, but he calls himself Don Santo Judio de Carrion. This person is said
to have written a moral poem, called "Danza General." It commences thus:

  "_Dise la Muerte._

  "Yo so la muerte cierta a todas criaturas,
  Que son y seran en el mundo durante:
  Demando y digo O ame! porque curas
  De vida tan breve en punto passante?" &c.

He then introduces a preacher, who announces Death to all persons, and
advises them to be prepared by good works to enter his Dance, which is
calculated for all degrees of mankind.

  "Primaramente llama a su danza a dos doncellas,
  A esta mi danza trax de presente,
  Estas dos donzellas que vades fermosas:
  Ellas vinieron de muy malamente
  A oir mes canciones que son dolorosas,
  Mas non les valdran flores nin rosas,
  Nin las composturas que poner salian:
  De mi, si pudiesen parterra querrian,
  Mas non proveda ser, que son mis esposas."

It may, however, be doubted whether the Jew Santo was the author of this
Dance of Death, as it is by no means improbable that it may have been a
subsequent work added to the manuscript referred to by Sanchez.

In 1675, Maitre Jacques Jacques, a canon of the cathedral of Ambrun,
published a singular work, intitled "Le faut mourir et les excuses
inutiles que l'on apporte a cette necessite. Le tout en vers burlesques."
Rouen, 1675, 12mo. It is written much in the style of Scarron and some
other similar poets of the time. It commences with a humorous description
given by Death of his proceedings with various persons in every part of
the globe, which is followed by several dialogues between Death and the
following characters: 1. The Pope. 2. A young lady betrothed. 3. A galley
slave. 4. Guillot, who has lost his wife. 5. Don Diego Dalmazere, a
Spanish hidalgo. 6. A king. 7. The young widow of a citizen. 8. A citizen.
9. A decrepit rich man. 10. A canon. 11. A blind man. 12. A poor peasant.
13. Tourmente, a poor soldier in the hospital. 14. A criminal in prison.
15. A nun. 16. A physician. 17. An apothecary. 18. A lame beggar. 19. A
rich usurer. 20. A merchant. 21. A rich merchant. As the book is uncommon,
the following specimen is given from the scene between Death and the young
betrothed girl:

  LA MORT.

  A vous la belle demoiselle,
  Je vous apporte une nouvelle,
  Qui certes vous surprendra fort.
  C'est qu'il faut penser a la mort,
  Tout vistement plies bagage,
  Car il faut faire ce voyage.


  LA DEMOISELLE.

  Qu'entends-je? Tout mon sens se perd,
  Helas! vous me prener sans verd;
  C'est tout a fait hors de raison
  Mourir dedans une saison
  Que je ne dois songer qu'a rire,
  Je suis contrainte de vous dire,
  Que tres injuste est vostre choix,
  Parce que mourir je ne dois,
  N'estant qu'en ma quinzieme annee,
  Voyez quelque vielle echinee,
  Qui n'ait en bouche point de dent;
  Vous l'obligerez grandement
  De l'envoyer a l'autre monde,
  Puis qu'ici toujours elle gronde;
  Vous la prendrez tout a propos,
  Et laissez moi dans le repos,
  Moi qui suis toute poupinette,
  Dans l'embonpoint et joliette,
  Qui n'aime qu'a me rejouir,
  De grace laissez moi jouir, &c.




CHAPTER III.

    _Macaber not a German or any other poet, but a nonentity.--Corruption
    and confusion respecting this word.--Etymological errors concerning
    it.--How connected with the Dance.--Trois mors et trois
    vifs.--Orgagna's painting in the Campo Santo at Pisa.--Its connection
    with the trois mors et trois vifs, as well as with the Macaber
    dance.--Saint Macarius the real Macaber.--Paintings of this dance in
    various places.--At Minden; Church-yard of the Innocents at Paris;
    Dijon; Basle; Klingenthal; Lubeck; Leipsic; Anneberg; Dresden;
    Erfurth; Nuremberg; Berne; Lucerne; Amiens; Rouen; Fescamp; Blois;
    Strasburg; Berlin; Vienna; Holland; Italy; Spain._


The next subject for investigation is the origin of the name of Macaber,
as connected with the Dance of Death, either with respect to the verses
that have usually accompanied it, or to the paintings or representations
of the Dance itself; and first of the verses.

It may, without much hazard, be maintained that, notwithstanding these
have been ascribed to a German poet called Macaber, there never was a
German, or any poet whatever bearing such a name. The first mention of him
appears to have been in a French edition of the Danse Macabre, with the
following title, "Chorea ab eximio Macabro versibus Alemannicis edito, et
a Petro Desrey emendata. Parisiis per Magistrum Guidonem Mercatorem pro
Godefrido de Marnef. 1490, folio." This title, from its ambiguity, is
deserving of little consideration as a matter of authority; for if a
comma be placed after the word Macabro, the title is equally applicable to
the author of the verses and to the painter or inventor of the Dance. As
the subject had been represented in several places in Germany, and of
course accompanied with German descriptions, it is possible that Desrey
might have translated and altered some or one of these, and, mistaking the
real meaning of the word, have converted it into the name of an author. It
may be asked in what German biography is such a person to be found? how it
has happened that this _famous_ Macaber is so little known, or whether the
name really has a Teutonic aspect? It was the above title in Desrey's work
that misled the truly learned Fabricius inadvertently to introduce into
his valuable work the article for Macaber as a German poet, and in a work
to which it could not properly belong.[39]

M. Peignot has very justly observed that the Danse Macabre had been very
long known in France and elsewhere, not as a literary work, but as a
painting; and he further remarks that although the verses are German in
the Basil painting, executed about 1440, similar verses in French were
placed under the dance at the Innocents at Paris in 1424.[40]

At the beginning of the text in the early French edition of the Danse
Macabre, we have only the words "la danse Macabre sappelle," but no
specific mention is made of the author of the verses. John Lydgate, in his
translation of them from the French, and which was most probably adopted
in many places in England where the painting occurred, speaks of "the
Frenche Machabrees daunce," and "the daunce of Machabree." At the end,
"Machabree the Doctoure," is abruptly and unconnectedly introduced at the
bottom of the page. It is not in the French printed copy, from the text
of which Lydgate certainly varies in several respects. It remains,
therefore, to ascertain whether these words belong to Lydgate, or to whom
else; not that it is a matter of much importance.

The earliest authority that has been traced for the name of "Danse
Macabre," belongs to the painting at the Innocents, and occurs in the MS.
diary of Charles VII. under the year 1424. It is also strangely called
"Chorea Machabaeorum," in 1453, as appears from the before cited document
at St. John's church at Besancon. Even the name of one _Maccabrees_, a
Provencal poet of the 14th century, has been injudiciously connected with
the subject, though his works are of a very different nature.

Previously to attempting to account for the origin of the obscure and much
controverted word Macaber, as applicable to the dance itself, it may be
necessary to advert to the opinions on that subject that have already
appeared. It has been disguised under the several names of Macabre,[41]
Maccabees,[42] Maratre,[43] and even Macrobius.[44] Sometimes it has been
regarded as an epithet. The learned and excellent M. Van Praet, the
guardian of the royal library at Paris, has conjectured that _Macabre_ is
derived from the Arabic _Magbarah_, magbourah, or magabir, all signifying
a church-yard. M. Peignot seems to think that M. Van Praet intended to
apply the word to the Dance itself,[45] but it is impossible that the
intelligent librarian was not aware that personified sculpture, as well as
the moral nature of the subject, cannot belong to the Mahometan religion.
Another etymology extremely well calculated to disturb the gravity of the
present subject, is that of M. Villaret, the French historian, when
adverting to the spectacle of the Danse Macabre, supposed to have been
given by the English in the church-yard of the Innocents at Paris. Relying
on this circumstance, he unceremoniously decides that the name of the
dance was likewise English; and that _Macabree_ is compounded of the
words, to _make_ and to _break_. The same silly etymology is referred to
as in some historical dictionary concerning the city of Paris by Mons.
Compan in his Dictionaire de Danse, article _Macaber_; and another which
is equally improbable has been hazarded by the accomplished Marquis de
Paulmy, who, noticing some editions of the Danse Macabre in his fine
library, now in the arsenal at Paris, very seriously states that Macaber
is derived from two Greek words, which denote its meaning to be an
_infernal dance_;[46] but if the Greek language were to be consulted on
the occasion, the signification would turn out to be very different.

It must not be left unnoticed that M. De Bure, in his account of the
edition of the Danse Macabre, printed by Marchant, 1486, has stated that
the verses have been attributed to Michel Marot; but the book is dated
before Marot was born.[47]

Again,--As to the connexion between the word Macaber with the Dance
itself.

In the course of the thirteenth century there appeared a French metrical
work under the name of "Li trois Mors et li trois Vis," _i. e._ Les trois
Morts et les trois Vifs. In the noble library of the Duke de la Valliere,
there were three apparently coeval manuscripts of it, differing, however,
from each other, but furnishing the names of two authors, Baudouin de
Conde and Nicolas de Marginal.[48] These poems relate that three noble
youths when hunting in a forest were intercepted by the like number of
hideous spectres or images of Death, from whom they received a terrific
lecture on the vanity of human grandeur. A very early, and perhaps the
earliest, allusion to this vision, seems to occur in a painting by Andrew
Orgagna in the Campo Santo at Pisa; and although it varies a little from
the description in the above-mentioned poems, the story is evidently the
same. The painter has introduced three young men on horseback with
coronets on their caps, and who are attended by several domestics whilst
pursuing the amusement of hawking. They arrive at the cell of Saint
Macarius an Egyptian Anachorite, who with one hand presents to them a
label with this inscription, as well as it can be made out, "Se nostra
mente fia ben morta tenendo risa qui la vista affitta la vana gloria ci
sara sconfitta la superbia e sara da morte;" and with the other points to
three open coffins, in which are a skeleton and two dead bodies, one of
them a king.

A similar vision, but not immediately connected with the present subject,
and hitherto unnoticed, occurs at the end of the Latin verses ascribed to
Macaber, in Goldasti's edition of the Speculum omnium statuum a Roderico
Zamorensi. Three persons appear to a hermit, whose name is not mentioned,
in his sleep. The first is described as a man in a regal habit; the second
as a civilian, and the third as a beautiful female decorated with gold and
jewels. Whilst these persons are vainly boasting of their respective
conditions, they are encountered by three horrible spectres in the shape
of dead human bodies covered with worms, who very severely reprove them
for their arrogance. This is evidently another version of the "Trois mors
et trois vifs" in the text, but whether it be older or otherwise cannot
easily be ascertained. It is composed in alternate rhymes, in the manner,
and probably by the author of Philibert or Fulbert's vision of the dispute
between the soul and the body, a work ascribed to S. Bernard, and
sometimes to Walter de Mapes. There are translations of it both in French
and English.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

For the mention of S. Macarius as the hermit in this painting by Orgagna,
we are indebted to Vasari in his life of that artist; and he had, no
doubt, possessed himself of some traditionary information on the subject
of it. He further informs us, that the person on horseback who is stopping
his nostrils, is intended for Andrea Uguzzione della fagivola. Above is a
black and hideous figure of Death mowing down with his scythe all ranks
and conditions of men. Vasari adds that Orgagna had crowded his picture
with a great many inscriptions, most of which were obliterated by time.
From one of them which he has preserved in his work, as addressed to some
aged cripples, it should appear that, as in the Macaber Dance, Death
apostrophizes the several characters.[49] Baldinucci, in his account of
Orgagna, mentions this painting and the story of the Three Kings and Saint
Macarius.[50] Morona, likewise, in his Pisa illustrata, adopts the name of
Macarius when describing the same subject. The figures in the picture are
all portraits, and their names may be seen, but with some variation as to
description, both in Vasari and Morona.[51]

Now the story of _Les trois mors et les trois vifs_, was prefixed to the
painting of the Macaber Dance in the church-yard of the Innocents at
Paris, and had also been sculptured over the portal of the church, by
order of the Duke de Berry in 1408.[52] It is found in numerous manuscript
copies of Horae and other service books prefixed to the burial office. All
the printed editions of the Macaber Dance contain it, but with some
variation, the figure of Saint Macarius in his cell not being always
introduced. It occurs in many of the printed service books, and in some of
our own for the use of Salisbury. The earliest wood engraving of it is in
the black book of the "15 signa Judicii," where two of the young men are
running away to avoid the three deaths, or skeletons, one of whom is
rising from a grave. It is copied in Bibliotheca Spenceriana, vol. i. p.
xxx.

From the preceding statement then there is every reason to infer that the
name of Macaber, so frequently, and without authority, applied to an
unknown German poet, really belongs to the Saint, and that his name has
undergone a slight and obvious corruption. The word _Macabre_ is found
only in French authorities, and the Saint's name, which, in the modern
orthography of that language, is _Macaire_, would, in many ancient
manuscripts, be written _Macabre_ instead of _Macaure_, the letter _b_
being substituted for that of _u_ from the caprice, ignorance, or
carelessness of the transcribers.

As no German copy of the verses describing the painting can, with any
degree of certainty, be regarded as the original, we must substitute the
Latin text, which may, perhaps, have an equal claim to originality. The
author, at the beginning, has an address to the spectators, in which he
tells them that the painting is called the Dance of Macaber. There is an
end, therefore, of the name of Macaber, as the author of the verses,
leaving it only as applicable to the painting, and almost, if not
altogether confirmatory of the preceding conjecture. The French version,
from which Lydgate made his translation, nearly agrees with the Latin.
Lydgate, however, in the above address, has thought fit to use the word
_translator_ instead of _author_, but this is of no moment, any more than
the words _Machabree the Doctour_, which, not being in the French text,
are most likely an interpolation. He likewise calls the work _the
daunce_; and it may, once for all, be remarked, that scarcely any two
versions of it will be found to correspond in all respects, every new
editor assuming fresh liberties, according to the usual practice in former
times.

The ancient paintings of the Macaber Dance next demand our attention. Of
these, the oldest on record was that of Minden in Westphalia, with the
date 1383, and mentioned by Fabricius in his Biblioth. med. et infimae
aetatis, tom. v. p. 2. It is to be wished that this statement had been
accompanied with some authority; but the whole of the article is extremely
careless and inaccurate.

The earliest, of which the date has been satisfactorily defined, was that
in the church-yard of the Innocents at Paris, and which has been already
mentioned as having been painted in 1434.

In the cloister of the church of the Sainte Chapelle at Dijon the Macaber
Dance was painted by an artist whose name was Masoncelle. It had
disappeared and was forgotten a long time ago, but its existence was
discovered in the archives of the department by Mons. Boudot, an ardent
investigator of the manners and customs of the middle ages. The date
ascribed to this painting is 1436. The above church was destroyed in the
revolution, previously to which another Macaber Dance existed in the
church of Notre Dame in the above city. This was not a painting on the
walls, but a piece of white embroidery on a black piece of stuff about two
feet in height and very long. It was placed over the stalls in the choir
on grand funeral ceremonies, and was also carried off with the other
church moveables, in the abovementioned revolution.[53] Similar
exhibitions, no doubt, prevailed in other places.

The next Macaber Dance, in point of date, was the celebrated one at
Basle, which has employed the pens and multiplied the errors of many
writers and travellers. It was placed under cover in a sort of shed in the
church-yard of the Dominican convent. It has been remarked by one very
competent to know the fact, that nearly all the convents of the Dominicans
had a Dance of Death.[54] As these friars were preachers by profession,
the subject must have been exceedingly useful in supplying texts and
matter for their sermons. The present Dance is said to have been painted
at the instance of the prelates who assisted at the Grand Council of
Basle, that lasted from 1431 to 1443; and in allusion, as supposed, to a
plague that happened during its continuance. Plagues have also been
assigned as the causes of other Dances of Death; but there is no
foundation whatever for such an opinion, as is demonstrable from what has
been already stated; and it has been also successfully combated by M.
Peignot, who is nevertheless a little at variance with himself, when he
afterwards introduces a conjecture that the painter of the first Dance
imitated the violent motions and contortions of those affected by the
plague in the dancing attitudes of the figures of Death.[55] The name of
the original painter of this Basle work is unknown, and will probably ever
remain so, for no dependance can be had on some vague conjectures, that
without the smallest appearance of accuracy have been hazarded concerning
it. It is on record that the old painting having become greatly injured by
the ravages of time, John Hugh Klauber, an eminent painter at Basle, was
employed to repair it in the year 1568, as appears from a Latin
inscription placed on it at the time. This painter is said to have covered
the decayed fresco with oil, and to have succeeded so well that no
difference between his work and the original could be perceived. He was
instructed to add the portrait of the celebrated Oecolampadius in the act
of preaching, in commemoration of his interference in the Reformation,
that had not very long before taken place. He likewise introduced at the
end of the painting, portraits of himself, his wife Barbara Hallerin, and
their little son Hans Birich Klauber. The following inscription, placed on
the painting on this occasion, is preserved in Hentzner's Itinerary, and
elsewhere.

                     A. O. C.
  Sebastiano Doppenstenio, Casparo Clugio Coss.
  Bonaventura a Bruno, Jacobo Rudio Tribb. Pl.
  Hunc mortales chorum fabulae, temporis injuria vitiatum
      Lucas Gebhart, Iodoc. Pfister. Georgius Sporlinus
                Hujus loci AEdiles.
    Integritati suae restituendum curavere
    Ut qui vocalis picturae divina monita securius audiunt
    Mutae saltem poeseos miserab. spectaculo
    Ad seriam philosophiam excitentur.
         [Greek: ORATELOS MAKROU BIOU
                 ARCHEN ORAMAKARIOU]
                 CI=C= I=C= LXIIX.

In the year 1616 a further reparation took place, and some alterations in
the design are said to have been then made. The above inscription, with an
addition only of the names of the then existing magistrates of the city,
was continued. A short time before, Mathew Merian the elder, a celebrated
topographical draftsman, had fortunately copied the older painting, of
which he is supposed to have first published engravings in 1621, with all
the inscriptions under the respective characters that were then remaining,
but these could not possibly be the same in many respects that existed
before the Reformation, and which are entirely lost. A proof of this may
be gathered from the lines of the Pope's answer to Death, whom he is thus
made to apostrophize: "Shall it be said that I, a God upon earth, a
successor of St. Peter, a powerful prince, and a learned doctor, shall
endure thy insolent summons, or that, in obedience to thy decree, I should
be compelled to ascertain whether the keys which I now possess will open
for me the gates of Paradise?" None of the inscriptions relating to the
Pope in other ancient paintings before the Reformation approach in the
least to language of this kind.

Merian speaks of a tradition that in the original painting the portrait of
Pope Felix V. was introduced, as well as those of the Emperor Sigismund
and Duke Albert II. all of whom were present at the council; but admitting
this to have been the fact, their respective features would scarcely
remain after the subsequent alterations and repairs that took place.

That intelligent traveller, Mons. Blainville, saw this painting in
January, 1707. He states that as it had been much injured by the weather,
and many of the figures effaced, the government caused it to be retouched
by a painter, whom they imagined to be capable of repairing the ravages it
had sustained, but that his execution was so miserable that they had much
better have let it alone than to have had it so wretchedly bungled. He
wholly rejects any retouching by Holbein. He particularizes two of the
most remarkable subjects, namely, the fat jolly cook, whom Death seizes by
the hand, carrying on his shoulder a spit with a capon ready larded, which
he looks upon with a wishful eye, as if he regretted being obliged to set
out before it was quite roasted. The other figure is that of the blind
beggar led by his dog, whom Death snaps up with one hand, and with the
other cuts the string by which the dog was tied to his master's arm.[56]

The very absurd ascription of the Basle painting to the pencil of Hans
Holbein, who was born near a century afterwards, has been adopted by
several tourists, who have copied the errors of their predecessors,
without taking the pains to make the necessary enquiries, or possessing
the means of obtaining correct information. The name of Holbein,
therefore, as combined with this painting, must be wholly laid aside, for
there is no evidence that he was even employed to retouch it, as some have
inadvertently stated; it was altogether a work unworthy of his talents,
nor does it, even in its latest state, exhibit the smallest indication of
his style of painting. This matter will be resumed hereafter, but in the
mean time it may be necessary to correct the mistake of that truly learned
and meritorious writer, John George Keysler, who, in his instructive and
entertaining travels, has inadvertently stated that the Basle painting was
executed by Hans Bock or Bok, a celebrated artist of that city;[57] but it
is well known that this person was not born till the year 1584.

The Basle painting is no longer in existence; for on the 2d of August,
1806, and for reasons that have not been precisely ascertained, an
infuriated mob, in which were several women, who carried lanterns to light
the expedition, tumultuously burst the inclosure which contained the
painting, tore it piecemeal from the walls, and in a very short space of
time completely succeeded in its total demolition, a few fragments only
being still preserved in the collection of Counsellor Vischer at his
castle of Wildensheim, near Basle. This account of its destruction is
recorded in Millin's Magazin Encyclopedique among the nouvelles
litteraires for that year; but the Etrenne Helvetique for the above year
has given a different account of the matter; it states that the painting
having been once more renovated in the year 1703, fell afterwards into
great decay, being entirely peeled from the wall--that this circumstance
had, in some degree, arisen from the occupation of the cloister by a
ropemaker--that the wall having been found to stand much in the way of
some new buildings erected near the spot, the magistrates ventured, but
not without much hesitation, to remove the cloister with its painting
altogether in the year 1805--and that this occasioned some disturbance in
the city among the common people, but more particularly with those who had
resided in its neighbourhood, and conceived a renewed attachment to the
painting.

Of this Dance of Death very few specific copies have been made. M.
Heinecken[58] has stated that it was engraved in 1544, by Jobst Denneker
of Augsburg; but he has confounded it with a work by this artist on the
other Dance of Death ascribed to Holbein, and which will be duly noticed
hereafter. The work which contained the earliest engravings of the Basle
painting, can on this occasion be noticed only from a modern reprint of it
under the following title: "Der Todten-Tantz wie derselbe in der
weitberuhmten Stadt Basel als ein Spiegel menslicher beschaffenheit gantz
kuntlich mit lebendigen farben gemahlet, nicht ohne nutzliche vernunderung
zu schen ist. Basel, bey Joh. Conrad und Joh. Jacob von Mechel, 1769,
12mo." that is, "The Dance of Death, painted most skilfully, and in lively
colours, in the very famous town of Basel, as a mirror of human life, and
not to be looked on without useful admiration."

The first page has some pious verses on the painting in the church-yard of
the Predicants, of which the present work contains only ten subjects,
namely, the cardinal, the abbess, the young woman, the piper, the jew, the
heathen man, the heathen woman, the cook, the painter, and the painter's
wife. On the abbess there is the mark D. R. probably that of the engraver,
two cuts by whom are mentioned in Bartsch's work.[59] On the cut of the
young woman there is the mark G S with the graving knife. They are
coarsely executed, and with occasional variations of the figures in
Merian's plates. The rest of the cuts, thirty-two in number, chiefly
belong to the set usually called Holbein's. All the cuts in this
miscellaneous volume have German verses at the top and bottom of each page
with the subjects. If Jansen, who usually pillages some one else, can be
trusted or understood, there was a prior edition of this book in 1606,
with cuts having the last-mentioned mark, but which edition he calls the
Dance of Death at Berne;[60] a title, considering the mixture of subjects,
as faulty as that of the present book, of which, or of some part of it,
there must have been a still earlier edition than the above-mentioned one
of 1606, as on the last cut but one of this volume there is the date 1576,
and the letters G S with the knife. It is most probable that this artist
completed the series of the Basle Dance, and that some of the blocks
having fallen into the hands of the above printers, they made up and
published the present mixed copy. Jost Amman is said to have engraved 49
plates of the Dance of Death in 1587. These are probably from the Basle
painting.[61]

The completest copies of this painting that are now perhaps extant, are to
be found in a well-known set of engravings in copper, by Matthew Merian,
the elder, the master of Hollar. There are great doubts as to their first
appearance in 1621, as mentioned by Fuessli and Heinecken, but editions
are known to exist with the respective dates of 1649, 1696, 1698, 1725,
1744, 1756, and 1789. Some of these are in German, and the rest are
accompanied with a French translation by P. Viene. They are all
particularly described by Peignot.[62] Merian states in his preface that
he had copied the paintings several years before, and given his plates to
other persons to be published, adding that he had since redeemed and
retouched them. He says this Dance was repaired in 1568 by Hans Hugo
Klauber, a citizen of Basle, a fact also recorded on the cut of the
painter himself, his wife, Barbara Hallerin, and his son, Hans Birich, by
the before-mentioned artist, G. S., and that it contained the portraits of
Pope Felix V., the Emperor Sigismund, and Albert, King of the Romans, all
of whom assisted at the Council of Basle in the middle of the 15th
century, when the painting was probably executed.

A greatly altered and modernised edition of Merian's work was published in
1788, 8vo. with the following title, "La Danse des Morts pour servir de
miroir a la nature humaine, avec le costume dessine a la moderne, et des
vers a chaques figures. Au Locle, chez S. Girardet libraire." This is on
an engraved frontispiece, copied from that in Merian. The letter-press is
extracted from the French translation of Merian, and the plates, which are
neatly etched, agree as to general design with his; but the dresses of
many of the characters are rather ludicrously modernised. Some moral
pieces are added to this edition, and particularly an old and popular
treatise, composed in 1593, intitled "L'Art de bien vivre et de bien
mourir."

A Dance of Death is recorded with the following title "Todtentantz durch
alle Stande der Menschen," Leipsig, durch David de Necker, formschneider.
1572, 4to.[63] Whether this be a copy of the Basle or the Berne painting,
must be decided on inspection, or it may possibly be a later edition of
the copy of the wood-cuts of Lyons, that will be mentioned hereafter.

In the little Basle, on the opposite side of the Rhine, there was a
nunnery called Klingenthal, erected towards the end of the 13th century.
In an old cloister, belonging to it there are the remains of a Dance of
Death painted on its walls, and said to have been much ruder in execution
than that in the Dominican cemetery at Basle. On this painting there was
the date 1312. In the year 1766 one Emanuel Ruchel, a baker by trade, but
an enthusiastic admirer of the fine arts, made a copy in water colours of
all that remained of this ancient painting, and which is preserved in the
public library at Basle.[64]

The numerous mistakes that have been made by those writers who have
mentioned the Basle painting have been already adverted to by M. Peignot,
and are not, in this place, worthy of repetition.[65] That which requires
most particular notice, and has been so frequently repeated, is the making
Hans Holbein the painter of it, who was not born till a considerable time
after its execution, and even for whose supposed retouching of a work,
almost beneath his notice in point of art, there is not the slightest
authority.

In the small organ chapel, or, according to some, in the porch, of the
church of St. Mary at Lubeck in Lower Alsace, there is, or was, a very
ancient Dance of Death, said to have been painted in 1463. Dr. Nugent, who
has given some account of it, says, that it is much talked of in all parts
of Germany; that the figures were repaired at different times, as in 1588,
1642, and last of all in 1701. The verses that originally accompanied it
were in low Dutch, but at the last repair it was thought proper to change
them for German verses which were written by Nathaniel Schlott of
Dantzick. The Doctor has given an English translation of them, made for
him by a young lady of Lubeck.[66] This painting has been engraved, and
will be again mentioned. Leipsic had also a Dance of Death, but no
particulars of it seem to have been recorded.

In 1525 a similar dance was painted at Anneberg in Saxony, which Fabricius
seems alone to have noticed. He also mentions another in 1534, at the
palace of Duke George at Dresden.[67] This is described in a German work
written on the subject generally, by Paul Christian Hilscher, and
published at Dresden, 1705, 8vo. and again at Bautzen, 1721, 8vo. It
consisted of a long frieze sculptured in stone on the front of the
building, containing twenty-seven figures. A view of this very curious
structure, with the Dance itself, and also on a separate print, on a
larger scale, varying considerably from the usual mode of representing the
Macaber Dance, is given in Anthony Wecken's Chronicle of Dresden, printed
in German at Dresden 1680, folio. It is said to have been removed in 1721
to the church-yard of Old Dresden.

Nicolai Karamsin has given a very brief, but ludicrous, account of a Dance
of Death in the cross aisle of the Orphan House at Erfurth;[68] but
Peignot places it in the convent of the Augustins, and seems to say that
it was painted on the panels between the windows of the cell inhabited by
Luther.[69] In all probability the same place is intended by both these
writers.

There is some reason to suppose that there was a Dance of Death at
Nuremberg. Misson, describing a wedding in that city, states that the
bridegroom and his company sat down on one side of the church and the
bride on the other. Over each of their heads was a figure of Death upon
the wall. This would seem very like a Dance of Death, if the circumstance
of the figure being on both sides of the church did not excite a doubt on
the subject.

Whether there ever was a Macaber Dance at Berne of equal antiquity with
that of Basle has not been ascertained: but Sandrart, in his article for
Nicolas Manuel Deutch, a celebrated painter at Berne, in the beginning of
the 16th century, has recorded a Dance of Death painted by him in oil, and
regrets that a work materially contributing to the celebrity of that city
had been so extremely neglected that he had only been able to lay before
the readers the following German rhymes which had been inscribed on it:

  Manuel aller welt figur,
  Hastu gemahlt uf diese mur
  Nu must sterben da, hilft kun fund:
  Bist nit sicher minut noch stund.

Which he thus translates:

  Cunctorum in muris pictis ex arte figuris.
  Tu quoque decedes; etsi hoc vix tempore credes.

Then Manuel's answer:

  Kilf eineger Heiland! dru ich dich bitt:
  Dann hic ist gar kein Bleibens nit
    So mir der Tod mein red wird stellen
    So bhut euch Gott, mein liebe Gsellen.

That is, in Latin:

  En tibi me credo, Deus, hoc dum sorte recedo
  Mors rapiat me, te, reliquos sociosque, valete!

To which account M. Fuseli adds, that this painting, equally remarkable
for invention and character, was retouched in 1553; and in 1560, to render
the street in which it was placed more spacious, entirely demolished.
There were, however, two copies of it preserved at Berne, both in water
colours, one by Albrech Kauw, the other a copy from that by Wilhelm
Stettler, a painter of Berne, and pupil of Conrad Meyer of Zurich. The
painting is here said to have been in _fresco_ on the wall of the
Dominican cemetery.[70]

The verses that accompanied this painting have been mentioned as
containing sarcastical freedoms against the clergy; and as Manuel had
himself undergone some persecutions on the score of religion at the time
of the Reformation, this is by no means improbable. There is even a
tradition that he introduced portraits of some of his friends, who
assisted in bringing about that event.

In 1832, lithographic copies of the Berne painting, after the drawings of
Stettler, were published at Berne, with a portrait of Manuel; and a set of
very beautiful drawings in colours, made by some artist at Berne, either
after those by Stettler or Kauw, in the public library, are in the
possession of the writer of this essay. They, as well as the lithographic
prints, exhibit Manuel's likeness in the subject of the painter.

One of the bridges at Lucerne was covered with a Macaber Dance, executed
by a painter named Meglinger, but at what time we are not informed. It is
said to have been very well painted, but injured greatly by injudicious
retouchings; yet there seems to be a difference of opinion as to the merit
of the paintings, which are or were thirty-six in number, and supposed to
have been copied from the Basle dance. Lucerne has also another of the
same kind in the burial ground of the parish church of Im-hof. One of the
subjects placed over the tomb of some canon, the founder of a musical
society, is Death playing on the violin, and summoning the canon to
follow him, who, not in the least terrified, marks the place in the book
he was reading, and appears quite disposed to obey. This Dance is probably
more modern than the other.[71] The subject of Death performing on the
above instrument to some person or other is by no means uncommon among the
old painters.

M. Maurice Rivoire, in his very excellent description of the cathedral of
Amiens, mentions the cloister of the Machabees, originally called, says
he, the cloister of Macabre, and, as he supposes, from the name of the
author of the verses. He gives some lines that were on one of the walls,
in which the Almighty commands Death to bring all mortals before him.[72]
This cloister was destroyed about the year 1817, but not before the
present writer had seen some vestiges of the painting that remained on one
of the sides of the building.

M. Peignot has a very probable conjecture that the church-yard of Saint
Maclou, at Rouen, had a Macaber Dance, from a border or frieze that
contains several emblematical subjects of mortality. The place had more
than once been destroyed.[73] On the pillars of the church at Fescamp, in
Normandy, the Dance of Death was sculptured in stone, and it is in
evidence that the castle of Blois had formerly this subject represented in
some part of it.

In the course of some recent alterations in the new church of the
Protestants at Strasburg, formerly a Dominican convent, the workmen
accidentally uncovered a Dance of Death that had been whitewashed, either
for the purpose of obliteration or concealment. This painting seems to
differ from the usual Macaber Dance, not always confined like that to two
figures only, but having occasionally several grouped together. M.
Peignot has given some more curious particulars relating to it, extracted
from a literary journal by M. Schweighaeuser, of Strasburg.[74] It is to be
hoped that engravings of it will be given.

Chorier has mentioned the mills of Macabrey, and also a piece of land with
the same appellation, which he says was given to the chapter of St.
Maurice at Vienne in Dauphine, by one Marc Apvril, a citizen of that
place. He adds, that he is well aware of the Dance of Macabre. Is it not,
therefore, probable, that the latter might have existed at Vienne, and
have led to the corruption of the above citizen's name by the common
people.[75]

Misson has noticed a Dance of Death in St. Mary's church at Berlin, and
obscurely referred to another in some church at Nuremberg.

Bruckmann, in his Epistolae Itinerariae, vol. v. Epist. xxxii. describes
several churches and other religious buildings at Vienna, and among them
the monastery of the Augustinians, where, he says, there is a painting of
a house with Death entering one of the windows by a ladder.

In the same letter he describes a chapel of Death in the above monastery,
which had been decorated with moral paintings by Father Abraham a St.
Clara, one of the monks. Among these were, 1. Death demolishing a student.
2. Death attacking a hunter who had just killed a stag. 3. Death in an
apothecary's shop, breaking the phials and medicine boxes. 4. Death
playing at draughts with a nobleman. 5. Harlequin making grimaces at
Death. A description of this chapel, and its painting was published after
the good father's decease. Nuremberg, 1710, 8vo.

The only specimen of it in Holland that has occurred on the present
occasion is in the celebrated _Orange-Salle_, which constitutes the grand
apartment of the country seat belonging to the Prince of Orange in the
wood adjacent to the Hague. In three of its compartments, Death is
represented by skeletons darting their arrows against a host of
opponents.[76]

Nor has Italy furnished any materials for the present essay. Blainville
has, indeed, described a singular and whimsical representation of Death in
the church of St. Peter the Martyr, at Naples, in the following words. "At
the entrance on the left is a marble with a representation of Death in a
grotesque form. He has two crowns on his head, with a hawk on his fist, as
ready for hunting. Under his feet are extended a great number of persons
of both sexes and of every age. He addresses them in these lines:

  Eo so la morte che caccio
  Sopera voi jente mondana,
  La malata e la sana,
  Di, e notte la percaccio;
  Non fugge, vessuna intana
  Per scampare dal mio laczio
  Che tutto il mondo abbraczio,
  E tutta la jente humana
  Perche nessuno se conforta,
  Ma prenda spavento
  Ch'eo per comandamento
  Di prender a chi viene la sorte.
  Sia vi per gastigamento
  Questa figura di morte,
  E pensa vie di fare forte
  Tu via di salvamento.

Opposite to the figure of Death is that of a man dressed like a tradesman
or merchant, who throws a bag of money on a table, and speaks thus:

  Tutti ti volio dare
  Se mi lasci scampare.

To which Death answers:

  Se mi potesti dare
  Quanto si pote dimandare
  Non te pote scampare la morte
  Se te viene la sorte.[77]

It can hardly be supposed that this subject was not known in Spain, though
nothing relating to it seems to have been recorded, if we except the poem
that has been mentioned in p. 25, but no Spanish painting has been
specified that can be called a regular Macaber Dance. There are grounds,
however, for believing that there was such a painting in the cathedral of
Burgos, as a gentleman known to the author saw there the remains of a
skeleton figure on a whitewashed wall.




CHAPTER IV.

    _Macaber Dance in England.--St. Paul's.--Salisbury.--Wortley
    Hall.--Hexham.--Croydon.--Tower of London.--Lines in Pierce Plowman's
    Vision supposed to refer to it._


We are next to examine this subject in relation to its existence in our
own country. On the authority of the work ascribed to Walter de Mapes,
already noticed in p. 24, it is not unreasonable to infer that paintings
of the Macaber Dance were coeval with that writer, though no specimens of
it that now remain will warrant the conclusion. We know that it existed at
Old Saint Paul's. Stowe informs us that there was a great cloister on the
north side of the church, environing a plot of ground, of old time called
Pardon church-yard. He then states, that "about this _cloyster_ was
artificially and richly painted the Dance of Machabray, or Dance of Death,
commonly called the Dance of Paul's: the like whereof was painted about
St. Innocent's cloyster at Paris: the meters or poesie of this dance were
translated out of French into English, by John Lidgate, Monke of Bury, the
picture of Death leading all estates; at the dispence of Jenken Carpenter
in the reigne of Henry the Sixt."[78] Lydgate's verses were first printed
at the end of Tottell's edition of the translation of his Fall of Princes,
from Boccaccio, 1554, folio, and afterwards, in Sir W. Dugdale's History
of St. Paul's cathedral.[79] In another place Stowe records that "on the
10th April, 1549, the cloister of St. Paul's church, called Pardon
church-yard, with the Dance of Death, commonly called the Dance of Paul's,
about the same cloister, costly and cunningly wrought, and the chappel in
the midst of the same church-yard, were all begun to be pulled down."[80]
This spoliation was made by the Protector Somerset, in order to obtain
materials for building his palace in the Strand.[81]

The single figure that remained in the Hungerford chapel at Salisbury
cathedral, previously to its demolition, was formerly known by the title
of "Death and the Young Man," and was, undoubtedly, a portion of the
Macaber Dance, as there was close to it another compartment belonging to
the same subject. In 1748, a print of these figures was published,
accompanied with the following inscription, which differs from that in
Lydgate. The young man says:

  Alasse Dethe alasse a blesful thyng thou were
  Yf thou woldyst spare us yn ouwre lustynesse.
  And cum to wretches that bethe of hevy chere
  Whene thay ye clepe to slake their dystresse
  But owte alasse thyne own sely selfwyldnesse
  Crewelly werneth me that seygh wayle and wepe
  To close there then that after ye doth clepe.

Death answers:

  Grosless galante in all thy luste and pryde
  Remembyr that thou schalle onys dye
  Deth schall fro thy body thy sowle devyde
  Thou mayst him not escape certaynly
  To the dede bodyes cast down thyne ye
  Beholde thayme well consydere and see
  For such as thay ar such shalt thou be.

This painting was made about the year 1460, and from the remaining
specimen its destruction is extremely to be regretted, as, judging from
that of the young gallant, the dresses of the time would be correctly
exhibited.

In the chapel at Wortley Hall, in Gloucestershire, there was inscribed,
and most likely painted, "an history and Daunce of Deathe of all estatts
and degrees." This inscribed history was the same as Lydgate's, with some
additional characters.[82] From a manuscript note by John Stowe, in his
copy of Leland's Itinerary, it appears that there was a Dance of Death in
the church of Stratford upon Avon: and the conjecture that Shakespeare, in
a passage in Measure for Measure, might have remembered it, will not,
perhaps, be deemed very extravagant. He there alludes to Death and the
fool, a subject always introduced into the paintings in question.[83]

On the upper part of the great screen which closes the entrance to the
choir of the church at Hexham, in Northumberland, are the painted remains
of a Dance of Death.[84] These consist of the figures of a pope, a
cardinal, and a king, which were copied by the ingenious John Carter, of
well-deserved antiquarian memory.

Vestiges of a Macaber Dance were not long since to be traced on the walls
of the hall of the Archiepiscopal palace at Croydon, but so much obscured
by time and neglect that no particular compartment could be ascertained.

The tapestries that decorated the walls of palaces, and other dwelling
places, were sometimes applied in extension of this moral subject. In the
tower of London, the original and most ancient seat of our monarchs, there
was some tapestry with the Macaber Dance.[85]

The following lines in that admirable satire, the Vision of Pierce
Plowman, written about the year 1350, have evidently an allusion to the
Dance, unless they might be thought to apply rather to the celebrated
triumph of Death by Petrarch, of which some very early paintings, and many
engravings, still exist; or they may even refer to some of the ancient
representations of the infernal regions that follow Death on the Pale
horse of the Revelations, and in which is seen a grotesque intermixture of
all classes of people.[86]

  Death came driving after, and all to dust pashed
  Kynges and Kaysers, Knightes and Popes,
  Learned and lewde: he ne let no man stande
  That he hitte even, he never stode after.
  Many a lovely ladie and lemmans of knightes
  Swouned and swelted for sorrowe of Deathes dyntes.

It is probable that many cathedrals and other edifices, civil as well as
ecclesiastical, in France, Germany, England, and probably other European
countries, were ornamented with paintings and sculpture of this extremely
popular subject.




CHAPTER V.

    _List of editions of the Macaber Dance.--Printed Horae that contain
    it.--Manuscript Horae.--Other Manuscripts in which it occurs.--Various
    articles with letter-press, not being single prints, but connected
    with it._


It remains only, so far as regards the Macaber Dance, to present the
reader with a list of the several printed editions of that celebrated
work, and which, with many corrections and additions, has been chiefly
extracted from M. Peignot's "Recherches historiques et litteraires sur les
Danses des Morts," Paris et Dijon, 1826, 8vo.

The article that should stand at the head of this list, if any reliance
could be had on a supposed date, is the German edition, intitled, "Der
Dotendantz mit figuren. Clage und Antwort Schon von allen staten der
welt," small folio. This is mentioned in Braun Notitia de libris in
Bibliotheca Monasterii ad SS. Udalricum et Afram Augustae, vol. ii. 62. The
learned librarian expresses his doubts as to the date, which he supposes
may be between 1480 and 1500. He rejects a marginal note by the
illuminator of the letters, indicating the date of 1459. Every page of
this volume is divided into two columns, and accompanied with German
verses, which may be either the original text, or a translation from the
French verses in some early edition of the Macaber Dance in that language.
It consists of twenty-two leaves, with wood-cuts of the Pope, Cardinal,
Bishop, Abbot, &c. &c. accompanied by figures of Death.

1. "La Danse Macabre imprimee par ung nomme Guy Marchand, &c. Paris,
1485," small folio. Mons. Champollion Figeac has given a very minute
description of this extremely rare, and perhaps unique, volume, the only
known copy of which is in the public library of Grenoble. This account is
to be found in Millin's Magazin Encyclopedique, 1811, vol. vi. p. 355, and
thence by M. Peignot, in his Recherches, &c.

2. "Ce present livre est appelle Miroer salutaire pour toutes gens, et de
tous estatz, et est de grant utilite et recreation pour pleuseurs
ensegnemens tant en Latin comme en Francoys lesquels il contient ainsi
compose pour ceulx qui desirent acquerir leur salut: et qui le voudront
avoir. La Danse Macabre nouvelle." At the end, "Cy finit la Danse Macabre
hystoriee augmentee de pleuseurs nouveaux parsonnages (six) et beaux dis.
et les trois mors et trois vif ensemble. Nouvellement ainsi composee et
imprimee par Guyot Marchant demorant a Paris au grant hostel du college de
Navarre en champ Gaillart lan de grace, 1486, le septieme jour de juing."
A small folio of fifteen leaves, or thirty pages, twenty-four of which
belong to the Danse Macabre, and six to the Trois morts et les trois vifs.

On the authority of the above expression, "composee," and also on that of
La Croix du Maine, Marchant has been made the author as well as the
printer of the work; but M. De la Monnoye is not of that opinion, nor
indeed is there any other metrical composition by this printer known to
exist.

3. "La Danse Macabre des femmes, &c. Paris, par Guyot Marchant, 1486, le
septieme jour de Juillet," small folio, of fifteen leaves only. This is
the first edition of the Macaber Dance of females; and though thirty-two
of them are described, the Queen and Duchess only are engraved. See No. 6
for the rest. This and the preceding edition are also particularly
described by Messrs. Champollion Figeac and Peignot.

4. "Chorea ab eximio Macabro versibus Alemanicis edita, et a Petro Desrey
emendata. Parisiis per magistrum Guidonem Mercatorem pro Godeffrido de
Marnef. 1490," folio. Papillon thought the cuts were in the manner of the
French artist Jollat, but without foundation, for they are much superior
to any work by that artist, and of considerable merit.

5. "La nouvelle Danse Macabre des hommes dicte miroer salutaire de toutes
gens et de touts etats, &c. Paris, Guyot Marchant. 1490." folio.

6. "La Danse Macabre des femmes, toute hystoriee et augmentee de nouveaulx
personnages, &c. Paris, Guyot Marchant, le 2 Mai, 1491," folio. This
edition, the second of the Dance of females, has all the cuts with other
additions. The list of the figures is in Peignot, but with some doubts on
the accuracy of his description.

7. An edition in the Low German dialect was printed at Lubeck, 1496,
according to Vonder Hagen in his Deutschen Poesie, p. 459, who likewise
mentions a Low German edition in prose, at the beginning of the 15th (he
must mean 16th) century. He adds, that he has copied one page with cuts
from _Kindeling's Remains_, but he does not say in what work.

8. "La grant Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes hystorice et augmentee
de beaulx dits en Latin, &c. &c. Le tout compose en ryme Francoise et
accompagne de figures. Lyon, le xviii jour de Fevrier, l'an 1499," folio.
This is supposed to be the first edition that contains both the men and
the women.

9. There is a very singular work, intitled "Icy est le compost et
kalendrier des _Bergeres_, &c. Imprime a Paris en lostel de beauregart en
la rue Cloppin a lenseigne du roy Prestre Jhan. ou quel lieu sont a
vendre, ou au lyon dargent en la rue Sainct Jaques." At the end, "Imprime
a Paris par Guy Marchant maistre es ars ou lieu susdit. Le xvii iour
daoust mil cccciiiixx.xix." This extremely rare volume is in the British
Museum, and is mentioned by Dr. Dibdin, in vol. ii. p. 530 of his edition
of Ames's typographical antiquities, and probably nowhere else. It is
embellished with the same fine cuts that relate to the females in the
edition of the Macaber Dance, Nos. 4 and 11. The work begins with the
words "Deux jeunes Bergeres seulettes," and appears to have been composed
for females only, differing very materially from the well-known
"Kalendrier des Bergers," though including matter common to both.

10. "Chorea ab eximio Macabro versibus Alemanicis edita et a Petro Desrey
Trecacio quodam oratore nuper emendata. Parisiis per Magistrum Guidonem
Mercatorem pro Godeffrido Marnef. 15 Octob. 1499," folio, with cuts.

11. "La Danse Macabre, &c. Ant. Verard, no date, but about 1500," small
folio. A vellum copy of this rare edition is described by M. Van Praet in
his catalogue of vellum books in the royal library at Paris. A copy is in
the Archb. Cant. library at Lambeth.

12. "La Danse Macabre, &c. Ant. Verard, no date, but about 1500," folio.
Some variations from No. 9 are pointed out by M. Van Praet. This
magnificent volume on vellum, and bound in velvet, came from the library
at Blois. It is a very large and thin folio, consisting of three or four
leaves only, printed on pasteboard, with four pages or compartments on
each leaf. The cuts are illuminated in the usual manner of Verard's books.
In the beginning it is marked "Marolles, No. 1601." It is probably
imperfect, the fool not being among the figures, and all the females are
wanting, though, perhaps, not originally in this edition. It is in the
royal library at Paris, where there is another copy of the work printed by
Verard, with coloured prints, but differing materially from the other in
the press-work. It is a common-sized folio, and was purchased at the sale
of the Count Macarthy's books.[87]

13. "La grant Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, &c. Imprimee a
Troyes par Nicolas Le Rouge demourant en la grant rue a l'enseigne de
Venise aupres la belle croix." No date, folio. With very clever wood-cuts,
probably the same as in the edition of 1490; and if so, they differ much
from the manner of Jollat, and have not his well-known mark.

14. "La grant Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, &c. Rouen, Guillaume
de la Mare." No date, 4to. with cuts, and in the Roman letter.

15. "La grande Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, ou est demonstre
tous humains de tous estats estre du bransle de la Mort. Lyon, Olivier
Arnoulet." No date, 4to.

16. "La grant Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, &c. Lyon, Nourry,
1501," 4to. cuts.

17. "La grant Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, &c. Imprime a
Genesve, 1503," 4to. cuts.

18. "La grant Danse Macabre, &c. Paris, Nicole de la Barre, 1523," 4to.
with very indifferent cuts, and the omission of some of the characters in
preceding editions. This has been privately reprinted, 1820, by Mr.
Dobree, from a copy in the British Museum.

19. "La grant Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes. Troyes, Le Rouge,
1531," folio, cuts.

20. "La grand Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes. Paris, Denys Janot.
1533," 8vo. cuts.

21. "La grand Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, tant en Latin qu'en
Francoys. Paris, par Estienne Groulleau libraire jure en la rue neuve
Nostre Dame a l'enseigne S. Jean Baptiste." No date, 16mo. cuts. The first
edition of this size, and differing in some respects from the preceding.

22. "La grand Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, &c. Paris, Estienne
Groulleau, 1550," 16mo. cuts.

23. "La grande Danse des Morts, &c. Rouen, Morron." No date, 8vo. cuts.

24. "Les lxviii huictains ci-devant appelles la Danse Machabrey, par
lesquels les Chrestiens de tous estats tout stimules et invites de penser
a la mort. Paris, Jacques Varangue, 1589," 8vo. In Roman letter, without
cuts.

25. "La grande Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, &c. Troyes, Oudot,"
1641, 4to. cuts. One of the bibliotheque bleue books.

26. "La grande Danse Macabre des hommes et des femmes, renouvellee de
vieux Gaulois en langage le plus poli de notre temps, &c. Troyes, Pierre
Garnier rue du Temple." No date, but the privilege is in 1728, 4to. cuts.
The _polished_ language is, of course, for the worse, and Macaber is
called "des Machabees," no doubt, the editor's improvement.

27. "La grande Danse _Macabre_ des hommes et des femmes, renouvellee, &c.
Troyes, chez la veuve Oudot, et Jean Oudot fils, rue du Temple, 1729,"
4to. cuts. Nearly the same as No. 25.

These inferior editions continued, till very lately, to be occasionally
reprinted for the use of the common people, and at the trifling expense of
a very few sous. They are, nevertheless, of some value to those who feel
interested in the subject, as containing tolerable copies of all the fine
cuts in the preceding edition, No. 11.

Dr. Dibdin saw in the public library at Munich a very old series of a
Macaber Dance, that had been inserted, by way of illustration, into a
German manuscript of the Dance of Death. Of these he has given two
subjects in his "Bibliographical Tour," vol. iii. p. 278.

But it was not only in the above volumes that the very popular subject of
the Macaber Dance was particularly exhibited. It found its way into many
of the beautiful service books, usually denominated Horae, or hours of the
Virgin. These principally belong to France, and their margins are
frequently decorated with the above Dance, with occasional variety of
design. In most of them Death is accompanied with a single figure only,
characters from both sexes being introduced. It would be impossible to
furnish a complete list of them; but it is presumed that the mention of
several, and of the printers who introduced them, will not be
unacceptable.

No. I. "Las Horas de nuestra Senora con muchos otros oficios y oraciones."
Printed in Paris by Nicolas Higman for Simon Vostre, 1495, 8vo. It has two
Dances of Death, the first of which is the usual Macaber Dance, with the
following figures: "Le Pape, l'Empereur, le Cardinal, l'Archevesque, le
Chevalier, l'Evesque, l'Escuyer, l'Abe, le Prevost, le Roy, le Patriarche,
le Connestable, l'Astrologien, le Bourgoys, le Chanoine, le Moyne,
l'Usurier, le Medesin, l'Amoureux, l'Advocat, le Menestrier, le Marchant,
le Chartreux, le Sergent, le Cure, le Laboureur, le Cordelier." Then the
women: "La Royne, la Duchesse, la Regente, la Chevaliere, l'Abbesse, la
Femme descine, la Prieure, la Damoissele, la Bourgoise, la Cordeliere, la
Femme daceul, la Nourice, la Theologienne, la nouvelle mariee, la Femme
grosse, la Veufve, la Marchande, la Ballive, la Chamberiere, la
Recommanderese, la vielle Damoise, l'Espousee, la Mignote, la Fille
pucelle, la Garde d'accouchee, la jeune fille, la Religieuse, la Vielle,
la Revenderesse, l'Amoureuse, la Sorciere, la Bigote, la Sote, la Bergere,
la Femme aux Potences, la Femme de Village; to which are added, l'Enfant,
le Clerc, l'Ermite."

The second Dance of Death is very different from the preceding, and
consists of groupes of figures. The subjects, which have never yet been
described, are the following:

1. Death sitting on a coffin in a church-yard. "Discite vos choream cuncti
qui cernitis istam."

2. Death with Adam and Eve in Paradise. He draws Adam towards him. "Quid
tum prosit honor glorie divitie."

3. Death helping Cain to slay Abel. "Esto meorum qui pulvis eris et
vermibus esca."

4. Death holding by the garment a cardinal, followed by several persons.
"In gelida putrens quando jacebis humo."

5. Death mounted on a bull strikes three persons with his dart. "Vado mori
dives auro vel copia rerum."

6. Death seizing a man sitting at a table with a purse in his hand, and
accompanied by two other persons. "Nullum respectum dat michi, vado mori."

7. An armed knight killing an unarmed man, Death assisting. "Fortium
virorum est magis mortem contemnere vitam odisse."

8. Death with a rod in his hand, standing upon a groupe of dead persons.
"Stultum est timere quod vitari non potest."

9. Death with a scythe, having mowed down several persons lying on the
ground. "Est commune mori mors nulli parcit honori."

10. A soldier introducing a woman to another man, who holds a scythe in
his hand. Death stands behind. "Mors fera mors nequam mors nulli parcit et
equam."

11. Death strikes with his dart a prostrate female, who is attended by two
others. "Hec tua vita brevis: que te delectat ubique."

12. A man falling from a tower into the water. Death strikes him at the
same time with his dart. "Est velut aura levis te mors expectat ubique."

13. A man strangling another, Death assisting. "Vita quid est hominis nisi
res vallata ruinis."

14. A man at the gallows, Death standing by. "Est caro nostra cinis modo
principium modo finis."

15. A man about to be beheaded, Death assisting. "Quid sublime genus quid
opes quid gloria prestant."

16. A king attended by several persons is struck by Death with his dart.
"Quid mihi nunc aderant hec mihi nunc abeunt."

17. Two soldiers armed with battle-axes. Death pierces one of them with
his dart. "Ortus cuncta suos: repetunt matremque requirunt."

18. Death strikes with his dart a woman lying in bed. "Et redit in nihilum
quod fuit ante nihil."

19. Death aims his dart at a sleeping child in a cradle, two other figures
attending. "A, a, a, vado mori, nil valet ipsa juventus."

20. A man on the ground in a fit, Death seizes him. Others attending.
"Mors scita sed dubia nec fugienda venit."

21. Death leads a man, followed by others. "Non sum securus hodie vel cras
moriturus."

22. Death interrupts a man and woman at their meal. "Intus sive foris est
plurima causa timoris."

23. Death demolishes a group of minstrels, from one of whom he has taken a
lute. "Viximus gaudentes, nunc morimur tristes et flentes."

24. Death leads a hermit, followed by other persons. "Forte dies hec est
ultima, vado mori."

This Dance is also found in the Horae printed by Godar, Vostre, and Gilles
Hardouyn, but with occasional variations, as to size and other matters, in
the different blocks which they respectively used. The same designs have
also been adopted, and in a very singular style of engraving, in a work
printed by Antony Verard, that will be noticed elsewhere.

Some of the cuts, for they are not all by the same artist, in this very
rare and beautiful volume, and not found in others printed by or for Simon
Vostre, may be very justly compared, in point of the delicacy of design
and engraving, though on wood, with the celebrated pax of Maso Finiguerra
at Florence, accurately copied in Mr. Ottley's history of engraving. They
are accompanied with this unappropriated mark [monogram].

No. II. "Ordinarium beate Marie Virginis ad usum Cisterciensem impressum
est caracteribus optimis una cum expensis honesti viri Symonis Vostre
commorantis Parisiis in vico novo Dive Marie in intersignio Sancti Joannis
Evangeliste, 1497," 12mo. This beautiful book is on vellum, with the same
Danse Macabre as in the preceding, but the other cuts are different.

No. III. "Hore presentes ad usum Sarum impresse fuerunt Parisiis per
Philippum Pigouchet Anno Salutis MCCCCXCVIII die vero xvi Maii pro Symone
Vostre librario commorante, &c." 8vo. as above.

Another beautiful volume on vellum, with the same Danse Macabre. He
printed a similar volume of the same date, for the use of Rome, also on
vellum.

A volume of prayers, in 8vo. mentioned by M. Peignot, p. 145, after M.
Raymond, but the title is not given. It is supposed to be anterior to
1500, and seems to contain the same personages in its Danse Macabre, as in
the preceding volumes printed by Simon Vostre.

No. IV. "Heures a l'usage de Soissons." Printed by Simon Vostre, on
vellum, 1502, 8vo. With the same Danse Macabre.

No. V. "Heures a l'usage de Rheims, nouvellement imprimees avec belles
histoires, pour Simon Vostre," 1502, 8vo. This is mentioned by M. Peignot,
on the authority of Papillon. It was reprinted 1513, 8vo. and has the same
cuts as above.

No. VI. "Heures a l'usage de Rome. Printed for Simon Vostre by Phil.
Pigouchet," 1502, large 8vo. on vellum. With the same Danse Macabre. This
truly magnificent volume, superior to all the preceding by the same
printer in beauty of type and marginal decoration, differs from them in
having stanzas at the bottom of each page of the Dance, but which apply
to the figure at the top only. They are here given.

  POPE.

  Vous qui vivez certainement
  Quoy qu'il tarde ainsi danserez
  Mais quand Dieu le scet seulement
  Avisez comme vous ferez

  Dam Pape vous commencerez
  Comme le plus digne Seigneur
  En ce point honorire serez
  Au grant maistre est deu l'honneur.


  KING.

  Mais maintenant toute haultesse
  Laisserez vous nestes pas seul
  Peu aurez de votre richesse
  Le plus riche n'a qung linseul

  Venez noble Roy couronne
  Renomme de force et prouesse
  Jadis fustez environne
  De grans pompes de grant noblesse.


  ARCHBISHOP.

  Que vous tirez la teste arriere
  Archevesque tirez vous pres,
  Avez vous peur qu'on ne vous fiere
  Ne doubtez vous viendres apres

  N'est pas tousjours la mort empres
  Tout homme suyvant coste a coste
  Rendre comment debtez et pres
  Une foys fault coustera loste.


  SQUIRE.

  Il n'est rien que ne preigne cours
  Dansez et pensez de suyr
  Vous ne povez avoir secours
  Il n'est qui mort puisse fuyr

  Avencez vous gent escuyer
  Qui scavez de danser les tours
  Lance porties et escuz hyer
  Aujourdhuy finerez voz jours.


  ASTROLOGER.

  Maistre pour vostre regarder
  En hault ne pour vostre clergie
  Ne pouvez la mort retarder
  Ci ne vault rien astrologie

  Toute la genealogie
  D'Adam qui fust le premier homme
  Mort prent se dit theologie
  Tous fault mourir pour une pomme.


  MERCHANT.

  Vecy vostre dernier marche
  Il convient que par cy passez
  De tout soing serez despechie
  Tel convoiste qui a assez

  Marchant regardes par deca
  Plusieurs pays avez cerchie
  A pied a cheval de pieca
  Vous n'en serez plus empeschie.


  MONK.

  Ha maistre par la passeres
  N'est ja besoing de vous defendre
  Plus homme nespouvanteres
  Apres Moyne sans plus attendre

  Ou pensez vous cy fault entendre
  Tantost aurez la bouche close
  Homme n'est fors que vent et cendre
  Vie donc est moult peu de chose.


  LOVER.

  Trop lavez ayme cest foleur
  Et a mourir peu regarde
  Tantost vous changerez couleur
  Beaulte n'est que ymage farde

  Gentil amoureux gent et frique
  Qui vous cuidez de grant valeur
  Vous estez pris la mort vous pique
  Ce monde lairez a douleur.


  CURATE.

  Passez cure sans long songier
  Je sans questes habandonne
  Le vif le mort soulier menger
  Mais vous serez aux vers donne

  Vous fustes jadis ordonne
  Miroir dautruy et exemplaire
  De voz faitz serez guerdonne
  A toute peine est deu salaire.


  CHILD.

  Sur tout du jour de la naissance
  Convient chascun a mort offrir
  Fol est qui n'en a congnoissance
  Qui plus vit plus a assouffrir

  Petit enfant naguerez ne
  Au monde aures peu de plaisance
  A la danse sera mene
  Comme autre car mort a puissance.


  QUEEN.

  Noble Royne de beau corsage
  Gente et joyeuse a ladvenant
  Jay de par le grant maistre charge
  De vous enmener maintenant

  Et comme bien chose advenant
  Ceste danse commenseres
  Faictes devoir au remenant
  Vous qui vivez ainsi feres.


  LADY.

  C'est bien chasse quand on pourchasse
  Chose a son ame meritoire
  Car au derrain mort tout enchasse
  Ceste vie est moult transitoire

  Gentille femme de chevalier
  Que tant aymes deduit et chasse
  Les engins vous fault habiller
  Et suyvre le train de ma trasse.


  PRIORESS.

  Se vous avez sans fiction
  Tout vostre temps servi a Dieu
  Du cueur en sa religion
  La quelle vous avez vestue

  Celuy qui tous biens retribue
  Vous recompenserer loyalment
  A son vouloir en temps et lieu
  Bien fait requiert bon payment.


  FRANCISCAN NUN.

  Se vos prieres sont bien dignes
  Elles vous vauldront devant Dieu
  Rien ne vallent soupirs ne signes
  Bone operacion tient lieu

  Femme de grande devocion
  Cloez voz heures et matines
  Et cessez contemplacion
  Car jamais nyres a matines.


  CHAMBER-MAID.

  Dictez jeune femme a la cruche
  Renommee bonne chambriere
  Respondez au moins quant on huche
  Sans tenir si rude maniere

  Vous nirez plus a la riviere
  Baver au four na la fenestre
  Cest cy vostre journee derniere
  Ausy tost meurt servant que maistre.


  WIDOW.

  Cest belle chose de tenir
  Lestat ou on est appellee
  Et soy tousjours bien maintenir
  Vertus est tout par tout louee.

  Femme vesve venez avant
  Et vous avancez de venir
  Vous veez les aultres davant
  Il convient une fois finir.


  LYING-IN NURSE.

  Venez ca garde dacouchees
  Dresse aves maintz bainz perdus
  Et ses cortines attachees
  Ou estoient beaux boucques pendus

  Biens y ont estez despendus
  Tant de motz ditz que cest ung songe
  Qui seront cher vendus
  En la fin tout mal vient en ronge.


  SHEPHERDESS.

  Aux camps ni rez plus soir ne matin
  Veiller brebis ne garder bestes
  Rien ne sera de vous demain
  Apres les veilles sont les festes

  Pas ne vous oublieray derriere
  Venez apres moy sa la main
  Entendez plaisante bergiere
  Ou marcande cy main a main.


  OLD WOMAN.

  Et vous madame la gourree
  Vendu avez maintz surplis
  Donc de largent est fourree
  Et en sont voz coffres remplis

  Apres tous souhaitz acomplis
  Convient tout laisser et ballier
  Selon la robe on fait le plis
  A tel potaige tel cuiller.


  WITCH.

  Est condannee comme meurtriere
  A mourir ne vivra plus gaire
  Je la maine en son cimitiere
  Cest belle chose de bien faire

  Oyez oyez on vous fait scavoir
  Que ceste vielle sorciere
  A fait mourir et decepvoir
  Plusieurs gens en mainte maniere.

In the cut of the adoration of the shepherds their names are introduced as
follows: Gobin le gay; le beau Roger; Aloris; Ysauber; Alison, and
Mahault. The same cut is in two or three other Horae mentioned in this
list.

No. VII. "Heures a l'usaige de Rouan. Simon Vostre, 1508, 8vo." With the
same Danse Macabre.

No. VIII. "Horae ad usum Romanum. Thielman Kerver," 1508, 8vo. Vellum. With
the same Danse Macabre.

No. IX. "Hore christofere virginis Marie secundum usum Romanum ad longum
absque aliquo recursu, &c." Parisiis. Simon Vostre, 1508, 8vo. M. Peignot
has given a very minute description of this volume with a list of the
different persons in the Danse Macabre.

No. X. "Heures a l'usage de ... Ant. Verard," 1509, 8vo. with the same
Danse Macabre.

No. XI. "Heures a l'usaige d'Angers. Simon Vostre," 1510, 8vo. With the
same Danse Macabre. Particularly described by M. Peignot.

No. XII. "Heures a l'usaige de Rome. Guil. Godar," 1510, large 8vo. vellum
illuminated. A magnificent book. It contains the Danse Macabre as in No.
I. But it is remarkable for a third Dance of Death on the margins at
bottom, consisting of small compartments with a single figure, but
unaccompanied in the usual manner by Death, who, in various shapes and
attitudes, is occasionally introduced. The characters are the following,
without the arrangement commonly observed, and here given in the order in
which they occur. 1. La Prieuse. 2. La Garde dacouche. 3. L'Abesse. 4. Le
Promoteur. 5. Le Conestable. 6. Le Moine, without a label. 7. La Vielle
Demoiselle. 8. La Baillive. 9. La Duchesse. 10. Le Sergent. 11. La
Nourrice. 12. La femme du Chevallier. 13. La Damoiselle. 14. Le Maistre
descole. 15. La Femme du village. 16. La Rescomanderese. 17. La
Revenderese. 18. Le Laboureur. 19. La Bourgoise. 20. L'Usurier. 21. Le
Pelerin. 22. Le Berger. 23. La Religieuse. 24. L'Home d'armes. 25. La
Sorciere. 26. Le Petit enfant. 27. Le Clerc. 28. Le Patriarche. 29. Le
Cardinal. 30. L'Empereur. 31. Le Roy. 32. La Marchande. 33. Le Cure. 34.
La Theologienne. 35. La Jeune fille. 36. Le Sot. 37. Le Hallebardier. 38.
La Pucelle vierge. 39. L'Hermite. 40. L'Escuier. 41. La Chamberiere. 42.
La Femme de lescuier. 43. La Cordeliere. 44. La Femme veuve. 45. Le
Chartreux. 46. La Royne. 47. La Regente. 48. La Bergere. 49. L'Advocat.
50. L'Espousee. 51. La Femme amoureuse. 52. La Nouvelle Mariee. 53. Le
Medecin. Wherever the figure of Death is introduced, he is accompanied
with the motto "Amort, amort."

No. XIII. "Hore ad usum Romanum. Thielman Kerver," 1511, 8vo. Vellum, with
the Danse Macabre.

No. XIV. "Heures a l'usage de Langres. Simon Vostre," 1512, 8vo. In the
possession of Mons. G. M. Raymond, who has described it in Millin's
"Magazin Encyclopedique," 1814, tom. iii. p. 13. Mentioned also by M.
Peignot.

No. XV. "Heures a l'usage de Paris. Simon Vostre," 1515, 8vo. With the
Danse Macabre, and the other mentioned in No. I.

No. XVI. "Heures de Nostre Dame a l'usage de Troyes." Th. Englard, pour G.
Goderet, vers 1520. Vellum. Described by M. Peignot.

No. XVII. "Hore ad usum Romanum. Thielman Kerver," 1526, 8vo. Vellum. A
beautiful volume. Prefixed to the Danse Macabre are two prints of the
Trois morts et trois vifs.

In all the above Horae the Macaber Dance is represented nearly alike in
design, the variations being chiefly in the attitudes of the figures,
which are cut on different blocks, except in a few instances where the
printers have borrowed the latter from each other. Thus Vostre uses
Verard's, and Pigouchet Godar's. The number of the subjects also varies,
Vostre and Kerver having more than Verard, Godar, and Pigouchet.

Exceptions to the above manner of representing the Macaber Dance, occur in
two Horae of singular rarity, and which are therefore worthy of particular
notice.

No. XVIII. "Officium beatae Mariae Virginis ad usum Romane ecclesie.
Impressum Lugduni expensis Bonini de Boninis Dalmatini," die xx martij,
1499, 12mo. On vellum. Here the designs are very different, and three of
the subjects are placed at the bottom of the page. They consist of the
following personages, there being no females among them. It was reprinted
by the same printer in 1521.

  Papa                Astrologus
  Imperator           Cives
  Cardinales.         Canonicus.

  Archiepiscopus      Scutifer
  Eques               Abbas
  Episcopus.          Pretor.

  Rex                 Monachus
  Patriarche          Usurarius
  Capitanus.          Medicus.

  Plebanus            Mercator
  Laborator           Certosinus
  Frater Minor.       Nuncius.

  Amans               Puer
  Advocatus           Sacristanus
  Joculator.          Heremita.

No. XIX. "Hore beate Marie Virginis ad usum insignis ac preclare ecclesie
Sarum cum figuris passionis mysterium representantibus recenter additis.
Impresse Parisiis per Johannem Bignon pro honesto viro Richardo Fakes,
London, librario, et ibidem commorante cymeterie Sancti Pauli sub signo A.
B. C." 1521. A ledger-like 12mo. This Macaber Dance is unfortunately
imperfect in the only copy of the book that has occurred. The figures that
remain are those of the Pope, King, Cardinal, Patriarch, Judge,
Archbishop, Knight, Mayor, and Earl.

Under each subject are Lydgate's verses, with some slight variation; and
it is therefore very probable that we have here a copy, as to many of the
figures, of the Dance that was painted at St. Paul's in compartments like
the other Macaber Dance, and not as the group in Dugdale, which has been
copied from a wood-cut at the end of Lydgate's "Fall of Prynces." As all
the before-mentioned Horae were printed at Paris, with one exception only,
and many of them at a very early period, it is equally probable that they
may be copies of the Dance at the Innocents, unless a preference in that
respect should be given to the figures in the French editions of the Danse
Macabre.

Manuscript Horae, or books of prayers, which contain the Macaber Dance are
in the next place deserving of our attention. These are extremely rare,
and two only have occurred on the present occasion.

1. A manuscript prayer book of the fifteenth century is very briefly
described by M. Peignot,[88] which he states to be the only one that has
come to his knowledge.

2. An exquisitely beautiful volume, in large 8vo. bound in brass and
velvet. It is a Latin Horae, elegantly written in Roman type at the
beginning of the 16th century. It has a profusion of paintings, every page
being decorated with a variety of subjects. These consist of stories from
scripture, sports, games, trades, grotesques, &c. &c. the several
employments of the months, which have also the signs of the zodiac, are
worth describing, there being two sets for each month.

  January.   1. A man sitting at table, a servant bringing
                in a dish of viands. The white tablecloth
                is beautifully diapered. 2. Boys
                playing at the game called Hockey.

  February.  1. A man warming himself by a fire, a
                domestic bringing in faggots. 2. Men
                and women at table, two women cooking
                additional food in the same apartment.

  March.     1. A man pruning trees. 2. A priest confirming
                a group of people.

  April.     1. A man hawking. 2. A procession of
                pilgrims.

  May.       1. A gentleman and lady on the same horse.
                2. Two pairs of lovers: one of the men
                plays on a flute, the other holds a
                hawk on his fist.

  June.      1. A woman shearing sheep. 2. A bridal
                procession.

  July.      1. A man with a scythe about to reap. He
                drinks from his leathern bottle. 2. Boys
                and girls at the sport called Threading
                the needle.

  August.    1. A man reaping with a sickle. 2. Blind
                man's buff.

  September. 1. A man sowing. 2. The games of hot
                cockles and ...

  October.   1. Making wine. 2. Several men repairing
                casks, the master of the vineyard
                directing.

  November.  1. A man threshing acorns to feed his hogs.
                2. Tennis.

  December.  1. Singeing a hog. 2. Boys pelting each
                other with snow balls.

The side margins have the following Danse Macabre, consisting as usual of
two figures only. Papa, Imperator, Cardinalis, Rex, Archiepiscopus,
Comestabilis, Patriarcha, Eques auratus, Episcopus, Scutarius, Abbas,
Prepositus, Astrologus, Mercator, Cordiger, Satelles, Usurarius,
Advocatus, Mimus, Infans, Heremita.

The margins at bottom contain a great variety of emblems of mortality.
Among these are the following:

1. A man presents a mirror to a lady, in which her face is reflected as a
death's head.

2. Death shoots an arrow at a man and woman.

3. A man endeavouring to escape from Death is caught by him.

4. Death transfixes a prostrate warrior with a spear.

5. Two very grotesque Deaths, the one with a scythe, the other with a
spade.

6. A group of five Deaths, four dancing a round, the other drumming.

7. Death on a bull, holding a dart in his hand.

8. Death in a cemetery running away with a coffin and pick-axe.

9. Death digging a grave for two shrouded bodies on the ground.

10. Death seizing a fool.

11. Death seizing the master of a family.

12. Death seizing Caillette, a celebrated fool mentioned by Rabelais, Des
Periers, &c. He is represented in the French translation of the Ship of
Fools.

13. Death seizing a beggar.

14. Death seizing a man playing at tennis.

15. Death striking the miller going to his mill.

16. Death seizing Ragot, a famous beggar in the reign of Louis XII. He is
mentioned by Rabelais.

This precious volume is in the present writer's possession.

Other manuscripts connected with the Macaber Dance are the following:

1. No. 1849, a Colbert MS. in the King of France's library, appears to
have been written towards the end of the fifteenth century, and is
splendidly illuminated on vellum with figures of men and women led by
Death, the designs not much differing from those in Verard's printed copy.

2. Another manuscript in the same library, formerly No. 543 in that of
Saint Victor, is at the end of a small volume of miscellanies written on
paper about the year 1520; the text resembles that of the immediately
preceding article, and occasionally varies from the printed editions. It
has no illuminations. These are the only manuscript Macaber Dances in the
royal library at Paris.

3. A manuscript of the Dance of Death, in German, is in the library of
Munich. See Dr. Dibdin's bibliographical Tour, vol. iii. 278; and Vonder
Hagen's history of German poetry. Berlin, 1812, 8vo. p. 459. The date of
1450 is given to this manuscript on the authority of Docen in his
Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 148, and new Literary Advertizer for 1806, No.
22, p. 348. Vonder Hagen also states that Docen has printed it in his
Miscellanies, p. 349-52, and 412-16.

4. A manuscript in the Vatican, No. 314. See Vonder Hagen, ubi supra, who
refers to Adelung, vol. ii. p. 317-18, where the beginning and other
extracts are given.

5. In the Duke de la Valliere's catal. No. 2801, is "La Danse Macabre par
personnages, in 4to. Sur papier du xv siecle, contenant 12 feuillets."

In the course of this enquiry no manuscript, decorated with a regular
series of a Dance of Death, has been discovered.

The Abbe Rive left, in manuscript, a bibliography of all the editions of
the Macaber Dance, which is at present, with other manuscripts by the
Abbe, in the hands of M. Achard, a bookseller at Marseilles. See Peignot,
Diction. de Bibliologie, iii. 284.

The following articles, accompanied by letter-press, and distinguishable
from single prints, appear to relate to the Macaber Dance.

1. The Dance and song of Death is among books licensed to John
Awdeley.[89]

2. "The roll of the Daunce of Death, with pictures and verses upon the
same," was entered on the Stationers' books, 5th Jan. 1597, by Thomas
Purfort, sen. and jun. The price was 6_d._ This, as well as that licensed
to Awdeley, was in all probability the Dance at St. Paul's.

3. "Der Todten Tantz au Hertzog Georgens zu Sachsen schloss zu Dresden
befindlich." _i. e._ "Here is found the Dance of Death on the Saxon palace
of Duke George at Dresden." It consists of twenty-seven characters, as
follow: 1. Death leading the way; in his right hand he holds a drinking
glass or cup, and in his left a trumpet which he is blowing. 2. Pope. 3.
Cardinal. 4. Abbot. 5. Bishop. 6. Canon. 7. Priest. 8. Monk. 9. Death
beating a drum with bones. 10. Emperor. 11. King. 12. Duke. 13. Nobleman.
14. Knight. 15. Gentleman. 16. Judge. 17. Notary. 18. Soldier. 19.
Peasant. 20. Beggar. 21. Abbess. 22. Duchess. 23. Old woman. 24. Old man.
25. Child. 26. Old beggar. 27. Death with a scythe. This is a single print
in the Chronicle of Dresden, by Antony Wecken, Dresden, 1680, folio,
already mentioned in p. 44.

4. In the catalogue of the library of R. Smith, which was sold by auction
in 1682, is this article "Dance of Death, in the cloyster of Paul's, with
figures, very old." It was sold for six shillings to Mr. Mearne.

5. A sort of Macaber Dance, in a Swiss almanack, consisting of eight
subjects, and intitled "Ein Stuck aus dem Todten tantz," or, "a piece of a
Dance of Death:" engraved on wood by Zimmerman with great spirit, after
some very excellent designs. They are accompanied with dialogues between
Death and the respective characters. 1. The Postilion on horseback. Death
in a huge pair of jack-boots, seizes him by the arm with a view to unhorse
him. 2. The Tinker. Death, with a skillet on his head, plunders the
tinker's basket. 3. The Hussar on horseback, accompanied by Death, also
mounted, and, like his comrade, wearing an enormous hat with a feather. 4.
The Physician. Death habited as a modern beau, with chapeau-bras, brings
his urinal to the Doctor for inspection. 5. The fraudulent Innkeeper in
the act of adulterating a cask of liquor is seized and throttled by a very
grotesque Death in the habit of an alewife, with a vessel at her back. 6.
The Ploughman, holding his implements of husbandry, is seized by Death,
who sits on a plough and carries a scythe in his left hand. 7. The
Grave-digger, is pulled by Death into the grave which he has just
completed. 8. The lame Messenger, led by Death. The size of the print 11
by 6-1/2 inches.

6. Papillon states that Le Blond, an artist, then living at Orleans,
engraved the Macaber Dance on wood for the Dominotiers, or venders of
coloured prints for the common people, and that the sheets, when put
together, form a square of three feet, and have verses underneath each
figure.[90]




CHAPTER VI.

    _Hans Holbein's connexion with the Dance of Death.--A dance of
    peasants at Basle.--Lyons edition of the Dance of Death, 1538.--Doubts
    as to any prior edition.--Dedication to the edition of 1538.--Mr.
    Ottley's opinion of it examined.--Artists supposed to have been
    connected with this work.--Holbein's name in none of the old
    editions.--Reperdius._


The name of Holbein has been so strongly interwoven with the Dance of
Death that the latter is seldom mentioned without bringing to recollection
that extraordinary artist.

It would be a great waste of time and words to dwell specifically on the
numerous errors of such writers as Papillon, Fournier, and several others,
who have inadvertently connected Holbein with the Macaber Dance, or to
correct those of travellers who have spoken of the subject as it appeared
in any shape in the city of Basle. The opinions of those who have either
supposed or stated that Holbein even retouched or repaired the old
painting at Basle, are entitled to no credit whatever, unaccompanied as
they are by necessary proofs. The names of the artists who were employed
on that painting have been already adverted to, and are sufficiently
detailed in the volumes of Merian and Peignot; and it is therefore
unnecessary to repeat them.

Evidence, but of a very slight and unsatisfactory nature, has been adduced
that Holbein painted some kind of a Death's Dance on the walls of a house
at Basle. Whether this was only a copy of the old Macaber subject, or
some other of his own invention, cannot now be ascertained. Bishop Burnet,
in his letters from Switzerland,[91] states that "there is a _Dance_ which
he painted on the walls of a house where he used to drink; yet so worn out
that very little is now to be seen, except _shapes and postures_, but
these shew the exquisiteness of the hand." It is much to be regretted that
this painting was not in a state to have enabled the bishop to have been
more particular in his description. He then mentions the older Dance,
which he places "along the side of the convent of the Augustinians
(meaning the Dominicans), now the French church, so worn out some time ago
that they ordered the best painter they had to lay new colour on it, but
this is so ill done, that one had rather see the dark shadow of Holbein's
pencil than this coarse work." Here he speaks obscurely, and adopts the
error that Holbein had some hand in it.

Keysler, a man of considerable learning and ingenuity, and the author of a
very excellent book of travels, mentions the old painting at Basle, and
adds, that "Holbein had also drawn and painted a Death's Dance, and had
likewise painted, as it were, a _duplicate_ of this piece on another
house, but which time has entirely obliterated."[92] We are here again
left entirely in the dark as to the first mentioned painting, and its
difference from the other. Charles Patin, an earlier authority than the
two preceding travellers, and who was at Basle in 1671, informs us that
strangers behold, with a considerable degree of pleasure, the walls of a
house at the corner of a little street in the above town, which are
covered from top to bottom with paintings by Holbein, that would have done
honour to the commands of a great prince, whilst they are, in fact,
nothing more than the painter's reward to the master of a tavern for some
meals that he had obtained.[93] In the list of Holbein's works, in his
edition of Erasmus's Moriae encomion, he likewise mentions the painting on
a house in the Eisengassen, or Iron-street, near the Rhine bridge, and for
which he is said to have received forty florins,[94] perhaps the same as
that mentioned in his travels.

This painting was still remaining in the year 1730, when Mr. Breval saw
it, and described it as a _dance of boors_, but in his opinion unworthy,
as well as the Dance of Death in that city, of Holbein's hand.[95] These
accounts of the paintings on houses are very obscure and contradictory,
and the only way to reconcile them is by concluding that Holbein might
have decorated the walls of some houses with a Dance of Death, and of
others with a dance of peasants.[96] The latter subject would indeed be
very much to the taste of an inn-keeper, and the nature of his occupation.
Some of the writers on engraving have manifested their usual inaccuracy on
the subject of Holbein's Dance of Peasants. Joubert says it has been
engraved, but that it is "a peu pres introuvable."[97] Huber likewise
makes them extremely rare, and adds, without the slightest authority, that
Holbein engraved them.[98] There is, however, no doubt that his beautiful
pencil was employed on this subject in various ways, of which the
following specimens are worthy of being recorded. 1. In a set of initial
letters frequently used in books printed at Basle and elsewhere. 2. In an
edition of Plutarch's works, printed by Cratander at Basle, 1530, folio,
and afterwards introduced into Polydore Vergil's "Anglicae historiae libri
viginti sex," printed at Basle, 1540, in folio, where, on p. 3 at bottom,
the subject is very elegantly treated. It occurs also, in other books
printed in the same city. 3. In an edition of the "Nugae" of Nicolas
Borbonius, Basle, 1540, 12mo. at p. 17, there is a dance of peasants
replete with humour: and, 4. A vignette in the first page of an edition of
Apicius, printed at Basle, 1541, 4to. without the printer's name.

After all, there seems to be a fatality of ambiguity in the account of the
Basle paintings ascribed to Holbein; and that of the Dance of Death has
not only been placed by several writers on the walls, inside and outside,
of houses, but likewise in the fish-market; on the walls of the
church-yard of St. Peter; and even in the cathedral itself of Basle; and,
therefore, amidst this chaos of description, it is absolutely impossible
to arrive at any conclusion that can be deemed in any degree satisfactory.

We are now to enter upon the investigation of a work which has been
somewhat erroneously denominated a "Dance of Death," by most of the
writers who have mentioned it. Such a title, however, is not to be found
in any of its numerous editions. It is certainly not a dance, but rather,
with slight exception, a series of admirable groups of persons of various
characters, among whom Death is appropriately introduced as an emblem of
man's mortality. It is of equal celebrity with the Macaber Dance, but in
design and execution of considerable superiority, and with which the name
of Hans Holbein has been so intimately connected, and that great painter
so generally considered as its inventor, that even to doubt his claim to
it will seem quite heretical to those who may have founded their opinion
on internal evidence with respect to his style of composition.

In the year 1538 there appeared a work with the following title, "Les
simulachres et historiees faces de la mort, autant elegamment
pourtraictes, que artificiellement imaginees." A Lyon Soubz lescu de
Coloigne, 4to. and at the end, "Excudebant Lugduni Melchior et Gaspar
Trechsel fratres, 1538." It has forty-one cuts, most exquisitely designed
and engraved on wood, in a manner which several modern artists only of
England and Germany have been competent to rival. As to the designs of
these truly elegant prints, no one who is at all skilled in the knowledge
of Holbein's style and manner of grouping his figures, would hesitate
immediately to ascribe them to that artist. Some persons have imagined
that they had actually discovered the portrait of Holbein in the subject
of the nun and her lover; but the painter, whoever he may have been, is
more likely to be represented in the last cut as one of the supporters of
the escutcheon of Death. In these designs, which are wholly different from
the dull and oftentimes disgusting Macaber Dance, which is confined, with
little exception, to two figures only, we have the most interesting
assemblage of characters, among whom the skeletonized Death, with all the
animation of a living person, forms the most important personage;
sometimes amusingly ludicrous, occasionally mischievous, but always busy
and characteristically occupied.

Doubts have arisen whether the above can be regarded as the first edition
of these justly celebrated engravings in the form of a volume accompanied
with text. In the "Notices sur les graveurs," Besancon, 1807, 8vo. a work
ascribed to M. Malpe,[99] it is stated to have been originally published
at Basle in 1530; and in M. Jansen's "Essai sur l'origine de la gravure,"
&c. Paris, 1808, 8vo. a work replete with plagiarisms, and the most
glaring mistakes, the same assertion is repeated. This writer adds, but
unsupported by any authority, that soon afterwards another edition
appeared with Flemish verses. Both these authors, following their blind
leader Papillon, have not ventured to state that they ever saw this
supposed edition of 1530, and it may indeed be asked, who has? Or in what
catalogue of any library is it recorded? Malpe acknowledges that the
earliest edition he had seen was that of 1538. M. Fuseli, in his edition
of Pilkington's Dictionary of Painters, has appended a note to the article
for Hans Holbein, where, alluding perhaps to the former edition of the
present dissertation, he remarks, that "Holbein's title to the Dance of
Death would not have been called in question, had the ingenious author of
the dissertation on that subject been acquainted with the German edition."
This gentleman seems, however, to have inadvertently forgotten a former
opinion which he had given in one of his lectures, where he says, "The
scrupulous precision, the high finish, and the Titianesque colour of Hans
Holbein would make the least part of his excellence, if his right to that
series of emblematic groups known under the name of Holbein's Dance of
Death had not, of late, been too successfully disputed." M. Fuseli would
have rendered some service to this question by favouring us with an
explicit account of the above German edition, if he really intended by it
a complete work; but it is most likely that he adverted to some separate
impressions of the cuts with printed inscriptions on them, but which are
only the titles of the respective characters or subjects. To such
impressions M. Malpe has certainly referred, adding that they have, at
top, passages from the Bible in German, and verses at bottom in the same
language. Jansen follows him as to the verses at bottom only. Now, on
forty-one of these separate impressions, in the collection of the accurate
and laborious author of the best work on the origin and early history of
engraving that has ever appeared, and on several others in the present
writer's possession, neither texts of scripture, nor verses at bottom, are
to be found, and nothing more than the above-mentioned German titles of
the characters. M. Huber, in his "Manuel des curieux et des amateurs de
l'art," vol. i. p. 155, after inaccurately stating that Holbein _engraved_
these cuts, proceeds to observe, that in order to form a proper judgment
of their merit, it is necessary to see the earliest impressions, printed
on one side only of the paper; and refers to twenty-one of them in the
cabinet of M. Otto, of Leipsig, but without stating any letter-press as
belonging to them, or regarding them as a part of any German edition of
the work.

In the public library of Basle there are proof impressions, on four
leaves, of all the cuts which had appeared in the edition of 1538, except
that of the astrologer. Over each is the name of the subject printed in
German, and without any verses or letter-press whatever at bottom.

It is here necessary to mention that the first known edition in which
these cuts were used, namely, that of 1538, was accompanied with French
verses, descriptive of the subjects. In an edition that soon afterwards
appeared, these French verses were translated into Latin by George
AEmylius, a _German_ divine; and in another edition, published at Basle, in
1554, the Latin verses were continued. In both these cases, had there been
any former _German verses_, would they not have been retained in
preference?

There is a passage, however, in Gesner's Pandectae, a supplemental volume
of great rarity to his well-known Bibliotheca, that slightly adverts to a
German edition of this work, and at the same time connects Holbein's name
with it. It is as follows: "Imagines mortis expressae ab optimo pictore
Johanne Holbein cum epigrammatibus Geo. AEmylii, excusae Francofurti et
Lugduni apud Frellonios, quorum editio plures habet picturas. Vidi etiam
cum metris Gallicis et _Germanicis si bene memini_."[100] But Gesner
writes from imperfect recollection only, and specifies no edition in
German. It is most probable that he refers to an early copy of the cuts on
a larger scale with a good deal of text in German, and printed and perhaps
engraved by Jobst Denecker, at Augsburg, 1544, small folio.

The forty-one separate impressions of the cuts in the collection of Mr.
Ottley, as well as those in the present writer's possession, are printed
on one side of the paper only, another argument that they were not
intended to be used in any book; and although they are extremely clear and
distinct, many of them that were afterwards used in the various editions
of the book are not less brilliant in appearance. It is well known to
those who are conversant with engravings on wood, that the earliest
impressions are not always the best; a great deal depending on the care
and skill with which they were taken from the blocks, and not a little on
the quality of the paper. As they were most likely engraved at Basle by an
excellent artist, of whom more will be said hereafter, and at the instance
of the Lyons booksellers or publishers, it is very probable that a few
impressions would be taken off with German titles only for the use of the
people of Basle, or other persons using the German language. Proofs might
also be wanted for the accommodation of amateurs or other curious persons,
and therefore it would be only necessary to print the names or titles of
the subjects. This conjecture derives additional support from the
well-known literary intercourse between the cities of Lyons and Basle, and
from their small distance from each other. On the whole, therefore, the
Lyons edition of 1538 may be safely regarded as the earliest, until some
other shall make its appearance with a well ascertained prior date, either
in German or any other language.

In the edition of 1538 there is a dedication, not in any of the others,
and of very considerable importance. It is a pious, quaint, and jingling
address to Jeanne de Touszele, Abbess of the convent of St. Peter, at
Lyons, in which the author, whose name is obscurely stated to be Ouzele,
compliments the good lady as the pattern of true religion, from her
intimate acquaintance with the nature of Death, rushing, as it were, into
his hands, by her entrance into the sepulchre of a cloister. He enlarges
on the various modes of representing the mortality of human nature, and
contends that the image of Death has nothing terrific in the eyes of the
Christian. He maintains that there is no better method of depicting
mortality than by a dead person, especially by those images which so
frequently occur on sepulchral monuments. Adverting then to the figures in
the present work he _regrets the death of him who has here conceived
[imagine] such elegant designs, greatly exceeding all other patterns of
the kind, in like manner as the paintings of Apelles and Zeuxis have
surpassed those of modern times_. He observes that these funereal
histories, accompanied by their grave descriptions in rhyme, induce the
admiring spectators to behold the dead as alive, and the living as dead;
which leads him to believe that Death, apprehensive lest this admirable
_painter_ should exhibit him so lively that he would no longer be feared
as Death, and that he should thereby become immortal himself, had hastened
his days to an end, and thus prevented him from completing many other
figures, which _he_ had already _designed_, especially that of the carman
crushed and wounded beneath his demolished waggon, the wheels and horses
of which are so frightfully overthrown that as much horror is excited in
beholding their downfall, as pleasure in contemplating the lickerishness
of one of the Deaths, who is clandestinely sucking with a reed the wine in
a bursting cask.[101] That in these imperfect subjects no one had dared to
put the finishing hand, on account of the boldness of their outline,
shadow, and perspective, _delineated_ in so graceful a manner, that by its
contemplation one might indulge either in a joyful sorrow, or a melancholy
pleasure. "Let antiquaries then," says he, "and lovers of ancient imagery
discover any thing comparable to these figures of Death, in which we
behold the Empress of all living souls from the creation, trampling over
Caesars, Emperors, and Kings, and with her scythe mowing down the
tyrannical heroes of the earth." He concludes with admonishing the Abbess
to take in good part this his sad but salutary present, and to persuade
her devout nuns not only to keep it in their cells and dormitories, but in
the cabinet of their memory, therein pursuing the counsel of St. Jerom,
&c.

The singularity of this curious and interesting dedication is deserving of
the utmost attention. It seems very strongly, if not decisively, to point
out the edition to which it is prefixed, as the first; and what is of
still more importance, to deprive Holbein of any claim to the _invention_
of the work. It most certainly uses such terms of art as can scarcely be
mistaken as conveying any other sense than that of _originality in
design_. There cannot be words of plainer import than those which describe
the painter, as he is expressly called, _delineating_ the subjects, and
leaving several of them unfinished: and whoever the artist might have
been, it clearly appears that he was not living in 1538. Now it is well
known that Holbein's death did not take place before the year 1554, during
the plague which ravaged London at that time. If then the expressions used
in this dedication signify any thing, it may surely be asked what becomes
of any claim on the part of Holbein to the designs of the work in
question, or does it not _at least_ remain in a situation of doubt and
difficulty?

It is, however, with no small hesitation that the author of the present
dissertation still ventures to dispute, and even to deny, the title of
Holbein to the invention of this Dance of Death, in opposition to his
excellent and valuable friend Mr. Ottley, whose opinion in matters of
taste, as well as on the styles of the different masters in the old
schools of painting and engraving may be justly pronounced to be almost
oracular. This gentleman has thus expressed himself: "It cannot be denied
that were there nothing to oppose to this passage, it would seem to
constitute very strong evidence that Holbein, who did not die until the
year 1554, was not the author of the designs in question; but I am firmly
persuaded that it refers in reality, not to the designer, but to the
artist who had been employed, under his direction, to engrave the designs
in wood, and whose name, there appears reason to believe, was Hans
Lutzenberger.[102] Holbein, I am of opinion, had, shortly before the year
1538, sold the forty-one blocks which had been some time previously
executed, to the booksellers of Lyons, and had at the same time given him
a promise of others which he had lately designed, as a continuation of the
series, and were then in the hands of the wood-engraver. The
wood-engraver, I suppose, died before he had completed his task, and the
correspondent of the bookseller, who had probably deferred his publication
in expectation of the new blocks, wrote from Basle to Lyons to inform his
friend of the disappointment occasioned by the artist's death. It is
probable that this information was not given very circumstantially, as to
the real cause of the delay, and that the person who wrote the dedication
of the book might have believed the designer and engraver to be one and
the same person: it is still more probable that he thought the distinction
of little consequence to his reader, and willingly omitted to go into
details which would have rendered his quaint moralizing in the above
passage less admissible. Besides, the additional cuts there spoken of
(eight cuts of the Dance of Death and four of boys) were afterwards
finished (doubtless by another wood-engraver, who had been brought up
under the eye of Holbein), and are not apparently inferior, whether in
respect of design or execution to the others. In short, these designs have
always been ascribed to Holbein, and designedly ranked amongst his finest
works."[103]

Mr. Ottley having admitted that the edition of the Dance of Death, printed
in quarto, at Lyons, 1538, is the earliest with which we are at present
acquainted, proceeds to state his belief that the cuts had been previously
and _certainly_ used at Basle. He then alludes to the supposed German
edition, about the year 1530, but acknowledges that he had not been able
to meet with or hear of any person who had seen it. He next introduces to
his reader's notice, and afterwards describes at large, a set of forty-one
impressions, being the complete series of the edition of 1538, except one,
and taken off with the greatest clearness and brilliancy of effect, on one
side of the paper only, each cut having over it its title printed in the
German language, with moveable type. He thinks it possible that they may
originally have had German verses underneath, and texts of Scripture
above, in addition to the titles; a fact, he adds, not now to be
ascertained, as the margins are clipped on the sides and at bottom. He
says, it is greatly to be regretted that the blocks were never taken off
with due diligence and good printing ink, after they got into the hands of
the Lyons booksellers, and then introduces into his page two fac-similes
of these cuts so admirably copied as to be almost undistinguishable from
the originals.[104] One may, indeed, regret with Mr. Ottley the _general
carelessness_ of the old printers in their mode of taking off impressions
from blocks of wood when introducing them into their books, and which is
so very unequally practised that, as already observed, the impressions are
often clearer and more distinct in later than in preceding editions. The
works of the old designers and engravers would, in many cases, have been
much more highly appreciated, if they had had the same justice done to
them by the printers as the editorial taste and judgment of Mr. Ottley,
combined with the skill of the workmen, have obtained in the decoration of
his own book. With respect to the impressions of the cuts in question,
when the blocks were in the hands of the Lyons booksellers, the fact is,
that in some of their editions they are occasionally as fine as those
separately printed off; and at the moment of making this remark, an
edition, published in 1547, at Lyons, is before the writer, in which many
of the prints are uncommonly clear and even brilliant, a circumstance
owing, in a great degree, to the nature of the paper on which they are
impressed.

It were almost to be wished that this perplexing evidence against
Holbein's title to the invention of the work before us had never existed,
and that he had consequently been left in the quiet possession of what so
well accords with his exquisite pencil and extraordinary talents. True it
is, that the person to whom we owe this stubborn testimony, has manifested
a much more intimate acquaintance with the mode of conveying his pious
ejaculations to the Lady Abbess in the quaintest language that could
possibly have been chosen, than with the art of giving an accurate account
of the prints in question. Yet it seems scarcely possible that he should
have used the word _imagined_, which undoubtedly expresses originality of
invention, and not the mere act of copying, if he had referred to an
engraver on wood, whom he would not have dignified with the appellation of
a painter on whom he was bestowing the highest possible eulogium. There
would also have been much less occasion for the author's hyperbolical
fears on the part of Death in the case of an engraver, than in that of a
painter. He has stated that the rainbow subject, meaning probably that of
the Last Judgment, was left unfinished; but it appears among the
engravings in his edition. He must, therefore, have referred to a
painting, with which likewise the expression "bold shadows and
perspective," seem better to accord than with a slight engraving on wood.
He had also seen the subject of the waggon with the wine casks in its
unfinished state, and in this case we may almost with certainty pronounce
it to have been a painting, as the cut of it does not appear in the first
edition, furnishing, at the same time, an argument against Holbein's
claim; nor may it be unimportant to add that the dedicator, a religious
person, and probably a man of some eminence, was much more likely to have
been acquainted with the painter than with the engraver. The dedicator
also stamps the work as originating at Lyons; and Frellon, its printer, in
a complaint against a Venetian bookseller, who pirated his edition,
emphatically describes it as exclusively belonging to France.

Again, it is improbable that the dedicator, whoever he was, should have
preferred complimenting the engraver of the cuts, who, with all his
consummate skill, must, in point of rank and genius, be placed below the
painter or designer; and it is at the same time remarkable that the name
of Holbein is not adverted to in any of the early and genuine editions of
the work, published at Lyons, or any other place, whilst his designs for
the Bible have there been so pointedly noticed by his friend the poet
Borbonius.

It would be of some importance, if it could be shown, that the engraver
was dead in or before the year 1538, for that circumstance would
contribute to strengthen Mr. Ottley's opinion: but should it be found that
he did not die in or before 1538, it would follow, of course, that the
painter was the person adverted to in the dedication, and who consequently
could not be Holbein. It becomes necessary, therefore, to endeavour at
least to discover some other artist competent to the invention of the
beautiful designs in question; and whether the attempt be successful or
otherwise, it may, perhaps, be not altogether misplaced or unprofitable.

It must be recollected that Francis the First, on returning from his
captivity at Pavia, imported with him a great many Italian and other
artists, among whom were Lionardo da Vinci, Rosso, Primaticcio, &c. He is
also known to have visited Lyons, a royal city at that time eminent in art
of every kind, and especially in those of printing and engraving on wood;
as the many beautiful volumes published at that place, and embellished
with the most elegant decorations in the graphic art, will at this moment
sufficiently testify. In an edition of the "Nugae" of Nicolas Borbonius,
the friend of Holbein, printed at Lyons, 1538, 8vo. are the following
lines:

  _De Hanso Ulbio, et Georgio Reperdio, pictoribus._

  Videre qui vult Parrhasium cum Zeuxide,
      Accersat a Britannia
  Hansum Ulbium, et Georgium _Reperdium_.
      _Lugduno_ ab urbe Galliae.

In these verses Reperdius is opposed to Holbein for the excellence of his
art, in like manner as Parrhasius had been considered as the rival of
Zeuxis.

After such an eulogium it is greatly to be regretted that notwithstanding
a very diligent enquiry has been made concerning an artist, who, by the
poet's comparative view of him, is placed on the same footing with
Holbein, and probably of the same school of painting, no particulars of
his life or works have been discovered. It is clear from Borbonius's lines
that he was then living at Lyons, and it is extremely probable that he
might have begun the work in question, and have died before he could
complete it, and that the Lyons publishers might afterwards have employed
Holbein to finish what was left undone, as well as to make designs for
additional subjects which appeared in the subsequent editions. Thus would
Holbein be so connected with the work as to obtain in future such notice
as would constitute him by general report the real inventor of it. If then
there be any validity in what is here stated concerning Reperdius, the
difficulty and obscurity in the preface to the Lyons edition of the Dance
of Death in 1538 will be removed, and Holbein remain in possession of a
share at least in the composition of that inestimable work. The mark or
monogram [monogram: HL] on one of the cuts cannot possibly belong to
Holbein, but may possibly be that of the engraver, of whom more
hereafter.




CHAPTER VII.

    _Holbein's Bible cuts.--Examination of the claim of Hans Lutzenberger
    as to the design or execution of the Lyons engravings of the Dance of
    Death.--Other works by him._


At this time the celebrated designs for the illustration of the Old
Testament, usually denominated Holbein's Bible, made their appearance,
with the following title, "Historiarum veteris instrumenti icones ad vivum
expressae. Una cum brevi, sed quoad fieri potuit, dilucida earundem
expositione. Lugduni, sub scuto Coloniensi MDXXXVIII." 4to. They were
several times republished with varied titles, and two additional cuts.
Prefixed are some highly complimentary Latin verses by Holbein's friend
Nicholas Bourbon, better known by his Latinized name of Borbonius, who
again introduces Parrhasius and Zeuxis in Elysium, and in conversation
with Apelles, who laments that they had all been excelled by Holbein.

These lines by Borbonius do not appear, among others addressed by him to
Holbein, in the first edition of his "Nugae" in 1533, or indeed in any of
the subsequent editions; but it is certain that Borbonius was at Lyons in
1538, and might then have been called on by the publishers of the designs,
with whom he was intimately connected, for the commendatory verses.

The booksellers Frellon of Lyons, by some means with which we are not now
acquainted, or indeed ever likely to be, became possessed of the copyright
to these designs for the Old Testament. It is very clear that they had
previously been in possession of those for the Dance of Death, and,
finding the first four of them equally adapted to a Bible, they
accordingly, and for the purpose of saving expense, made use of them in
this Bible, though with different descriptions, having, in all
probability, employed the same engraver on wood as in the Dance of Death,
a task to which he had already demonstrated himself to be fully competent.
Now, if the Frellons had regarded Holbein as the designer of the
"Simulachres et historiees faces de la Mort," would they not rather have
introduced into that work the complimentary lines of Borbonius on _some_
painting by Holbein of a Dance of Death, and which will be hereafter more
particularly adverted to, instead of inserting the very interesting and
decisive dedication that has so emphatically referred to the then deceased
painter of the above admirable composition?

Nor is it by any means a matter of certainty that Holbein was the designer
of _all_ the wood engravings belonging to the Bible in question. Whoever
may take the pains to examine these biblical subjects with a strict and
critical eye, will not only discover a very great difference in the style
and drawing of them, but likewise a striking resemblance, in that respect,
of several of them to those in the Dance of Death, as well as in the
manner of engraving. The rest are in a bolder and broader style, in a
careless but effective manner, corresponding altogether with such designs
as are well ascertained to be Holbein's, and of which it would be
impossible to produce a single one, that in point of delicacy of outline,
or composition, accords with those in the Dance;[105] and the judgment of
those who are best acquainted with the works of Holbein is appealed to on
this occasion. It is, besides, extremely probable that the anonymous
painter or designer of the Dance might have been employed also by the
Frellons to execute a set of subjects for the Bible previously to his
Death, and that Holbein was afterwards engaged to complete the work.

A comparison of the 8th subject in the "Simulachres, &c." with that in the
Bible for Esther I. II. where the canopy ornamented with fleurs-de-lis is
the same in both, will contribute to strengthen the above conjecture, as
will both the cuts to demonstrate their Gallic origin. It is most certain
that the king sitting at table in the Simulachres is intended for Francis
I. which, if any one should doubt, let him look upon the miniature of that
king, copied at p. 214 in Clarke's "Repertorium bibliographicum," from a
drawing in a French MS. belonging to M. Beckford, or at a wood-cut in fo.
xcxix b. of "L'histoire de Primaleon de Grece." Paris, 1550, folio, where
the art in the latter will be found to resemble very much that in the
"Simulachres." The portraits also of Francis by Thomas De Leu, Boissevin,
and particularly that in the portraits of illustrious men edited by Beza
at Geneva, may be mentioned for the like purpose.

The admission in the course of the preceding remarks that Holbein might
have been employed in some of the additional cuts that appeared in the
editions of the Lyons Dance of Death which followed that of 1538, may seem
at variance with what has been advanced with respect to the Bible cuts
ascribed to him. It is, however, by no means a matter of necessity that an
artist with Holbein's talents should have been resorted to for the purpose
of designing the additional cuts to the Lyons work. There were, during the
middle of the 16th century, several artists equally competent to the
undertaking, both as to invention and execution, as is demonstrable, among
numerous other instances, from the spurious, but beautiful, Italian copy
of the original cuts; from the scarcely distinguishable copies of the
Lyons Bible cuts in an edition put forth by John Stelsius at Antwerp,
1561, and from the works of several artists, both designers and
wood-engravers, in the books published by the French, Flemish, and Italian
booksellers at that period. An interesting catalogue raisonne might be
constructed, though with some difficulty, of such articles as were
decorated with most exquisite and interesting embellishments. The above
century was much richer in this respect than any one that succeeded it,
displaying specimens of art that have only been rivalled, perhaps never
outdone, by the very skilful engravers on wood of modern times.

Our attention will, in the next place, be required to the excellent
_engraver_ of the Dance of Death, the thirty-sixth cut of which represents
the Duchess sitting up in bed, and accompanied with two figures of Death,
one of which plays on a violin, whilst the other drags away the
bed-clothes. On the base of one of the bed-posts is the mark or monogram
[monogram: HL] which has, among other artists, been inconsiderately
ascribed to Holbein. That it was intended to express the name of the
designer cannot be supported by evidence of any kind. We must then seek
for its meaning as belonging to the engraver, and whose name was, in all
probability, Hans Leuczellberger or Lutzenberger, sometimes called Franck.
M. de Mechel, the celebrated printseller and engraver at Basle, addressed
a letter to M. de Murr, in which he states that on a proof sheet of an
alphabet in the library in that city, containing several small figures of
a Dance of Death, he had found the above name. M. Brulliot remarks that he
had seen some of the letters of this alphabet, but had not perceived on
them either the name of Lutzenberger, or the mark [monogram: HL];[106] but
M. de Mechel has not said that the _mark_ was on the proof sheet, or on
the letters themselves, but only the name of Lutzenberger, adding that the
[monogram: HL] on the cut of the Duchess will throw some light on the
matter, and that Holbein, although this monogram has been usually ascribed
to him, never expressed his name by it, but used for that purpose an
[monogram: H] joined to a [monogram: B]; in which latter assertion M. de
Mechel was by no means correct.

On another alphabet of a Dance of Peasants, in the possession of the
writer of these pages, and undoubtedly by the same artists, M. de Mechel,
to whom it was shown when in England, has written in pencil, the following
memorandum: "[monogram: HL] grave par Hans (John) Lutzenberger, graveur en
patrons a Basle, vivant la au commencement du 16me siecle;" but he has
inadvertently transferred the remark to the wrong alphabet, though both
were undoubtedly the work of the same artist, as well as a third alphabet,
equally beautiful, of groups of children.

The late Pietro Zani, whose intimate experience in whatever relates to
the art of engraving, together with the vast number of prints that had
passed under his observation, must entitle his opinions to the highest
consideration, has stated, in more places than one in his "Enciclopedia
Metodica," that Holbein had no concern with the cuts of the Lyons Dance of
Death, the engraving of which he decidedly ascribes to Hans Lutzenberger;
and, without any reference to the inscription on the proof of one of the
alphabets in the library at Basle before-mentioned, which he had probably
neither seen nor heard of, mentions the copy of one of the alphabets which
he had seen at Dresden, and at once consigns it to Lutzenberger. He
promises to resume the subject at large in some future part of his immense
work, which, if existing, has not yet made its appearance.

As the prints by this fine engraver are very few in number, and extremely
rare, the following list of them may not be unacceptable.

1. An oblong wood engraving, in length 11 inches by 3-1/2. It represents,
on one side, Christ requiring the attention of a group of eight persons,
consisting of a monk, a peasant with a flail, a female, &c. to a lighted
taper on a candelabrum placed in the middle of the print; on the other
side, a group of thirteen or fourteen persons, preceded by one who is
looking into a pit in which is the word PLATO. Over his head is inscribed
ARISTOTELES; he is followed by a pope, a bishop, monks, &c. &c.

2. Another oblong wood engraving, 6-1/2 inches by 2-1/2, in two
compartments, divided by a pillar. In one, the Judgment of Solomon; in the
other, Christ and the woman taken in adultery; he writes something on the
ground with his finger. It has the date 1539.

3. Another, size as No. 2. An emperor is sitting in a court of justice
with several spectators attending some trial. This is doubtful.

4. Another oblong print, 10-1/2 inches by 3, and in two compartments. 1.
David prostrate before the Deity in the clouds, accompanied by Manasses
and a youth, over whom is inscribed OFFEN SVNDER. 2. A pope on a throne
delivering some book, perhaps letters of indulgence, to a kneeling monk.
This very beautiful print has been called "The Traffic of Indulgences,"
and is minutely and correctly described by Jansen.[107]

5. A print, 12 inches by 6, representing a combat in a wood between
several naked persons and a troop of peasants armed with instruments of
husbandry. Below on the left, the letters [monogram: H =N=]. Annexed are
two tablets, one of which is inscribed HANS LEVCZELLBVRGER FVRMSCHNIDER;
on the other is an alphabet. Jansen has also mentioned this print.[108]
Brulliot describes a copy of it in the cabinet of prints belonging to the
King of Bavaria, in which, besides the name, is the date MDXXII.[109]

6. A print of a dagger or knife case, in length 9 inches. At top, a figure
inscribed VENVS has a lighted torch in one hand and a horn in the other;
she is accompanied by Cupid. In the middle two boys are playing, and at
bottom three others standing, one with a helmet.

7. A copy of Albert Durer's decollation of John the Baptist, with the mark
[monogram: H L] reversed, is mentioned by Zani as certainly belonging to
this artist.[110] In the index of names, he says, he finds his name thus
written HANNS LVTZELBVRGER FORMSCHNIDER GENANT (chiamato) FRANCK, and
calls him the true prince of engravers on wood.

8. An alphabet with a Dance of Death, the subjects of which, with a few
exceptions, are the same as those in the other Dance; the designs,
however, occasionally vary. In delicacy of drawing, in strength of
character and in skill as to engraving they may be justly pronounced
superior to every thing of the kind, and their excellence will probably
remain a long time unrivalled. The figures are so small as almost to
require the aid of lenses, the size of each letter being only an inch
square. Zani had seen and admired this alphabet at Dresden.[111]

9. Another alphabet by the same artists. It is a Dance of Peasants,
intermixed with other subjects, some of which are not of the most delicate
nature. They are smaller than the letters in the preceding article, and
are probably connected in point of design with the Dance of Peasants that
Holbein is said to have painted at Basle.

10. Another alphabet, also by the same artists. This is in all respects
equal in beauty and merit to the others, and exhibits groups of boys in
the most amusing and playful attitudes and employments. The size of the
letters is little more than half an inch square. These children much
resemble those which Holbein probably added to the later editions of the
Lyons engravings.[112]

The proofs of the above alphabets, may have been deposited by Lutzenberger
in the public library of his native city. Whether they were cut on wood or
on metal may admit of a doubt; but there is reason to believe that the old
printers and type-cutters occasionally used blocks of metal instead of
wood for their figured initial letters, and the term _formschneider_
equally applies to those who engraved in relief on either of those
materials. Nothing can exceed the beauty and spirit of the design in these
alphabets, nor the extreme delicacy and accurate minuteness of the
engraving.

The letters in these respective alphabets were intended for the use of
printers, and especially those of Basle, as Cratander, Bebelius, and
Isingrin. Copies and imitations of them are to be found in many books
printed at Zurich, Strasburg, Vienna, Augsburg, Frankfort, &c. and a few
even in books printed at London by Waley, Purslowe, Marsh, and Nicholson,
particularly in a quarto edition of Coverdale's Bible, if printed in the
latter city; and one of them, a capital A, is in an edition of Stowe's
Survey of London, 1618, 4to.

There is an unfortunate ambiguity connected with the marks that are found
on ancient engravings in wood, and it has been a very great error on the
part of all the writers who treat on such engravings, in referring the
marks that accompany them to the block-cutters, or as the Germans properly
denominate them the _formschneiders_, whilst, perhaps, the greatest part
of them really belong to the designers, as is undoubtedly the case with
respect to Albert Durer, Hans Schaufelin, Jost Amman, Tobias Stimmer, &c.
It may be laid down as a rule that there is no certainty as to the marks
of engravers, except where they are accompanied with some implement of
their art, especially a graving tool. Where the designer of the subject
put his mark on the drawing which he made on, or for, the block, the
engraver would, of course, copy it. Sometimes the marks of both designer
and engraver are found on prints, and in these cases the ambiguity is
consequently removed.




CHAPTER VIII.

    _List of several editions of the Lyons work on the Dance of Death,
    with the mark of Lutzenberger.--Copies of them on wood.--Copies on
    copper by anonymous artists.--By Wenceslaus Hollar.--Other anonymous
    artists.--Nieuhoff Picard.--Rusting.--Mechel.--Crozat's
    drawings.--Deuchar.--Imitations of some of the subjects._


I.

"Les Simulachres et historiees faces de la Mort, autant elegamment
pourtraictes, que artificiellement imaginees. A Lyon, Soubz l'escu de
Coloigne, MDXXXVIII." At the end "Excudebant Lugduni Melchior et Gaspar
Trechsel fratres, 1538," 4to. On this title-page is a cut of a
triple-headed figure crowned with wings, on a pedestal, over which a book
with [Greek: GNOTHI SEAUTON]. Below, two serpents and two globes, with
"usus me genuit." This has, 1. A dedication to Madame Jehanne de Touszele.
2. Diverses tables de mort, non painctes, mais extraictes de l'escripture
saincte, colorees par Docteurs Ecclesiastiques, et umbragees par
philosophes. 3. Over each print, passages from scripture, allusive to the
subject, in Latin, and at bottom the substance of them in four French
verses. 4. Figures de la mort moralement descriptes et depeinctes selon
l'authorite de l'scripture, et des Sainctz Peres. 5. Les diverses mors des
bons, et des maulvais du viel, et nouveau testament. 6. Des sepultures des
justes. 7. Memorables authoritez, et sentences des philosophes, et
orateurs Payens pour conformer les vivans a non craindre la mort. 7. De la
necessite de la mort qui ne laisse riens estre par durable." With
forty-one cuts. This may be safely regarded as the first edition of the
work. There is nothing in the title page that indicates any preceding one.

II. "Les Simulachres et historiees faces de la mort, contenant la Medecine
de l'ame, utile et necessaire non seulement aux malades mais a tous qui
sont en bonne disposition corporelle. D'avantage, la forme et maniere de
consoler les malades. Sermon de sainct Cecile Cyprian, intitule de
Mortalite. Sermon de S. Jan Chrysostome, pour nous exhorter a patience:
traictant aussi de la consommation de ce siecle, et du second advenement
de Jesus Christ, de la joye eternelle des justes, de la peine et damnation
des mauvais, et autres choses necessaires a un chascun chrestien, pour
bien vivre et bien mourir. A Lyon, a l'escu de Coloigne, chez Jan et
Francois Frellon freres," 1542, 12mo. With forty-one cuts. Then a moral
epistle to the reader, in French. The descriptions of the cuts in Latin
and French as before, and the pieces expressed in the title page.

III. "Imagines Mortis. His accesserunt, Epigrammata, e Gallico idiomate a
Georgio AEmylio in Latinum translata. Ad haec, Medicina animae, tam iis qui
firma, quam qui adversa corporis valetudine praediti sunt, maxime
necessaria. Ratio consolandi ob morbi gravitatem periculose decumbentes.
Quae his addita sunt, sequens pagina commonstrabit. Lugduni, sub scuto
Coloniensi, 1545." With the device of the crab and the butterfly. At the
end, "Lugduni Excudebant Joannes et Franciscus Frellonii fratres," 1545,
12mo. The whole of the text is in Latin, and translated, except the
scriptural passages, from the French, by George AEmylius, as he also states
in some verses at the beginning; but several of the mottoes at bottom are
different and enlarged. It has forty-two cuts, the additional one,
probably not by the former artist, being that of the beggar sitting on the
ground before an arched gate: extremely fine, particularly the beggar's
head. This subject has no connection with the Dance of Death, and is
placed in another part of the volume, though in subsequent editions
incorporated with the other prints. The "Medicina animae" is very different
from the French one. There is some reason for supposing that the Frellons
had already printed an edition with AEmylius's text in 1542. This person
was an eminent German divine of Mansfelt, and the author of many pious
works. In the present edition the first cut of the creation exhibits a
crack in the block from the top to the bottom, but it had been in that
state in 1543, as appears from an impression of it in Holbein's Bible of
that date. It is found so in all the subsequent editions of the present
work, with the exception of those in Italian of 1549 and in the Bible of
1549, in which the crack appears to have been closed, probably by
cramping; but the block again separated afterwards.

This edition is of some importance with respect to the question as to the
priority of the publication of the work in France or Germany, or, in other
words, whether at Lyons or Basle. It is accompanied by some lines
addressed to the reader, which begin in the following manner:

  Accipe jucundo praesentia carmina vultu,
    Seu Germane legis, sive ea Galle legis:
  In quibus extremae qualis sit mortis imago
    Reddidit imparibus Musa Latina modis
  _Gallia quae dederat lepidis epigrammata verbis
    Teutona convertens est imitata manus._
  Da veniam nobis doctissime Galle, videbis
    Versibus appositis reddita si qua parum.

Now, had the work been originally published in the German language,
AEmylius, himself a German, would, as already observed, scarcely have
preferred a French text for his Latin version. This circumstance furnishes
likewise, an argument against the supposed existence of German verses at
the bottom of the early impressions of the cuts already mentioned.

A copy of this edition, now in the library of the British Museum, was
presented to Prince Edward by Dr. William Bill, accompanied with a Latin
dedication, dated from Cambridge, 19 July, 1546, wherein he recommends the
prince's attention to the figures in the book, in order to remind him that
all must die to obtain immortality; and enlarges on the necessity of
living well. He concludes with a wish that the Lord will long and happily
preserve his life, and that he may finally reign to all eternity with his
_most Christian father_. Bill was appointed one of the King's chaplains in
ordinary, 1551, and was made the first Dean of Westminster in the reign of
Elizabeth.

IV. "Imagines Mortis. Duodecim imaginibus praeter priores, totidemque
inscriptionibus praeter epigrammata e Gallicis a Georgio AEmylio in Latinum
versa, cumulatae. Quae his addita sunt, sequens pagina commonstrabit.
Lugduni sub scuto Coloniensi, 1547." With the device of the crab and
butterfly. At the end, "Excudebat Joannes Frellonius, 1547," 12mo. This
edition has twelve more cuts than those of 1538 and 1542, and eleven more
than that of 1545, being, the soldier, the gamblers, the drunkards, the
fool, the robber, the blind man, the wine carrier, and four of boys. In
all fifty-three. Five of the additional cuts have a single line only in
the frames, whilst the others have a double one. All are nearly equal in
merit to those which first appeared in 1538.

V. "Icones Mortis, Duodecim imaginibus praeter priores, totidemque
inscriptionibus, praeter epigrammata e Gallicis a Georgio AEmylio in Latinum
versa, cumulatae. Quae his addita sunt, sequens pagina commonstrabit,
Lugduni sub scuto Coloniensi, 1547." 12mo. At the end, Excudebat Johannes
Frellonius, 1547. This edition contains fifty-three cuts, and is precisely
similar to the one described immediately before, except that it is
entitled _Icones_, instead of _Imagines_ Mortis.

VI. "Les Images de la Mort. Auxquelles sont adjoustees douze figures.
Davantage, la medecine de l'ame, la consolation des malades, un sermon de
mortalite, par Sainct Cyprian, un sermon de patience, par Sainct Jehan
Chrysostome. A Lyon. A l'escu de Cologne, chez Jehan Frellon, 1547." With
the device of the crab and butterfly. At the end, "Imprime a Lyon a l'escu
de Coloigne, par Jehan Frellon, 1547. 12mo." The verses at bottom of the
cuts the same as in the edition of 1538, with similar ones for the
additional. In all, fifty-three cuts.

VII. "Simolachri historie, e figure de la morte. La medicina de l'anima.
Il modo, e la via di consolar gl'infermi. Un sermone di San Cipriano, de
la mortalita. Due orationi, l'un a Dio, e l'altra a Christo. Un sermone di
S. Giovan. Chrisostomo, che ci essorta a patienza. Aiuntovi di nuovo molte
figure mai piu stampate. In Lyone appresso Giovan Frellone MDXLIX." 12mo.
With the device of the crab and butterfly. At the end, the same device on
a larger scale in a circle. Fifty-three cuts. The scriptural passages are
in Latin. To this edition Frellon has prefixed a preface, in which he
complains of a pirated copy of the work in Italian by a printer at Venice,
which will be more particularly noticed hereafter. He maintains that the
cuts in this spurious edition are far less beautiful than the _French_
ones, and this passage goes very far in aid of the argument that they are
not of German origin. Frellon, by way of revenge, and to save the trouble
of making a new translation of the articles that compose the volume, makes
use of that of his Italian competitor.

VIII. "Icones Mortis. Duodecim Imaginibus praeter priores, totidemque
inscriptionibus, praeter epigrammata e Gallicis a Georgio AEmylio in Latinum
versa, cumulatae. Quae his addita sunt, sequens pagina commonstrabit.
Basileae, 1554. 12mo." With fifty-three cuts. It would not be very easy to
account for the absence of the name of the Basle printer.

IX. "Les Images de la Mort, auxquelles sont adjoustees dix sept figures.
Davantage, la medecine de l'ame. La consolation des malades. Un sermon de
mortalite, par Saint Cyprian. Un sermon de patience, par Saint Jehan
Chrysostome. A Lyon, par Jehan Frellon, 1562." With the device of the crab
and butterfly. At the end, "A Lyon, par Symphorien Barbier," 12mo. This
edition has five additional cuts, viz. 1. A group of boys, as a triumphal
procession, with military trophies. 2. The bride; the husband plays on a
lute, whilst Death leads the wife in tears. 3. The bridegroom led by Death
blowing a trumpet. Both these subjects are appropriately described in the
verses below. 4. A group of boy warriors, one on horseback with a
standard. 5. Another group of boys with drums, horns, and trumpets. These
additional cuts are designed and engraved in the same masterly style as
the others, but it is now impossible to ascertain the artists who have
executed them. From the decorations to several books published at Lyons it
is very clear that there were persons in that city capable of the task.
Holbein had been dead eight years, after a long residence in London.

Du Verdier, in his Bibliotheque Francoise, mentions this edition, and adds
that it was translated from the French into Latin, Italian, Spanish,
German, and English;[113] a statement that stands greatly in need of
confirmation as to the last three languages, but this writer, on too many
occasions, deserves but small compliment for his accuracy.

X. "Imagines Mortis: item epigrammata e Gall. a G. AEmilio in Latinum
versa. Lugdun. Frellonius, 1574." 12mo.[114]

XI. In 1654 a Dutch work appeared with the following title, "De Doodt
vermaskert met swerelts ydelheyt afghedaen door G. V. Wolsschaten,
verciert met de constighe Belden vanden maerden Schilder Hans Holbein.
_i. e._ Death masked, with the world's vanity, by G. V. Wolsschaten,
ornamented with the ingenious images of the famous painter Hans Holbein.
T'Antwerpen, by Petrus Bellerus." This is on an engraved frontispiece of
tablet, over which are spread a man's head and the skin of two arms
supported by two Deaths blowing trumpets. Below, a spade, a pilgrim's
staff, a scepter, and a crosier, with a label, on which is "sceptra
ligonibus aequat." Then follows another title-page, with the same words,
and the addition of Geeraerdt Van Wolsschaten's designation, "Prevost van
sijne conincklijcke Majesteyts Munten des Heertoogdoms van Brabant, &c.
MDCLIV." 12mo. The author of the text, which is mixed up with poetry and
historical matter, was prefect of the mint in the Duchy of Brabant.[115]
This edition contains eighteen cuts, among which the following subjects
are from the original blocks. 1. Three boys. 2. The married couple. 3. The
pedlar. 4. The shipwreck. 5. The beggar. 6. The corrupt judge. 7. The
astrologer. 8. The old man. 9. The physician. 10. The priest with the
eucharist. 11. The monk. 12. The abbess. 13. The abbot. 14. The duke. Four
others, viz. the child, the emperor, the countess, and the pope, are
copies, and very badly engraved. The blocks of the originals appear to
have fallen into the hands of an artist, who probably resided at Antwerp,
and several of them have his mark, [monogram: SA], concerning which more
will be said under one of the ensuing articles. As many engravings on wood
by this person appeared in the middle of the sixteenth century, it is
probable that he had already used these original blocks in some edition of
the Dance of Death that does not seem to have been recorded. There are
evident marks of retouching in these cuts, but when they first appeared
cannot now be ascertained. The mark might have been placed on them, either
to denote ownership, according to the usual practice at that time, or to
indicate that they had been repaired by that particular artist.

All these editions, except that of 1574, have been seen and carefully
examined on the present occasion: the supposed one of 1530 has not been
included in this list, and remains to be seen and accurately described, if
existing, by competent witnesses.

Papillon, in his Traite de la gravure en bois, has given an elaborate,
but, as usual with him, a very faulty description of these engravings. He
enlarges on the beauty of the last cut with the allegorical coat of arms,
and particularly on that of the gentleman whose right hand he states to be
placed on its side, whilst it certainly is extended, and touches with the
back of it the mantle on which the helmet and shield of arms are placed.
He errs likewise in making the female look towards a sort of dog's head,
according to him, under the mantle and right hand of her husband, which,
he adds, might be taken for the pummell of his sword, and that she fondles
this head with her right hand, &c. not one word of which is correct. He
says that a good impression of this print would be well worth a Louis d'or
to an amateur. He appears to have been in possession of the block
belonging to the subject of the lovers preceded by Death with a drum; but
it had been spoiled by the stroke of a plane.


COPIES OF THE ABOVE DESIGNS, AND ENGRAVED ALSO ON WOOD.

I. At the head of these, in point of merit, must be placed the Italian
spurious edition mentioned in No. VII. of the preceding list. It is
entitled "Simolachri historie, e figure de la morte, ove si contiene la
medicina de l'anima utile e necessaria, non solo a gli ammalati, ma tutte
i sani. Et appresso, il modo, e la via di consolar gl'infermi. Un sermone
di S. Cipriano, de la mortalita. Due orationi, l'una a Dio, e l'altra a
Christo da dire appresso l'ammalato oppresso da grave infermita. Un
sermone di S. Giovan Chrisostomo, che ci essorta a patienza; e che tratta
de la consumatione del secolo presente, e del secondo avenimento di Jesu
Christo, de la eterna felicita de giusti, de la pena e dannatione de rei;
et altre cose necessarie a ciascun Christiano, per ben vivere, e ben
morire. Con gratia e privilegio de l'illustriss. Senato Vinitiano, per
anni dieci. Appresso Vincenzo Vaugris al segno d'Erasmo, MDXLV." 12mo.
With a device of the brazen serpent, repeated at the end. It has all the
cuts in the genuine edition of the same date, except that of the beggar at
the gate. It contains a very moral dedication to Signor Antonio Calergi by
the publisher Vaugris or Valgrisi; in which, with unjustifiable
confidence, he enlarges on the great beauty of the work, the cuts in which
are, in his estimation, not merely equal, but far superior to those in the
French edition in design and engraving. They certainly approach the
nearest to the fine originals of all the imitations, but will be found on
comparison to be inferior. The mark [monogram: HL] on the cut of the
duchess sitting up in bed, with the two Deaths, one of whom is fiddling,
whilst the other pulls at the clothes, is retained, but this could not be
with a view to pass these engravings as originals, after what is stated in
the dedication. An artist's eye will easily perceive the difference in
spirit and decision of drawing. In the ensuing year 1546, Valgrisi
republished this book in Latin, but without the dedication, and there are
impressions of them on single sheets, one of which has at the bottom, "In
Venetia, MDLXVIII. Fra. Valerio Faenzi Inquis. Apreso Luca Bertelli." So
that they required a license from the Inquisition.

II. In the absence of any other Italian editions of the "Simolachri," it
is necessary to mention that twenty-four of the last-mentioned cuts were
introduced in a work of extreme rarity, and which has escaped the notice
of bibliographers, intitled "Discorsi Morali dell' eccell. Sig. Fabio
Glissenti contra il dispiacer del morire. Detto Athanatophilia Venetia,
1609." 4to. These twenty-four were probably all that then remained; and
five others of subjects belonging also to the "Simolachri," are inserted
in this work, but very badly imitated, and two of them reversed. In the
subject of the Pope there is in the original a brace of grotesque devils,
one of which is completely erased in Glissenti, and a plug inserted where
the other had been scooped out. A similar rasure of a devil occurs in the
subject of the two rich men in conversation, the demon blowing with a
bellows into his ear, whilst a poor beggar in vain touches him to be
heard. Besides these cuts, Glissenti's work is ornamented with a great
number of others, connected in some way or other with the subject of
Death, which the author discusses in almost every possible variety of
manner. He appears to have been a physician, and an exceedingly pious man.
His portrait is prefixed to every division of the work, which consists of
five dialogues.

III. In an anonymous work, intitled "Tromba sonora per richiamar i morti
viventi dalla tomba della colpa alla vita della gratia. In Venetia, 1670."
8vo. Of which there had already been three editions; there are six of the
prints from the originals, as in the "Simolachri," &c. No. I. and a few
others, the same as the additional ones to Glissenti's work.

In another volume, intitled "Il non plus ultra di tutte le scienze
ricchezze honori, e diletti del mondo, &c. In Venetia, 1677." 24mo. There
are twenty-five of the cuts as in the Simolachri, and several others from
those added to Glissenti.

IV. A set of cuts which do not seem to have belonged to any work. They are
very close copies of the originals. On the subject of the Duchess in bed,
the letter [monogram: S] appears on the base of one of the pillars or
posts, instead of the original [monogram: HL], and it is also seen on the
cut of the soldier pierced by the lance of Death. Two have the date 1546.
In that of the monk, whom, in the original, Death seizes by the cowl or
hood, the artist has made a whimsical alteration, by converting the hood
into a fool's cap with bells and asses' ears, and the monk's wallet into a
fool's bauble. It is probable that he was of the reformed religion.

V. "Imagines Mortis, his accesserunt epigrammata e Gallico idiomate a
Georgio AEmylio in Latinum translata, &c. Coloniae apud haeredes Arnoldi
Birckmanni, anno 1555. 12mo." With fifty-three cuts. This may be regarded
as a surreptitious edition of No. IV. of the originals by [monogram: HL]
p. 106. The cuts are by the artist mentioned in No. IX. of those
originals, whose mark is [monogram: SA] which is here found on five of
them. They are all reversed, except the nobleman; and although not devoid
of merit, they are not only very inferior to the fine originals, but also
to the Italian copies in No. I. The first two subjects are newly designed;
the two Devils in that of the Pope are omitted, and there are several
variations, always for the worse, in many of the others, of which a
tasteless example is found in that of Death and the soldier, where the
thigh bone, as the very appropriate weapon of Death, is here converted
into the common-place dart. The mark [monogram: HL] in the original cut of
the Duchess in bed, is here omitted, without the substitution of any
other. This edition was republished by the same persons, without any
variation, successively in 1557, 1566, 1567, and 1573.[116]

Papillon, in his "Traite sur la gravure en bois,"[117] when noticing the
above-mentioned mark, has, amidst the innumerable errors that abound in
his otherwise curious work, been led into a mistake of an exceedingly
ludicrous nature, by converting the owner of the mark into a cardinal. He
had found it on the cuts to an edition of Faerno's fables, printed at
Antwerp, 1567, which is dedicated to Cardinal Borromeo by Silvio
Antoniano, professor of Belles Lettres at Rome, afterwards secretary to
Pope Pius IV. and at length himself a Cardinal. He was the editor of
Faerno's work. Another of Papillon's blunders is equally curious and
absurd. He had seen an edition of the Emblems of Sambucus, with cuts,
bearing the mark [monogram: SA] in which there is a fine portrait of the
author with his favourite dog, and under the latter the word BOMBO, which
Papillon gravely states to be the name of the engraver; and finding the
same word on another of the emblems which has also the dog, he concludes
that all the cuts which have not the [monogram: SA] were engraved by the
same BOMBO. Had Papillon, a good artist in his time, but an ignorant man,
been able to comprehend the verses belonging to that particular emblem, he
would have seen that the above word was merely the name of the dog, as
Sambucus himself has declared, whilst paying a laudable tribute to the
attachment of the faithful companion of his travels. Brulliot, in his
article on the mark [monogram: SA][118] has mentioned Papillon's ascription
of it to Silvio Antoniano, but without correcting the blunder, as he ought
to have done. This monogram appears on five of the cuts to the present
edition of the "Imagines Mortis;" but M. De Murr and his follower Janssen,
are not warranted in supposing the rest of them to have been engraved by a
different artist.

It will perhaps not be deemed an unimportant digression to introduce a few
remarks concerning the owner of the above monogram. It is by no means
clear whether he was a designer or an engraver, or even both. There is a
chiaroscuro print of a group of saints, engraved by Peter Kints, an
obscure artist, with the name of Antony Sallaerts at length, and the mark.
Here he appears as a designer. M. Malpe, the Besancon author of "Notices
sur les graveurs," speaks of Sallaerts as an excellent painter, born at
Brussels about 1576, which date cannot possibly apply to the artist in
question; but at the same time, he adds, that he is said to have engraved
on wood the cuts in a little catechism printed at Antwerp that have the
monogram [monogram: SA]. These are certainly very beautiful, in accordance
with many others with the same mark, and very superior in design to those
which have it in the "Imagines Mortis." M. Malpe has also an article for
Antony Silvyus or Silvius, born at Antwerp about 1525, and he mentions
several books with engravings and the mark in question, which he gives to
the same person. M. Brulliot expresses a doubt as to this artist; but it
is very certain there was a family of that name, and surnamed, or at least
sometimes called, Bosche or Bush, which indeed is more likely to have been
the real Flemish name Latinized into Silvius. Foppens[119] has mentioned
an Antony Silvius, a schoolmaster at Antwerp, in 1565, and several other
members of this family. Two belonging to it were engravers, and another a
writing master.

Whether the artist in question was a Sallaerts or a Silvius, it is certain
that Plantin, the celebrated printer, employed him to decorate several of
his volumes, and it is to be regretted that an unsuccessful search has
been made for him in Plantin's account books, that were not long since
preserved, with many articles belonging to him, in his house at Antwerp.
His mark also appears in several books printed in England during the reign
of Elizabeth, and particularly on a beautiful set of initial letters, some
of which contain the story of Cupid and Psyche, from the supposed designs
by Raphael, and other subjects from Ovid's Metamorphoses: these have been
counterfeited, and perhaps in England. The initial [monogram: G], in this
alphabet, with the subject of Leda and the swan, was inadvertently
prefixed to the sacred name at the beginning of St. Paul's Epistle to the
Hebrews in the Bishop's Bible, printed by Rd. Jugge in 1572, and in one of
his Common Prayer Books. An elegant portrait of Edward VI. with the mark
[monogram: SA] is likewise on Jugge's edition of the New Testament, 1552,
4to. and there is reason to believe that Jugge employed this artist, as
the same monogram appears on a cut of his device of the pelican.

VI. In the German volume, the title of which is already given in the first
article of the engravings from the Basle painting,[120] there are
twenty-nine subjects belonging to the present work; the rest relating to
the Basle dance, except two or three that are not in either of them. These
have fallen into the hands of a modern bookseller, but there can be no
doubt that there were other editions which contained the whole set. The
most of them have the letters [monogram: G. S.] with the graving tool, and
one has the date 1576. The name of this artist is unknown; but M. Bartsch
has mentioned several other engravings by him, omitting, however, the
present, which, it is to be observed, sometimes vary in design from the
originals.

VII. "Imagines Mortis illustratae epigrammatis Georgii AEmylii theol.
doctoris. Fraxineus AEmylio Suo. Criminis ut poenam mortem mors sustulit
una: sic te immortalem mortis imago facit." With a cut of Death and the
old man. This is the middle part only of a work, intitled "Libellus
Davidis Chytraei de morte et vita aeterna. Editio postrema; cui additae sunt
imagines mortis, illustrata Epigrammatis D. Georgio AEmylio, Witebergae.
Impressus a Matthaeo Welack, anno MDXC." 12mo. The cuts, fifty-three in
number, are, on the whole, tolerably faithful, but coarsely engraved. In
the subject of the Pope the two Devils are omitted, and, in that of the
Counsellor, the Demon blowing with a bellows into his ear is also wanting.
Some have the mark [monogram: cross], and one that of [monogram: W] with a
knife or graving tool.

VIII. "Todtentanz durch alle stendt der menschen, &c. furgebildet mit
figuren. S. Gallen, 1581." 4to. See Janssen, Essai sur l'origine de la
gravure, i. 122, who seems to make them copies of the originals.

IX. The last article in this list of the old copies, though prior in date
to some of the preceding, is placed here as differing materially from them
with respect to size. It is a small folio, with the following title,
"Todtentantz,

  Das menschlichs leben anders nicht
    Dann nur ain lauff zum Tod
  Und Got ain nach seim glauben richt
    Dess findstu klaren tschaid
  O Mensch hicrinn mit andacht lisz
    Und fassz zu hertzen das
  So wirdsttu Ewigs hayls gewisz
    Kanst sterben dester bas.

  MDXLIIII.

  Desine longaevos exposcere sedulus annos
    Inque bonis multos annumerare dies
  Atque hodie, fatale velit si rumpere filum
    Atropos, impavido pectore disce mori."

At the end, "Gedruckt inn der kaiserlichen Reychstatt Augspurg durch Jobst
Denecker Formschneyder." This edition is not only valuable for its extreme
rarity, but for the very accurate and spirited manner in which the fine
original cuts are copied. It contains all the subjects that were then
published, but not arranged as those had been. It has the addition of one
singular print, intitled "Der Eebrecher," _i. e._ the Adulterer,
representing a man discovering the adulterer in bed with his wife, and
plunging his sword through both of them, Death guiding his hands. On the
opposite page to each engraving there is a dialogue between Death and the
party, and at bottom a Latin hexameter. The subject of the Pleader has the
unknown mark [monogram], and on that of the Duchess in bed, there is the
date 1542. From the above colophon we are to infer that Dennecker, or as
he is sometimes, and perhaps more properly, called De Necker or De Negher,
was the engraver, as he is known to have executed many other engravings on
wood, especially for Hans Schaufelin, with whom he was connected. He was
also employed in the celebrated triumph of Maximilian, and in a collection
of saints, to whom the family of that emperor was related.

X. "Emblems of Mortality, representing, in upwards of fifty cuts, Death
seizing all ranks and degrees of people, &c. Printed for T. Hodgson, in
George's Court, St. John's Lane, Clerkenwell, 1789. 12mo." With an
historical essay on the subject, and translations of the Latin verses in
the Imagines Mortis, by John Sidney Hawkins, esq. The cuts were engraved
by the brother of the celebrated Bewick, of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and a
pupil of Hodgson, who was an engraver on wood of some merit at that time.
They are but indifferently executed, but would have been better had the
artist been more liberally encouraged by the master, who was the publisher
on his own account, Mr. Hawkins very kindly furnishing the letter-press.
They are faithful copies of all the originals, except the first, which,
containing a figure of the Deity habited as a Pope, was scrupulously
exchanged for another design. A frontispiece is added, representing Death
leading up all classes of men and women.

XI. "The Dance of Death of the celebrated Hans Holbein, in a series of
fifty-two engravings on wood by Mr. Bewick, with letter-press
illustrations.

                  What's yet in this
  That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
  Lie hid more thousand Deaths: yet Death we fear,
  That makes these odds all even.
                                  SHAKSPEARE.

London. William Charlton Wright." 12mo. With a frontispiece, partly copied
from that in the preceding article, a common-place life of Holbein, and an
introduction pillaged verbatim from an edition with Hollar's cuts,
published by Mr. Edwards. The cuts, with two or three exceptions, are
imitated from the originals, but all the human figures are ridiculously
modernised. The text to the subjects is partly descriptions in prose, and
partly Mr. Hawkins's verses, and the cuts, if Bewick's, very inferior to
those in his other works.

XII. "Emblems of Mortality, representing Death seizing all ranks and
degrees of people. Imitated in a series of wood cuts from a painting in
the cemetery of the Dominican church at Basil in Switzerland, with
appropriate texts of scripture, and a poetical apostrophe to each, freely
translated from the Latin and French. London. Printed for Whittingham and
Arliss, juvenile library, Paternoster-row." 12mo. The frontispiece and the
rest of the cuts, with two exceptions, from the same blocks as those used
for the last-mentioned edition. The preface, with very slight variation,
is abridged from that by Mr. Hawkins in No. VIII. and the descriptive
verses altogether the same as those in that edition. Both the last
articles seem intended for popular and juvenile use. It will be
immediately perceived that the title page is erroneous in confounding the
Basle Dance of Death with that in the volume itself.

XIII. The last in this list is "Hans Holbein's Todtentanz in 53 getreu
nach den holtz schnitten lithographirten Blattern. Herausgegeben von J.
Schlotthauer, K. Professor. Mit erklaerendem Texte. Munschen, 1832. Auf
kosten des Herausgebers," 12mo. or, "Hans Holbein's Dance of Death in
fifty-three lithographic leaves, faithfully taken from wood engravings.
Published by J. Schlotthauer, royal professor, with explanatory text.
Munich, 1832. At the cost of the editors." This work is executed in so
beautiful and accurate a manner that it might easily be mistaken for the
wood originals.

The professor has substituted German verses, communicated by a friend,
instead of the former Latin ones. He states that the subject will be taken
up by Professor Massman, of Munich, whose work will satisfy all enquiries
relating to it. Massman, however, has added to this volume a sort of
explanatory appendix, in which some of the editions are mentioned. He
thinks it possible that the cholera may excite the same attention to this
work as the plague had formerly excited to the old Macaber Dance at Basle,
and concludes with a promise to treat the subject more at large at some
future time.


COPIES OF THE SAME DESIGNS, ENGRAVED IN COPPER.

I. "Todten Dantz durch alle stande und Beschlecht der Menschen, &c."
_i. e._ "Death's Dance through all ranks and conditions of men." This
title is on a frontispiece representing a gate of rustic architecture, at
the top of which are two boy angels with emblems of mortality between
them, and underneath are the three Fates. At the bottom, Adam and Eve with
the tree of knowledge, each holding the apple presented by the serpent.
Between them is a circular table, on which are eight sculls of a Pope,
Emperor, Cardinal, &c. with appropriate mottoes in Latin. On the outer
edge of the table STATVTVM EST OMNIBVS HOMINIBVS SEMEL MORI POST HOC AVTEM
IVDICIVM. In the centre the letters MVS, the terminating syllable of each
motto. Before the gate are two pedestals, inscribed MEMENTO MORI and
MEMORARE NOVISSIMA, on which stand figures of Death supporting two
pyramids or obelisks surmounted with sculls and a cross, and inscribed
ITER AD VITAM. Below, "Eberh. Kieser excudit." This frontispiece is a copy
of a large print engraved on wood long before. Without date, in quarto.

The work consists of sixty prints within borders of flowers, &c. in the
execution of which two different and anonymous artists have been employed.
At the top of each print is the name of the subject, accompanied with a
passage from scripture, and at the bottom three couplets of German verses.
Most of the subjects are copied from the completest editions of the Lyons
cuts, with occasional slight variations. They are not placed in the same
order, and all are reversed, except Nos. 57 and 60. No. 12 is not
reversed, but very much altered, a sort of duplicate of the Miser. No. 50,
the Jew, and No. 51, the Jewess, are entirely new. The latter is sitting
at a table, on which is a heap of money, and Death appears to be giving
effective directions to a demon to strangle her. No. 52 is also new. A
castle within a hedge. Death enters one of the windows by a ladder, whilst
a woman looks out of another.[121] The subject is from Jeremiah, ch. ix.
v. 21. "Death is come up into our windows, &c." In the subject of the
Pope, the two Devils are omitted. Two military groups of boys, newly
designed, are added. The following are copies from Aldegrever, Nos. 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 11, and 12. At the beginning and end of the book there are moral
poems in the German language.

II. Another edition of the same cuts. The title-page of the copy here
described is unfortunately lost. It has a dedication in Latin to three
patricians of Frankfort on the Maine by Daniel Meisner a Commenthaw, Boh.
Poet. L. C. dated, according to the Roman capitals, in a passage from
Psalm 46, in the year 1623. This is followed by the Latin epigram, or
address to the reader, by Geo. AEmylius, whose translations of the original
French couplets are also given, as well as the originals themselves. These
are printed on pages opposite to the subjects, but they are often very
carelessly transposed. At the end the date 1623 is twice repeated by means
of the Roman capitals in two verses from Psalms 78 and 63, the one German,
the other Latin. 12mo.

III. "Icones Mortis sexaginta imaginibus totidemque inscriptionibus
insignitae, versibus quoque Latinis et novis Germanicis illustratae.
Vorbildungen desz Todtes. In sechtzig figuren durch alle Stande und
Geschlechte, derselbigen nichtige Sterblichkeit furzuweisen, aus gebruckt,
und mit so viel ubors schriffren, auch Lateinischen und neuen Teutschen
Verszlein erklaret. Durch Johann Vogel. Bey Paulus Fursten Kunsthandlern
zu finden." On the back of this printed title is an engraving of a hand
issuing from the clouds and holding a pair of scales, in one of which is a
scull, in the other a Papal tiara, sceptre, &c. weighing down the scull.
On the beam of the scales an hour glass and an open book with Arabic
numerals. In the distance, at bottom, is seen a traveller reposing in a
shed. Above is a label, inscribed "Metas et tempora libro," and below,
"Ich Wage ziel und zeitten ab." Then follows a neatly engraved and regular
title-page. At top, a winged scull surmounted with an hour-glass, and
crossed with a spade and scythe. At bottom, three figures of Death sitting
on the ground; one of them plays on a hautboy, or trumpet, another on a
bagpipe, and the third has a drum behind him. The middle exhibits a
circular Dance of Death leading by the hand persons of all ranks from the
Emperor downwards. In the centre of this circle "Toden Tantz zu finden bey
Paulus Furst Kunst handlern," and quite at the bottom of the page, "G.
Stra. in. A. Khol fecit." Next comes an exhortation on Death to the reader
in Latin verse, followed by several poems in German and Latin, those in
German signed G. P. H. Immediately afterwards, and before the first cut of
the work is another elegantly engraved frontispiece representing an arched
gate of stone surmounted with three sculls of a Pope, a Cardinal, and a
King, between a vase of flowers on the right, and a pot of incense, a cock
standing near it, on the left. On the keystone of the gate are two tilting
lances in saltier, to which a shield and helmet are suspended. Through the
arch is seen a chamber, in which there seems to be a bier, and near it a
cross. On the left of the gate is a niche with a scull and bones in it.
Below are two large figures of Death. That on the left has a wreath of
flowers round its head, and is beating a bell with a bone. Under him is an
owl, and on the side of his left knee a scythe. The other Death has a cap
and feather, in his right hand an hour-glass, the left pointing to the
opposite figure. On the ground between them, a bow, a quiver of arrows and
a dart. On the left inner side of the gate a pot with holy water is
suspended to a ring, the sprinkler being a bone. Further on, within the
gate, is a flat stone, on which are several sculls and bones, a snake
biting one of the sculls. On the right hand corner at bottom is the letter
[monogram: A], perhaps the mark of the unknown engraver. The explanations
on the pages opposite to each print are in German and Latin verses, the
latter by AEmylius, with occasional variations. This edition has the sixty
prints in the two preceding Nos. some of them having been retouched; and
the cut of the King at table, No. 9, is by a different engraver from the
artist of the same No. in the preceding 4to. edition, No. I. The present
edition has also an additional engraving at the end, representing a gate,
within which are seen several sculls and bones, other sculls in a niche,
and in the distance a cemetery with coffins and crosses. Over the gate a
scull on each side, and on the outer edge of the arch is the inscription,
"Quis Rex, quis subditus hic est?" At bottom,

  Hie sage wer es sagen kan     | Here let tell who may:
  Wer konig sey? wer unterthan. | Or, which be the king? which the subject?
                         Paulus Furst Excu.

The whole of the print in a border of sculls, bones, snakes, toads, and a
lizard. Opposite to it the date 1647 is to be gathered from the Roman
capitals in two scriptural quotations, the one in Latin, the other in
German, ending with this colophon, "Gedrucht zu Nuremberg durch Christoff
Lochner. In Verlegung Paul Fursten Kunsthandlern allda." 12mo.

IV. A set of engravings, 8 inches by 8, of which the subject of the
Pedlar, only has occurred on the present occasion. Instead of the
trump-marine, which one of the Deaths plays on in the original cut, this
artist has substituted a violin, and added a landscape in the back-ground.
Below are these verses:

  LA MORT.

  Sus? cesse ton traficq, car il fault a ceste heure
  Que tu sente l'effort de mon dard assere.
  Tu as assez vescu, il est temps que tu meure,
  Mon coup inevitable est pour toy prepare.


  LE MARCHANT.

  Et de grace pardon, arreste ta cholere.
  Je suis pauvre marchant appaise ta rigueur.
  Permete qu'encore un temps je vive en ceste terre:
  Et puis tu recevras l'offrande de mon coeur.

V. A set of thirty etchings by Wenceslaus Hollar, within elegant frames or
borders designed by Diepenbecke, of which there are three varieties. The
first of these has at the top a coffin with tapers, at bottom, Death lying
prostrate. The sides have figures of time and eternity. At bottom, _Ab.
Diepenbecke inv. W. Hollar fecit_. The second has at top a Death's head
crowned with the Papal tiara; at bottom, a Death's head with cross-bones
on a tablet, accompanied by a saw, a globe, armour, a gun, a drum, &c. On
the sides are Hercules and Minerva. At bottom, _Ab. Diepenbecke inv. W.
Hollar fecit, 1651_. The third has at top a Death's head, an hour-glass
winged between two boys; at bottom, a Death's head and cross-bones on a
tablet between two boys holding hour-glasses. On the sides, Democritus and
Heraclitus with fools' caps. This border has no inscription below. As
these etchings are not numbered, the original arrangement of them cannot
be ascertained. The names of Diepenbecke and Hollar are at the bottom of
several of the borders, &c. On the subject of the Queen is the mark
[monogram: UH] and on three others that of [monogram: WH]. This is the
first and most desirable state of the work, the borders having afterwards
fallen into the hands of Petau and Van Morle, two foreign printsellers,
whose impressions are very inferior. It has not been ascertained what
became of these elegant additions, but the work afterwards appeared
without them, and with the additional mark [monogram: HB] _i._ on every
print, and intended for Holbein invenit. It is very certain that Hollar
himself did not place this mark on the prints; he has never introduced it
in any of his copies from Holbein, always expressing that painter's name
in these several ways: [monogram: HH], [monogram: HHolbein] _inv._
[monogram: HHolbein] _pinxit_, H. HOLBEIN inv. H. HOLBEIN inventor. On one
of his portraits from the Arundel collection he has placed "[monogram:
HHolbein] _incidit in lignum_." No copy, however, of this portrait has
occurred in wood, and, if this be only a conjecture on the part of the
engraver, the distance of time between the respective artists is an
objection to its validity, though it is possible that Holbein might have
engraved on wood, because there are prints which have all the appearance
of belonging to him, that have his usual mark, accompanied by an engraving
tool. There is no text to these etchings, except the Latin scriptural
passages under each, that occur in the original editions in that language.
As a sort of frontispiece to the work, Hollar has transferred the last cut
of the allegorical shield of arms, supported by a lady and gentleman, to
the beginning, with the appropriate title of MORTALIVM NOBILITAS. The
other subjects are, 1. Adam and Eve in Paradise. 2. Their expulsion from
Paradise. 3. Adam digging, Eve spinning. 4. The Pope. 5. The Emperor. 6.
The Empress. 7. The Queen. 8. The Cardinal. 9. The Duke. 10. The Bishop.
11. The Nobleman. 12. The Abbot. 13. The Abbess. 14. The Friar. 15. The
Nun. 16. The Preacher. 17. The Physician. 18. The Soldier, or Warrior. 19.
The Advocate. 20. The Married Couple. 21. The Duchess. 22. The Merchant.
23. The Pedlar. 24. The Miser. 25. The Waggoner with wine casks. 26. The
Gamesters. 27. The Old Man. 28. The Old Woman. 29. The Infant. Of these,
Nos. 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 13, 14, 23, 27, and 28, correspond with the Lyons
wood-cuts, except that in No. 1 a stag is omitted, and there are some
variations; in No. 6, the windows of the palace are altered; in No. 13, a
window is added to the house next to the nunnery; and in No. 9, a figure
is introduced, and the ducal palace much altered; in No. 23, a sword is
omitted. They are all reverses, except No. 5. The rest of the subjects are
reversed, with one exception, from the copies by [monogram: SA] in the
spurious edition first printed at Cologne in 1555, with occasional very
slight variations. Hollar's copies from the original cuts are in a small
degree less both in width and depth. In the subject of Death and the
Soldier he has not shown his judgment in making use of the spurious
edition rather than the far more elegant and interesting original,[122]
and it is remarkable that this is the only print belonging to the spurious
ones that is not reversed.

It is very probable that Hollar executed this work at Antwerp, where, at
the time of its date, he might have found Diepenbecke and engaged him to
make designs for the borders which are etched on separate plates, thus
supplying passe-par-touts that might be used at discretion. Many sets
appear without the borders, which seem to have strayed, and perhaps to
have been afterwards lost or destroyed. As Rubens is recorded to have
admired the beauty of the original cuts, so it is to be supposed that
Diepenbecke, his pupil, would entertain the same opinion of them, and that
he might have suggested to Hollar the making etchings of them, undertaking
himself to furnish appropriate borders. But how shall we account for the
introduction of so many of the spurious and inferior designs, if he had
the means of using the originals? Many books were formerly excessively
rare, which, from peculiar circumstances, not necessary to be here
detailed, but well known to bibliographers and collectors, have since
become comparatively common. Hollar might not have had an opportunity of
meeting with a perfect copy of the original cuts, or he might, in some way
or other, have been impeded in the use of them, when executing his work,
and thus have been driven to the necessity of pursuing it by means of the
spurious edition. These, however, are but conjectures, and it remains for
every one to adopt his own opinion.

The copper-plates of the above thirty etchings appear to have fallen into
the hands of an English noble family, from which the late Mr. James
Edwards, a bookseller of well merited celebrity, obtained them, and about
the year 1794 caused many impressions to be taken off after they had been
_rebitten_ with great care, so as to prevent that injury, with respect to
outline, which usually takes place where etchings or engravings upon
copper are _retouched_. Previously to this event good impressions must
have been extremely rare, at least on the continent, as they are not found
in the very rich collections of Winckler or Brandes, nor are they
mentioned by the foreign writers on engraving. To Mr. Edwards's
publication of Hollar's prints there was prefixed a short dissertation on
the Dance of Death, which is here again submitted to public attention in a
considerably enlarged form, and corrected from the errors and
imperfections into which its author had been misled by preceding writers
on the subject, and by the paucity of the materials which he was then able
to obtain. This edition was reprinted verbatim, and with the same
etchings, in 1816, for J. Coxhead, in Holywell Street, Strand, but without
any mention of the former, and accompanied with the addition of a brief
memoir of Holbein.

It is most likely that Hollar, having discovered the error which he had
committed in copying the spurious engravings before-mentioned, and
subsequently procured a set of genuine impressions, resolved to make
another set of etchings from the original work, four only of which he
appears to have executed, his death probably taking place before they
could be completed. These are, 1. The Pope crowning the Emperor, with
"Moriatur sacerdos magnus." 2. The rich man disregarding the beggar, with
"Qui obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis, &c." and the four Latin
lines, "Consulitis, dites, &c." at bottom, as in the original. It is
beautifully and most faithfully copied, with [monogram: HHolbein] _inv.
Hollar fecit_. 3. The Ploughman, with "In sudore vultus, &c." 4. The
Robber, with "Domine vim patior."

In Dugdale's History of St. Paul's, and also in the Monasticon, there is a
single etching by Hollar of Death leading all ranks of people. It is only
an improved copy of an old wood-cut in Lydgate's works, already mentioned
in p. 52, and which is altogether imaginary, not being taken from any real
series of the Dance.

VI. "Varii e veri ritratte della morte disegnati in immagini, ed espressi
in Essempii al peccatore duro di cuore, dal padre Gio. Battista Marmi
della compagnia de Giesu." Venetia, 1669, 8vo. It has several engravings,
among which are the following, after the original designs. 1. Queen. 2.
Nobleman. 3. Merchant. 4. Gamblers. 5. Physician. 6. Miser. The last five
being close copies from the same subjects, in the Basle edit. 1769, No. V.
of the copies in wood.

VII. "Theatrum mortis humanae tripartitum. I. Pars. Saltum Mortis. II.
Pars. Varia genera Mortis. III. Pars. Paenas Damnatorum continens, cum
figuris aeneis illustratum." Then the same repeated in German, with the
addition "Durch Joannem Weichardum Valvasor. Lib. Bar. cum facultate
superiorum, et speciali privilegio Sac. Caes. Majest. Gedrucht zu Laybach,
und zu finden ben Johann Baptista Mayr, in Saltzburg. Anno 1682. 4to."
Prefixed is an engraved frontispiece representing a ruined arch, under
which is a coffin, and before it the King of Terrors between two other
figures of Death mounted respectively on an elephant and camel. In the
foreground, Adam and Eve, tied to the forbidden tree of knowledge, between
several other Deaths variously employed. Two men digging graves, &c.
Underneath, "[monogram: W.] inven. [monogram: W.] excud. Jo. Koch del.
And. Trost sculp. Wagenpurgi in Carniola." It is the first part only with
which we are concerned. The artist, with very little exception, has
followed and reversed the spurious wood-cuts of 1555, by [monogram: SA].
To the groups of boys he has added a Death leading them on.

VIII. "De Doodt vermaskert met des werelts ydelheyt afghedaen door
Geeraerdt Van Wolschaten." This is another edition of No. IX. of the
original wood-cuts, here engraved on _copper_. The text is the same as
that of 1654, with the addition of seven leaves, including a cut of Death
leading all ranks of men. In that of the Pedler the artist has introduced
some figures in the distance of the original _soldier_. Among other
variations the costume of the time of William III. is sometimes very
ludicrously adopted, especially in the frontispiece, where the author is
represented writing at a desk, and near him two figures of a man in a full
bottom wig, and a woman with a mask and a perpendicular cap in several
stories, usually called a _Fontange_, both having skeleton faces. At
bottom, the mark [monogram: L B.f.]. This edition was printed at Antwerp
by Jan Baptist Jacobs, without date, but the privilege has that of 1698.
12mo.

IX. "Imagines Mortis, or the Dead Dance of Hans Holbeyn, painter of King
Henry the VIII." This title is on a copper-plate within a border, and
accompanied with nineteen etchings on copper, by Nieuhoff Piccard, a
person who will be more particularly adverted to hereafter. They consist
of, 1. The emblem of Mortality. 2. The temptation. 3. The expulsion from
Paradise. 4. Adam digging, Eve spinning. 5. Concert of Deaths. 6. The
Infant. 7. The new married couple. 8. The Duke. 9. The Advocate. 10. The
Abbot. 11. The Monk. 12. The Abbess. 13. The Soldier. 14. The Merchant.
15. The Pedler. 16. The Fool. 17. The Blind Man. 18. The Old Woman. 19.
The Old Man. The designs, with some occasional variations, correspond with
those in the original wood-cuts. The plates of these etchings must have
passed into the hands of some English printsellers, as broken sets of them
have not long since been seen, one only of which, namely, that of the
Temptation, had these lines on it:

  "All that e'er had breath
  Must dance after Death."

with the date 1720. Several were then numbered at bottom with Arabic
numerals.

X. "Schau-platz des Todes, oder Todten Tanz, von Sal. Van Rusting Med.
Doct. in Nieder-Teutscher-Spracke nun aber in Hoch Teutscher mit nothigen
Anmerchungen heraus gegeben von Johann Georg. Meintel Hochfurstl
Brandenburg-Onoltzbachischen pfarrer zu Petersaurach." Nurnberg, 1736.
8vo. Or, "The Theatre of Death, or Dance of Death, by Sol. Van Rusting,
doctor of medicine, in Low German language, but now in High German, with
necessary notes by John George Meintel in the service of his Serene
Highness of Brandenburg, and parson of Petersaurach." It is said to have
been originally published in 1707, which is very probable, as Rusting, of
whom very little is recorded, was born about 1650. In the early part of
his life he practised as an army surgeon. He was a great admirer and
follower of the doctrines of Balthasar Bekker in his "Monde enchante."
There are editions in Dutch only, 1735 and 1741. 12mo. the plates being
copies. In the above-mentioned edition by Meintel there is an elaborate
preface, with some account of the Dance of Death, and its editions, but
replete with the grossest errors, into which he has been misled by
Hilscher, and some other writers. His text is accompanied with a profusion
of notes altogether of a pious and moral nature.

Rusting's work consists of thirty neat engravings, of which the following
are copied from the Lyons wood-cuts. 1. The King, much varied. 2. The
Astrologer. 3. The Soldier. 4. The Monk. 5. The Old Man. 6. The Pedler.
The rest are, on the whole, original designs, yet with occasional hints
from the Lyons cuts; the best of them are, the Masquerade, the
Rope-dancer, and the Skaiters. The frontispiece is in two compartments;
the upper one, Death crowned, sitting on a throne, on each side of him a
Death trumpeter; the lower, a fantastic Dance of seven Deaths, near a
crowned skeleton lying on a couch.

XI. "Le triomphe de la Mort." A Basle, 1780, folio. This is the first part
of a collection of the works of Hans Holbein, engraved and published by M.
Chretien de Mechel, a celebrated artist, and formerly a printseller in the
above city. It has a dedication to George III. followed by explanations in
French of the subjects, in number 46, and in the following order; No. 1. A
Frontispiece, representing a tablet of stone, on one side of which Holbein
appears behind a curtain, which is drawn aside by Death in order to
exhibit to him the grand spectacle of the scenes of human life which he is
intended to paint; this is further designated by a heap of the attributes
of greatness, dignities, wealth, arts, and sciences, intermixed with
Deaths' heads, all of which are trampled under foot by Death himself. At
bottom, Lucan's line, "Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat." The tablet is
surmounted by a medallion of Holbein, supported by two genii, one of whom
decorates the portrait with flowers, whilst another lets loose a
butterfly, and a third is employed in blowing bubbles. On the tablet
itself is a second title, "Le triomphe de la mort, grave d'apres les
dessins originaux de Jean Holbein par Chr{n}. de Mechel, graveur a Basle,
MDCCLXXX." This frontispiece has been purposely inverted for the present
work. The other subjects are: No. 2. The Temptation. 3. Expulsion from
Paradise. 4. Adam digging, Eve spinning. 5. The Pope. 6. The Cardinal. 7.
The Duke. 8. The Bishop. 9. The Canon. 10. The Monk. 11. The Abbot. 12.
The Abbess. 13. The Preacher. 14. The Priest. 15. The Physician. 16. The
Astrologer. 17. The Emperor. 18. The King. 19. The Empress. 20. The Queen.
21. The Duchess. 22. The Countess. 23. The New-married Couple. 24. The
Nun. 25. The Nobleman. 26. The Knight. 27. The Gentleman. 28. The Soldier.
29. The Judge. 30. The Counsellor. 31. The Advocate. 32. The Merchant. 33.
The Pedler. 34. The Shipwreck. 35. The Wine-carrier. 36. The Plowman. 37.
The Miser. 38. The Robber. 39. The Drunkard. 40. The Gamblers. 41. The Old
Man. 42. The Old Woman. 45. The Blind Man. 44. The Beggar. 45. The Infant.
46. The Fool.

M. Mechel has added another print on this subject, viz. the sheath of a
dagger, a design for a chaser. It is impossible to exceed the beauty and
skill that are manifested in this fine piece of art. The figures are, a
king, queen, warrior, a young woman, a monk, and an infant, all of whom
most unwillingly accompany Death in the dance. The despair of the king,
the dejection of the queen, accompanied by her little dog, the terror of
the soldier who hears the drum of Death, the struggling of the female, the
reluctance of the monk, and the sorrow of the poor infant, are depicted
with equal spirit and veracity. The original drawing is in the public
library at Basle, and ascribed to Holbein. There is a general agreement
between these engravings and the original wood-cuts. Twenty-three are
reversed. In No. 13 the jaw-bone in the hand of Death is not distinct. In
No. 16 a cross is added, and in No. 17 two heads.

Mr. Coxe, in his Travels in Switzerland, has given some account of the
drawings copied as above by M. de Mechel, in whose possession he saw them.
He states that they were sketched with a pen, and slightly shaded with
Indian ink. He mentions M. de Mechel's conjecture that they were once in
the Arundel collection, and infers from thence that they were copied by
Hollar, which, however, from what has been already stated on the subject
of Hollar's print of the Soldier and Death, as well as from other
variations, could not have been the case. Mr. Coxe proceeds to say that
four of the subjects in M. de Mechel's work are not in the drawings, but
were copied from Hollar. It were to be wished that he had specified them.
The particulars that follow were obtained by the compiler of the present
dissertation from M. de Mechel himself when he was in London. He had not
been able to trace the drawings previously to their falling into the hands
of M. de Crozat,[123] at whose sale, about 1771, they were purchased by
Counsellor Fleischmann of Strasburg, and M. de Mechel having very
emphatically expressed his admiration of them whilst they were in the
possession of M. Fleischmann, that gentleman very generously offered them
as a present to him. M. de Mechel, however, declined the offer, but
requested they might be deposited in the public library at Basle, among
other precious remains of Holbein's art. This arrangement, however, did
not take place, and it happened in the mean time that two nephews of
Prince Gallitzin, minister from Russia to the court of Vienna, having
occasion to visit M. Fleischmann, then much advanced in years, and his
memory much impaired, prevailed on him to concede the drawings to their
uncle, who, on learning from M. de Mechel what had originally passed
between himself and M. Fleischmann, sent the drawings to him, with
permission to engrave and publish them, which was accordingly done, after
they had been detained two years for that purpose. They afterwards passed
into the Emperor of Russia's collection of fine arts at Petersburg.

It were greatly to be wished that some person qualified like Mr. Ottley,
if such a one can be found, would take the trouble to enter on a critical
examination of these drawings in their present state, with a view to
ascertain, as nearly as possible, whether they carry indisputable marks of
Holbein's art and manner of execution, or whether, as may well be
suspected, they are nothing more than copies, either by himself or some
other person, from the original wood engravings.

M. de Mechel had begun this work in 1771, when he had engraved the first
four subjects, including a frontispiece totally different from that in the
volume here described. There are likewise variations in the other three.
He was extremely solicitous that these should be cancelled.

XII. David Deuchar, sometimes called the Scottish Worlidge, who has etched
many prints after Ostade and the Dutch masters, published a set of
etchings by himself, with the following printed title: "The Dances of
Death through the various stages of human life, wherein the capriciousness
of that tyrant is exhibited in forty-six copper-plates, done from the
original designs, which were cut in wood and afterwards painted by John
Holbein in the town house at Basle, to which is prefixed descriptions of
each plate in French and English, with the scripture text from which the
designs were taken. Edinburgh, MDCCLXXXVIII." Before this most inaccurate
title are two engraved leaves, on one of which is Deuchar's portrait, in a
medallion, supported by Adam and Eve holding the forbidden fruit. Over the
medallion, the three Fates, the whole within an arch before a pediment. On
each side, a plain column, supporting a pyramid, &c. On the other leaf a
copy of the engraved title to M. de Mechel's work with the substitution of
Deuchar's name. After the printed title is a portrait, as may be supposed,
of Holbein, within a border containing six ovals of various subjects, and
a short preface or account of that artist, but accompanied with some very
inaccurate statements. The subjects are inclosed, like Hollar's, within
four different borders, separately engraved, three of them borrowed, with
a slight variation in one, from Diepenbeke, the fourth being probably
Deuchar's invention. The etchings of the Dance of Death are forty-six in
number, accompanied with De Mechel's description and English translation.
At the end is the emblematical print of mortality, but not described, with
the dagger sheath, copied from De Mechel. Thirty of these etchings are
immediately copied from Hollar, No. X. having the distance altered. The
rest are taken from the spurious wood copies of the originals by
[monogram: SA] with variation in No. XVIII.; and in No. XXXIX. and XLIII.
Deuchar has introduced winged hour-glasses. These etchings are very
inferior to those by Hollar. The head of Eve in No. III. resembles that of
a periwigged Frenchman of the time of Louis XIV. but many of the subjects
are very superior to others, and intitled to much commendation.

XIII. The last in this list is "Der Todtentanz ein gedicht von Ludwig
Bechstein mit 48 kupfern in treuen Conturen nach H. Holbein. Leipzig.
1831," 12mo.; or, "Death's Dance, a poem by Ludwig Bechstein, with
forty-eight engravings in faithful outlines from H. Holbein." These very
elegant etchings are by Frenzel, inspector of the gallery of engravings
of the King of Saxony at Dresden. The poem, which is an epic one, relates
entirely to the power of Death over mankind.

It is necessary to mention that the artist who made the designs for the
Lyons Dance of Death is not altogether original with respect to a few of
them. Thus, in the subject of Adam digging and Eve spinning, he has partly
copied an ancient wood engraving that occurs in some of the Horae printed
by Francis Regnault at Paris. In the subject of the Queen, and on that of
the Duke and Duchess, he has made some use of those of Death and the Fool,
and Death and the Hermit, in the old Dance at Basle. On the other hand, he
has been imitated, 1. in "La Periere Theatre des bons engins. 1561." 24mo.
where the rich man bribing the judge is introduced at fo. 66. 2. The
figure of the Swiss gentleman in "Recueil de la diversite des habits."
Paris, 1567. 12mo. is copied from the last print in the Lyons book. 3.
From the same print the Death's head has been introduced in an old wood
engraving, that will be more particularly described hereafter. 4.
Brebiette, in a small etching on copper, has copied the Lyons plowman. 5.
Mr. Dance, in his painting of Garrick, has evidently made use of the
gentleman who lifts up his sword against Death. The copies of the portrait
of Francis I. have been already noticed.




CHAPTER IX.

    _Further examination of Holbein's title.--Borbonius.--Biographical
    notice of Holbein.--Painting of a Dance of Death at Whitehall by him._


It may be necessary in the next place to make some further enquiry
respecting the connection that Holbein is supposed to have had _at any
time_ with the subject of the Dance of Death.

The numerous errors that have been fallen into in making Holbein a
participator in any manner whatever with the old Basle Macaber Dance, have
been already noticed, and are indeed not worth the trouble of refuting. It
is wholly improbable that he would interfere with so rude a piece of art;
nor has his name been recorded among the artists who are known to have
retouched or repaired it. The Macaber Dance at Basle, or any where else,
is, therefore, with respect to Holbein, to be altogether laid aside; and
if the argument before deduced from the important dedication to the
edition of the justly celebrated wood-cuts published at Lyons in 1538 be
of any value, his claim to their invention, at least to those in the first
edition, must also be rejected.[124] There is indeed but very slight
evidence, and none contemporary, that he painted any Dance of Death at
Basle. The indefinite statements of Bishop Burnet and M. Patin, together
with those of the numerous and careless travellers who have followed
blind leaders, and too often copied each other without the means or
inclination of obtaining correct information, are deserving of very little
attention. The circumstance of Holbein's having painted a Dance of
Peasants somewhere in the above city, in conjunction with the usual
mistake of ascribing to him the old Macaber Dance, seems to have
occasioned the above erroneous statements as to a Dance of Death by his
pencil. It is hardly possible that Zuinger, almost a contemporary, when
describing the Dance of Peasants and other paintings by Holbein at Basle
would have omitted the mention of any Dance of Death:[125] but even
admitting the former existence of such a painting, it would not constitute
him the inventor of the designs in the Lyons work. He might have imitated
or copied those designs, or the wood-cuts themselves, or perhaps have
painted subjects that were different from either.

We are now to take into consideration some very clear and important
evidence that Holbein actually _did paint a Dance of Death_. This is to be
found in the _Nugae_ of Borbonius in the following verses:

  _De morte picta a Hanso pictore nobili._

  Dum mortis Hansus pictor imaginum exprimit,
  Tanta arte mortem retulit, ut mors vivere
  Videatur ipsa: et ipse se immortalibus
  Parem Diis fecerit, operis hujus gloria.[126]

It has been already demonstrated that these lines could not refer to the
old painting of the Macaber Dance at the Dominican convent, whilst, from
the important dedication to the edition of the wood-cuts first published
at Lyons in 1538, it is next to impossible that that work could then have
been in Borbonius's contemplation. It appears from several places in his
Nugae that he was in England in 1535, at which time Holbein drew his
portrait in such a manner as to excite his gratitude and admiration in
another copy of verses.[127] This was probably the chalk drawing still
preserved in the fine collection of portraits of the eminent persons in
the court of Henry VIII. formerly at Kensington, and thence removed to
Buckingham House, and which has been copied in an elegant wood-cut, that
first appeared in the edition of the Paidagogeion of Borbonius, Lyons,
1536, and afterward in two editions of his Nugae. It is inscribed NIC.
BORBONIVS VANDOP. ANNO AETATIS XXXII. 1535. He returned to Lyons in 1536,
and it is known that he was there in 1538, when he probably wrote the
complimentary lines in Holbein's Biblical designs a short time before
their publication, either out of friendship to the painter, or at the
instance of the Lyons publisher with whom he was certainly connected.

Now if Borbonius, during his residence at Lyons, had been assured that the
designs in the wood-cuts of the Dance of Death were the production of
Holbein, would not his before-mentioned lines on that subject have been
likewise introduced into the Lyons edition of it, or at least into some
subsequent editions, in none of which is any mention whatever made of
Holbein, although the work was continued even after the death of that
artist? The application, therefore, of Borbonius's lines must be sought
for elsewhere; but it is greatly to be regretted that he has not adverted
to the place where the painting, as he seems to call it, was made.

Very soon after the calamitous fire at Whitehall in 1697, which consumed
nearly the whole of that palace, a person calling himself T. Nieuhoff
Piccard, probably belonging to the household of William the Third, and a
man who appears to have been an amateur artist, made the etchings in the
article IX. already described in p. 130. Copies of them were presented to
some of his friends, with manuscript dedications to them. Three of these
copies have been seen by the author of this Dissertation, and as the
dedications differ from each other, and are of very considerable
importance on the present occasion, the following extracts from them are
here translated and transcribed:

    "TO MYNHEER HEYMANS.

    "Sir,--The costly palace of Whitehall, erected by Cardinal Wolsey, and
    the residence of King Henry VIII. contains, among other performances
    of art, a _Dance of Death_, painted by Holbein in its galleries,
    which, through an unfortunate conflagration, has been reduced to
    ashes; and even the little work which he has engraved with his own
    hand, and which I have copied as near as possible, is so scarce, that
    it is known only to a few lovers of art. And since the court has
    thought proper, in consideration of your singular deserts, to cause a
    dwelling to be built for you at Whitehall, I imagined it would not be
    disagreeable to you to be made acquainted with the former decorations
    of that palace. It will not appear strange that the artist should have
    chosen the above subject for ornamenting the _royal_ walls, if we
    consider that the founder of the Greek monarchy directed that he
    should be daily reminded of the admonition, 'Remember, Philip, that
    thou art a man.' In like manner did Holbein with his pencil give
    tongues to these walls to impress not only the king and his court, but
    every one who viewed them with the same reflection."

He then proceeds to describe each of the subjects, and concludes with some
moral observations.

In another copy of these etchings the dedication is to

    "The high, noble, and wellborn Lord William Benting, Lord of Rhoon,
    Pendreght, &c."

    "Sir,--In the course of my constant love and pursuit of works of art,
    it has been my good fortune to meet with that scarce little work of
    Hans Holbein neatly engraved on wood, and which he himself had painted
    as large as life in fresco on the walls of Whitehall. In the copy
    which I presume to lay before you, as being born in the same palace, I
    have followed the original as nearly as possible, and considering the
    partiality which every one has for the place of his birth, a
    description of what is remarkable and curious therein and now no
    longer existing on account of its destruction by a fatal fire, must
    needs prove acceptable, as no other remains whatever have been left of
    that once so famous court of King Henry VIII. built by Cardinal
    Wolsey, than your own dwelling."

He then repeats the story of Philip of Macedon, and the account of the
subjects of his etchings.

At the end of this dedication there is a fragment of another, the
beginning of which is lost. The following passages only in it are worthy
of notice. "The residence of King William." "I flatter myself with a
familiar acquaintance with Death, since I have already lived long enough
to seem to be buried alive, &c." In other respects, the same, in
substance, as the preceding.

It is almost needless to advert to M. Nieuhoff Piccard's mistake in
asserting that Holbein made the engravings which he copied; but it would
have been of some importance if, instead of his pious ejaculations, he had
described all the subjects that Holbein painted on the walls of the
galleries at Whitehall. He must have used some edition of the wood-cuts
posterior to that of 1545, which did not contain the subjects of the
German soldier, the fool, and the blind man, all of which he has
introduced. It is possible, however, that he has given us all the subjects
that were then remaining, the rest having become decayed or obliterated
from dampness and neglect, and even those which then existed would soon
afterwards perish when the remains of the old palace were removed. His
copies are by no means faithful, and seem to be rather the production of
an amateur than of a regular artist. For his greater convenience, he
appears to have preferred using the wood engravings instead of the
paintings; and it is greatly to be regretted that we have no better or
further account of them, especially of the time at which they were
executed. The lives of Holbein that we possess are uniformly defective in
chronological arrangement. There seems to be a doubt whether the Earl of
Arundel recommended him to visit England; but certain it is that in the
year 1526 he came to London with a letter of that date addressed by
Erasmus to Sir Thomas More, accompanied with his portrait, with which More
was so well satisfied that he retained him at his house at Chelsea upwards
of two years, until Henry VIII. from admiration of his works, appointed
him his painter, with apartments at Whitehall. In 1529 he visited Basle,
but returned to England in 1530. In 1535 he drew the portrait of his
friend Nicholas Bourbon or Borbonius at London, probably the
before-mentioned crayon drawing at Buckingham House, or some duplicate of
it. In 1538 he painted the portrait of Sir Richard Southwell, a privy
counsellor to Henry VIII. which was afterwards in the gallery of the Grand
Duke of Tuscany.[128] About this time the magistrates of the city of Basle
settled an annuity on him, but conditionally that he should return in two
years to his native place and family, with which terms he certainly did
not comply, preferring to remain in England. In the last-mentioned year he
was sent by the king into Burgundy to paint the portrait of the Duchess of
Milan, and in 1539 to Germany to paint that of Anne of Cleves. In some
household accounts of Henry VIII. there are payments to him in 1538, 1539,
1540, and 1541, on account of his salary, which appears to have been
thirty pounds per annum.[129] From this time little more is recorded of
him till 1553, when he painted Queen Mary's portrait, and shortly
afterwards died of the plague in London in 1554.

In the absence of positive evidence it may surely be allowed to substitute
probable conjecture; and as it cannot be clearly proved that Holbein
painted a Dance of Death at Basle, may not the before-mentioned verses of
Borbonius refer to his painting at Whitehall, and which the poet must
himself have seen? It is no objection that Borbonius remained a year only
in England, when his portrait was painted by his friend Holbein in 1535,
or that the verses did not make their appearance till 1538, for they seem
rather to fix the date of the painting, if really belonging to it, between
those years; and it is not unreasonable to suppose that Borbonius would
hold some intercourse with the painter, even after leaving England, as is
indeed apparent from other compliments bestowed on him in his Nugae, the
contents of which are by no means chronologically arranged, and many of
the poems known to have been written long before their publication. The
lines in question might have been written any where, and at any time, and
this may be very safely stated until the real time in which the Whitehall
painting was made shall be ascertained.

In one of Vanderdort's manuscript catalogues of the pictures and rarities
transported from St. James's to Whitehall, and placed there in the newly
erected cabinet room of Charles I. and in which several works by Holbein
are mentioned, there is the following article: "A little piece where Death
with a green garland about his head, stretching both his arms to apprehend
a Pilate in the habit of one of the spiritual Prince Electors of Germany.
Copied by Isaac Oliver from Holbein."[130] There cannot be a doubt that
this refers to the subject of the Elector, as painted by Holbein in the
Dance of Death at Whitehall, proving at the same time the identity of the
painting with the wood-cuts, whatever may be the inference.

Sandrart, after noticing a remarkable portrait of Henry VIII. at
Whitehall, states, that "there yet remains in that palace _another work_
by Holbein that constitutes him the Apelles of the time."[131] This is
certainly very like an allusion to a Dance of Death.

It is by no means improbable that Mathew Prior may have alluded to
Holbein's painting at Whitehall, as it is not likely that he would be
acquainted with any other.

  Our term of life depends not on our deed,
  Before our birth our funeral was decreed,
  Nor aw'd by foresight, nor misled by chance,
  Imperious death directs the ebon lance,
  Peoples great Henry's tombs, and leads up Holbein's Dance.
                                _Ode to the Memory of George Villiers._




CHAPTER X.

    _Other Dances of Death._


Having thus disposed of the two most ancient and important works on the
subject in question, others of a similar nature, but with designs
altogether different, and introduced into various books, remain to be
noticed, and such are the following:

I. "Les loups ravissans fait et compose par maistre Robert Gobin prestre,
maistre es ars licencie en decret, doyen de crestiente de Laigny sur Marne
au dyocese de Paris, advocat en court d'eglise. Imprime pour Anthoine
Verard a Paris, 4to." without date, but about 1500. This is a very bitter
satire, in the form of a dream, against the clergy in general, but more
particularly against Popes John XXII. and Boniface VIII. A wolf, in a
lecture to his children, instructs them in every kind of vice and
wickedness, but is opposed, and his doctrines refuted, by an allegorical
personage called Holy Doctrine. In a second vision Death appears to the
author, accompanied by Fate, War, Famine, and Mortality. All classes of
society are formed into a Dance, as the author chooses to call it, and the
work is accompanied with twenty-one very singular engravings on wood,
executed in a style perhaps nowhere else to be met with. The designs are
the same as those in the second Dance of the Horae, printed by Higman for
Vostre, No. I. page 61.

II. "A booke of Christian prayers, collected out of the ancient writers,
&c." Printed by J. Day, 1569. 4to. Afterwards in 1578, 1581, 1590, and
1609. It is more frequently mentioned under the title of "Queen
Elizabeth's prayer-book," a most unsuitable title, when it is recollected
how sharply this haughty dame rebuked the Dean of Christchurch for
presenting a common prayer to her which had been purposely ornamented with
cuts by him.[132] This book was most probably compiled by the celebrated
John Fox, and is accompanied with elegant borders in the margins of every
leaf cut in wood by an unknown artist whose mark is [monogram: CI], though
they have been most unwarrantably ascribed to Holbein, and even to Agnes
Frey, the wife of Albert Durer, who is not known with any certainty to
have practised the art of engraving. At the end is a Dance of Death
different from every other of the kind, and of singular interest, as
exhibiting the costume of its time with respect to all ranks and
conditions of life, male and female.

These are the characters. "The Emperor, the King, the Duke, the Marques,
the Baron, the Vicount, the Archbishop, the Bishop, the Doctor, the
Preacher, the Lord, the Knight, the Esquire, the Gentleman, the Judge, the
Justice, the Serjeant at law, the Attorney, the Mayor, the Shirife, the
Bailife, the Constable, the Physitian, the Astronomer, the Herauld, the
Sergeant at arms, the Trumpetter, the Pursevant, the Dromme, the Fife, the
Captaine, the Souldier, the Marchant, the Citizen, the Printers (in two
compartments), the Rich Man, the Aged Man, the Artificer, the Husbandman,
the Musicians (in two compartments), the Shepheard, the Foole, the Beggar,
the Roge, of Youth, of Infancie." Then the females. "The Empresse, the
Queene, the Princes, the Duchesse, the Countesse, the Vicountesse, the
Baronnesse, the Lady, the Judge's Wife, the Lawyer's Wife, the
Gentlewoman, the Alderman's Wife, the Marchantes Wife, the Citizen's Wife,
the Rich Man's Wife, the Young Woman, the Mayde, the Damosell, the
Farmar's Wife, the Husbandman's Wife, the Countriwoman, the Nurse, the
Shepheard's Wife, the Aged Woman, the Creeple, the Poore Woman, the
Infant, the (female) Foole." All these are designed in a masterly manner,
and delicately engraved. The figures of the Deaths occasionally abound in
much humour, and always with appropriate characters. The names of the
unknown artists were worthy of being recorded.

III. "Icones mortis, sexaginta imaginibus totidemque inscriptionibus
insignitae versibus quoque Latinis et novis Germanicis illustratae.
Norimbergae Christ. Lockner, 1648, 8vo."[133]

IV. "Rudolph Meyers S: Todten dantz ergantz et und heraus gegeben durch
Conrad Meyern Maalern in Zurich, im jahr 1650." On an engraved title page,
representing an angel blowing a trumpet, with a motto from the Apocalypse.
Death or Time holds a lettered label with the above inscription or title.
In the back ground groups of small figures allusive to the last judgment.
Then follows a printed title "Sterbenspiegel das ist sonnenklare
vorstellung menschlicher nichtigkeit durch alle Stand und Geschlechter:
vermitlest 60 dienstlicher kupferblatteren lehrreicher uberschrifften und
beweglicher zu vier stimmen auszgesetzter Todtengesangen, vor disem
angefangen durch Rudolffen Meyern S. von Zurich, &c. Jetzaber zu erwekung
nohtwendiger Todsbetrachtung verachtung irdischer eytelkeit; und beliebung
seliger ewigkeit zuend gebracht und verlegt durch Conrad Meyern Maalern in
Zurich und daselbsten bey ihme zufinden. Getruckt zu Zuerich bey Johann
Jacob Bodmer, MDCL." 4to. that is: The Mirror of Death--that is--a
brilliant representation of human nothingness in all ranks and conditions,
by means of 60 appropriate Copperplates, spiritual superscriptions, and
moving songs of Death, arranged for four voices, formerly commenced by
Rudolph Meyer of Zurich, &c. but now brought to an end and completed, for
the awaking of a necessary consideration of death, a contempt of earthly
vanity, and a love of blissful eternity, by _Conrad_ Meyer of Zurich, of
whom they are to be had. Printed at Zurich, by John Jacob Bodmer, MDCL.

The subjects are the following:--1. The Creation. 2. The Fall. 3.
Expulsion from Paradise. 4. Punishment of Man. 5. Triumph of Death. 6. An
allegorical frontispiece relating to the class of the Clergy. 6. The Pope.
7. The Cardinal. 8. The Bishop. 9. The Abbot. 10. The Abbess. 11. The
Priest. 12. The Monk. 13. The Hermit. 14. The Preacher. 15. An allegorical
frontispiece to the class of Rulers and Governors. 15. The Emperor. 16.
The Empress. 17. The King. 18. The Queen. 19. The Prince Elector. 20. The
Earl and Countess. 21. The Knight. 22. The Nobleman. 23. The Judge. 24.
The Steward, Widow, and Orphan. 25. The Captain. 26. An allegorical
frontispiece to the Lower Classes. 26. The Physician. 27. The Astrologer.
28. The Merchant. 29. The Painter and his kindred: among these the old man
is Dietrich Meyern; the painter resembles the portrait of Conrad Meyern in
Sandrart, and the man at the table is probably Rudolph Meyern. 30. The
Handcraftsman. 31. The Architect. 32. The Innkeeper. 33. The Cook. 34. The
Ploughman. 35. The Man and Maid Servant. 36. The old Man. 37. The old
Woman. 38. The Lovers. 39. The Child. 40. The Soldier. 41. The Pedler. 42.
The Highwayman. 43. The Quack Doctor. 44. The Blind Man. 45. The Beggar.
46. The Jew. 47. The Usurer. 48. The Gamesters. 49. The Drunkards. 50. The
Gluttons. 51. The Fool. 52. The Certainty of Death. 53. The Uncertainty
of Death. 54. The Last Judgment. 55. Christ's Victory. 56. Salvation. 57.
True and False Religion.

The text consists chiefly of Death's apostrophe to his victims, with their
remonstrances, verses under each subject, and various other matters. At
the end are pious songs and psalms set to music. This work was jointly
executed by two excellent artists, Rodolph and Conrad Meyer or Meyern,
natives of Zurich. The designs are chiefly by Rodolph, and the etchings by
Conrad, consisting of sixty very masterly compositions. The grouping of
the figures is admirable, and the versatile representations of Death most
skilfully characterized. Many of the subjects are greatly indebted to the
Lyons wood engravings.

In 1657 and 1759 there appeared other editions of the latter, with this
title, "Die menschliche Sterblichkeit under dem titel Todten Tanz in LXI
original-kupfern, von Rudolf und Conrad Meyern beruhmten kunstmahlern in
Zurich abermal herausgegeben, nebst neven, dazu dienenden, moralischen
versen und veber schriften." That is, "Human mortality, under the title of
the Dance of Death, in 61 original copper prints of Rudolf and Conrad
Meyern, renowned painters at Zurich, to which are added appropriate moral
verses and inscriptions." Hamburg and Leipsig, 1759, 4to. The prolegomena
are entirely different from those in the other edition, and an elaborate
preface is added, giving an account of several editions of the Dance of
Death. Instead of the Captain, No. 25, the Ensign is substituted, and the
Cook is newly designed. Some of the numbers of the subjects are misplaced.
The etchings have been retouched, and on many the date of 1637 is seen,
which had no where occurred in the first edition here described.

In 1704 copies of 52 of these etchings were published at Augsburg, under
the title of "Tripudium mortis per victoriam super carnem universae orbis
terrae erectum. Ab A. C. Redelio S. C. M. T. P." on a label held by Death
as before. Then the German title "Erbaulicher Sterb-Spiegel dast ist
sonnen-klahre vorstellung menschlicher nichtigkeit durch alle stande und
geschlechter: vermittelst schoner kupffern, lehr-reicher bey-schrifften
und hertz-beweglich angehangter Todten-lieder ehmahls herauss gegeben
durch Rudolph und Conrad Meyern mahlern in Zurch Anjetzo aber mit
Lateinischen unterschrifften der kupffer vermehret und aussgezieret von
dem Welt-beruhmten Poeten Augustino Casimiro Redelio, Belg. Mech. Sac.
Caes. Majest. L. P. Augsburg zu finden bey Johann Philipp Steudner.
Druckts, Abraham Gugger. 1704." 4to. That is, "An edifying mirror of
mortality, representing the nullity of man through all stations and
generations, by means of beautiful engravings in copper, instructive
inscriptions, and heart-moving lays of Death, as an appendix to the work
formerly edited by Rudolph and Conrad Meyern of Zurich, but now published
with Latin inscriptions, and engravings augmented and renewed by the
worldly renowned poet Augustin Casimir Redel, &c."

In this edition the Pope and all the other religious characters are
omitted, probably by design. The etchings are very inferior to the fine
originals, and without the name of the artist. The dresses are frequently
modernised in the fashion of the time, and other variations are
occasionally introduced.

V. "Den Algemeynen dooden Spiegel van Pater Abraham a Sancta Clara,"
_i. e._ The universal mirror of Death of Father Abraham a Sancta Clara. On
a frontispiece engraved on copper, with a medallion of the author, and
various allegorical figures. Then the printed title, "Den Algemeynen
Dooden spiegel ofte de capelle der Dooden waer in alle Menschen sich al
lacchende oft al weenende op recht konnen beschouwen verciert mer aerdige
historien, Siu-rycke gedichten ende sedenleer-ende Beeldt-schetsen op
gestelt door den eerweerdigen Pater Abraham a Sancta Clara Difinitor der
Provincie van het order der ongeschoende Augustynen ende Predickant van
syne Keyserlycke Majesteyt Leopoldus. Getrouwelyck overgeset vyt het
hoogh-duyts in onse Nederduytsche Taele. Tot Brussel, by de Wed. G. Jacobs
tegen de Baert-brugge in de Druckerye, 1730." 12mo. _i. e._ "The universal
mirror of Death taken from the chapel of the dead; in which all men may
see themselves properly, whether laughing or weeping, ornamented with
pretty stories, spirited poems, and instructive prints, arranged by Father
Abraham a Sancta Clara, of the Augustinian order, and preacher to his
Imperial Majesty Leopold, and faithfully translated out of High Dutch into
our Netherlandish language."

The work consists of sixty-seven engravings on wood within borders, and of
very indifferent execution in all respects; the text a mixture of prose
and poetry of a religious nature, allusive to the subjects, which are not
uniformly a dance of Death. The best among them are the Painter, p. 45;
the Drunkard, p. 75; the dancing Couple, Death playing the Flageolet, p.
103; the Fowler, p. 113; the hen-pecked Husband, p. 139; the Courtezan, p.
147; the Musician, p. 193; the Gamester, p. 221; and the blind Beggar, p.
289.

VI. "Geistliche Todts-Gedanchen bey allerhand semahlden und Tchildereyn in
vabildung Interschiedlichen geschlechts, alters, standes, und wurdend
perschnen sich des Todes zucrinneren ans dessen lehrdie tugende zuueben und
die Tundzu meyden Erstlich in kupfer entworffen nachmaler durch sittliche
erdrtherung und aberlegung unter Todten-farben in vorschem gebracht,
dardurch zumheyl der seelen im gemuth des geneighten lesers ein lebendige
forcht und embsige vorsorg des Todes zu erwecken. Cum permissu superiorum.
Passau Gedrucht bey Frederich Gabriel Mangold, hochfurst, hof
buchdruckern, 1753. Lintz, verlegts Frantz Anton Ilger, Burgerl,
Buchhandlern allda." Folio. In English, "The Spiritual Dance of Death in
all kinds of pictures and representations, whereby persons of every age,
sex, rank, and dignity, may be reminded of Death, from which lesson they
may exercise themselves in virtue, and avoid sin. First put upon copper,
and afterwards, through moral considerations and investigations brought to
light in Death's own colours, thereby for the good of the souls of the
well inclined readers to awaken in them a lively fear and diligent
anticipation of Death."

The subjects are: 1. The Creation. 2. Temptation. 3. Expulsion. 4.
Punishment. 5. A charnel house, with various figures of Death, three in
the back-ground dancing. 6. The Pope. 7. Cardinal. 8. Bishop. 9. Abbot.
10. Canon. 11. Preacher. 12. Chaplain. 13. Monk. 14. Abbess. 15. Nun. 16.
Emperor. 17. Empress. 18. King. 19. Queen. 20. Prince. 21. Princess. 22.
Earl. 23. Countess. 24. Knight. 25. Nobleman. 26. Judge. 27. Counsellor.
28. Advocate. 29. Physician. 30. Astrologer. 31. Rich man. 32. Merchant.
33. Shipwreck. 34. Lovers. 35. Child. 36. Old man. 37. Old woman. 38.
Carrier. 39. Pedler. 40. Ploughman. 41. Soldier. 42. Gamesters. 43.
Drunkards. 44. Murderer. 45. Fool. 46. Blind man. 47. Beggar. 48. Hermit.
49. Corruption. 50. Last Judgment. 51. Allegory of Death's Arms, &c.

The designs and some of the engravings are by M. Rentz, for the most part
original, with occasional hints from the Lyons wood-cuts.

Another edition with some variation was printed at Hamburg, 1759, folio.

VII. In the Lavenburg Calendar for 1792, are 12 designs by Chodowiecki for
a Dance of Death. These are: 1. The Pope. 2. The King. 3. The Queen. 4.
The General. 5. The Genealogist. 6. The Physician. 7. The Mother. 8. The
Centinel. 9. The Fish Woman. 10. The Beggar. 11. The fille de joye and
bawd. 12. The Infant.

VIII. A Dance of Death in one of the Berne Almanacks, consisting of the 16
following subjects. 1. Death fantastically dressed as a beau, seizes the
city maiden. 2. Death wearing a Kevenhuller hat, takes the housemaid's
broom from her. 3. Death seizes a terrified washerwoman. 4. He takes some
of the apple-woman's fruit out of her basket. 5. The cellar maid or
tapster standing at the door of an alehouse is summoned by death to
accompany him. 6. He lays violent hands upon an abusive strumpet. 7. In
the habit of an old woman he lays hold of a midwife with a newly born
infant in her hands. 8. With a shroud thrown over his shoulder he summons
the female mourner. 9. In the character of a young man with a chapeau bras
he brings a urinal for the physician's inspection. 10. The life-guardsman
is accompanied by Death also on horseback and wearing an enormous military
hat. 11. Death with a skillet on his head plunders the tinker's basket.
12. Death in a pair of jack-boots leads the postilion. 13. The lame beggar
led by Death. 14. Death standing in a grave pulls the grave digger towards
him by the leg. 15. Death seated on a plough with a scythe in his left
hand, seizes the farmer, who carries several implements of husbandry on
his shoulders. 16. The fraudulent inn-keeper in the act of adulterating
his liquor in the cask, is throttled by Death who carries an ale vessel at
his back. These figures are cut on wood in a free and masterly manner, by
Zimmerman, an artist much employed in the decoration of these calendars.
The prints are accompanied with dialogues between Death and the respective
parties.

IX. "Freund Heins Erscheinungen in Holbeins manier von J. R. Schellenberg
Winterthur, bey Heinrich Steiner und Comp. 1785, 8vo." That is--"Friend
Heins appearance in the manner of Holbein, by J. R. Schellenberg." The
preface states that from the poverty of the German language in synonymous
expressions for the allegorical or ideal Death, the author has ventured to
coin the jocose appellation of Friend Hein, which will be understood from
its resemblance to Hain or Hayn, a word signifying a grove. The sagacity
of the German reader will perhaps discover the analogy. The subjects are
24 in number, as follow:

1. Love interrupted. The lovers are caught by Death in a net, and in no
very decent attitude.

2. Suicide. A man shoots himself with a pistol, and falls into the arms of
Death.

3. Death in the character of a beau visits a lady at her toilet.

4. The Aeronaut. The balloon takes fire, and the aeronaut is precipitated.

5. Death's visit to the school. He enters at a door inscribed SILENTIUM,
and puts the scholars to flight.

6. Bad distribution of alms.

7. Expectation deluded. Death disguised as a fine lady lays hands upon a
beau, who seems to have expected a very different sort of visitor.

8. Unwelcome officiousness. Death feeding an infant with poison, the nurse
wringing her hands in despair.

9. The dissolution of the monastery. The Abbot followed by his monks
receives the fatal summons in a letter delivered to him by Death.

10. The company of a friend. An aged man near a grave wrings his hands.
Death behind directs his attention to heaven.

11. The lottery gambler. Death presents him with the unlucky ticket.

12. The woman of Vienna and the woman of Rome. Death seizes one, and
points to the other.

13. The Usurer. Death shuts him into his money chest.

14. The Glutton. Death seizes him at table, and forcibly pours wine down
his throat.

15. The Rope-dancer. Death mounted on an ass, and fantastically
apparelled, enters the circle of spectators, and seizes the performer by
one of his legs.

16. The lodge of secrecy (freemasonry). Death introduces a novice
blindfold to the lodge.

17. The recruiting Officer. Death enlists some country fellows, a fiddler
preceding.

18. Berthold Swartz. Death ignites the contents of the mortar, and blows
up the monk. In the usual representations of this story the Devil is
always placed near the monk.

19. The Duel. A man strikes with a sword at Death, who is lifting up the
valves of a window.

20. The plunder of the falling-trap. Death demolishes a student by
throwing a bookcase filled with books upon him.

21. Silence surrendered. Death appears to a schoolmistress. The children
terrified, escape.

22. The privilege of the strong. Death lays violent hands on a lady, whom
her male companions in vain endeavour to protect.

23. The apothecary. Death enters his shop, and directs his attention to
the poor patients who are coming in.

24. The Conclusion. Two anatomists joining hands are both embraced by
Death.

The best of these subjects are Nos. 4, 13, 14, 15, and 18. The text is a
mixture of prose and verse.

X. "The English Dance of Death, from the designs of Thomas Rowlandson,
with metrical illustrations by the author of Doctor Syntax." 2 vols. 8vo.
1815-1816. Ackermann.

In seventy-two coloured engravings. Among these the most prominent and
appropriate are, the last Chase; the Recruit; the Catchpole; the
Death-blow; the Dramshop; the Skaiters; the Duel; the Kitchen; the
Toastmaster; the Gallant's downfall; and the fall of four in hand. The
rest are comparatively feeble and irrelevant, and many of the subjects
ill-chosen, and devoid of that humour which might have been expected from
the pencil of Rowlandson, whose grotesque predominates as usual in the
groups.

XI. "Death's Doings, consisting of numerous original compositions in prose
and verse, the friendly contributions of various writers, principally
intended as illustrations of 24 plates designed and etched by R. Dagley,
author of "Select gems from the antique," &c." 1826. 8vo.

From the intrinsic value and well deserved success of this work, a new
edition was almost immediately called for, which received many important
additions from the modest and ingenious author. Among these a new
frontispiece, from the design of Adrian Van Venne, the celebrated Dutch
poet and painter, is particularly to be noticed. This edition is likewise
enriched with numerous elegant contributions, both in prose and verse,
from some of the best writers of the age.

XII. A modern French Dance of Death, under the title of "Voyage pour
l'Eternite, service general des omnibus acceleres, depart a tout heure et
de tous les point du globe." Par J. Grandville. No date, but about 1830. A
series of nine lithographic engravings, including the frontispiece. Oblong
4to. These are the subjects:

1. Frontispiece. Death conducting passengers in his omnibus to the
cemetery of Pere la Chaise.

2. "C'est ici le dernier relai." Death as a postilion gives notice to a
traveller incumbered with his baggage, &c.

3. "Vais-je bien? ... vous avancez horriblement." Death enters a
watchmaker's shop, and shews his hour-glass to the master and his
apprentice.

4. "Monsieur le Baron, on vous demande.--Dites que je n'y suis pas." Death
having entered the apartment, the valet communicates his summons to his
gouty master lying on a couch.

5. "Soyez tranquille, j'ai un garcon qui ne se trompe jamais." The
apothecary addresses these words to some cautious patients whilst he fills
a vessel which they have brought to his shop. Death, as an apprentice in
another room, pounds medicines in a mortar.

6. "Voila, Messieurs, un plat de mon metier." A feast. Death as a waiter
enters with a plate of poisonous fruit.

7. "Voulez vous monter chez moi, mon petit Monsieur, vous n'en serez pas
fache, allez." Death, tricked out as a fille de joye with a mask, entices
a youth introduced by a companion.

8. "--Pour une consultation, Docteur, j'en suis j'vous suis ..." Death in
the character of an undertaker, his hearse behind, invites an old man to
follow him.

9. "Oui, Madame, ce sera bien la promenade la plus delicieuse! une voiture
dans le dernier gout! un cheval qui fend l'air, et le meilleur groom de
France." Death, habited as a beau, conducts a lady followed by her maid to
a carriage in waiting.

XIII. The British Dance of Death, exemplified by a series of engravings
from drawings by Van Assen, with explanatory and moral essays. Printed by
and for George Smeeton, Royal Arcade, Pall Mall. 8vo. no date. With a
frontispiece designed by Geo. Cruikshank, representing a crowned sitting
Death, holding a scythe in one hand, and with the other leaning on a
globe. This is circular in the middle. Over it two small compartments of
Death striking an infant in the cradle, and a sick man. At bottom, two
others of Death demolishing a glutton and a drunkard. A short preface
states that the work is on the plan of "the celebrated designs of
Holbein," meaning of course the Lyons work, but to which it has not the
smallest resemblance, and refers to Lord Orford for the mention of the
Basle dance, which, as having two or sometimes three figures only, it
does resemble. It then states that the late Mr. Van Assen had no intention
of publishing these designs, which now appear in compliance with the
wishes of many of his friends to possess them. They are very neatly
engraved, and tinted in imitation of the original drawings, but are wholly
destitute of that humour which might have been expected from the pencil of
the ingenious inventor, and which he has manifested on many other
occasions. The subjects are the following: 1. The Infant. 2. Juvenile
piety. 3. The Student. 4. The Sempstress. 5. The musical Student. 6. The
Dancer. 7. The female Student. 8. The Lovers. 9. The industrious Wife. 10.
The Warrior. 11. The Pugilists. 12. The Glutton. 13. The Drunkard. 14. The
Watchman. 15. The Fishwoman. 16. The Physician. 17. The Miser. 18. Old
Age. Death with his dart is standing near all these figures, but does not
seem to be noticed by any of them.

XIV. A Dance of Death in Danish rimes is mentioned in Nyerup's "Bidragh
til den Danske digtakunst historie." 1800. 12mo.

XV. John Nixon Coleraine, an amateur, and secretary to the original Beef
Stake Club, etched a dance of Death for ladies' fans. He died only a few
years ago. Published by Mr. Fores, of Piccadilly, who had the
copper-plates, but of which no impressions are now remaining.




CHAPTER XI.

    _Dances of Death, with such text only as describes the subjects._


I. Six small circles on a single sheet, engraved on copper by Israel Van
Meckenen. 1. Christ sitting on his cross. 2. Three skulls on a table. 3.
Death and the Pope. 4. Death riding on a lion, and the Patriarch. 5. Death
and the Standard-bearer. 6. Death and the Lady. At top "memento mori," at
bottom "Israhel V. M."

II. A Dance of Death, engraved on copper, by Henry Aldegrever. 1. Creation
of Eve. 2. Adam and Eve eating the forbidden fruit. 3. Expulsion from
Paradise. 4. Adam digging, Eve spinning. 5. Death and the Pope. 6. Death
and the Cardinal. 7. Death and the Bishop. 8. Death and the Abbot. All
these have the date 1541, and with some variations follow the Lyons
woodcuts. They have scriptural texts in Latin. 12mo. The whole were
afterwards copied in a work by Kieser, already described, p. 121.

III. A Dance of Death, consisting of eight subjects, engraved on copper by
an unknown artist, whose mark is [monogram: AC]. 1. Death beating a drum,
precedes a lady and gentleman accompanied by a little dog. 2. Death
playing on a stickado, precedes a lady and gentleman dancing back to back,
below an hour-glass. 3. Death, with an hour-glass in his right hand, lays
his left on the shoulder of a gentleman taking hold of a lady with his
right hand, and carrying a hawk with his left. 4. Death crowned with a
garland, and holding an hour-glass in his left hand, stands between a lady
and gentleman joining hands. 5. Death, with a fool's cap and hood, a
dagger of lath, and a bladder, holds up an hour-glass with his right hand;
with his left he seizes the hand of a terrified lady accompanied by a
gentleman, who endeavours to thrust away the unwelcome companion. 6.
Another couple led by Death. 7. Death with a cap and feathers holds an
hour-glass in his right hand, and with his left seizes a lady, whom a
gentleman endeavours to draw away from him. All have the date 1562. 12mo.
Size, three inches by two. They are described also in Bartsch, Peintre
Graveur, ix. 482, and have been sometimes erroneously ascribed to
Aldegrever.

[Illustration]

IV. A Dance of Death, extremely well executed on wood, the designs of
which have been taken from a set of initial letters, that will hereafter
be particularly described. They are upright, and measure two inches by one
and a half. Each subject is accompanied with two German verses.

V. On the back of the title page to "Die kleyn furstlich Chronica,"
Strasb. 1544, 4to. are three subjects that appear to be part of a series.
1. Death and the Pope, who has a book and triple crosier. Death kneels to
him whilst he plays on a tabor and drum. 2. Death and the King. Death
blows a trumpet. 3. Death shoots an arrow at a warrior armed with sword
and battle-axe. All these figures are accompanied with German verses, and
are neatly engraved on wood.

VI. A series of single figures, etched with great spirit by Giovanni Maria
Mitelli. They are not accompanied by Death, but hold dialogues with him in
Italian stanzas. The characters are, 1. The Astrologer. 2. The Doctor of
universal science. 3. The Hunter. 4. The Mathematician. 5. The Idolater.
They are not mentioned in Bartsch, nor in any other list of the works of
engravers. It is possible that there are more of them.

VII. The five Deaths, etched by Della Bella. 1. A terrific figure of Death
on a galloping horse. In his left hand a trumpet, to which a flag,
agitated by the wind, is attached. In the back ground, several human
skeletons, variously employed. 2. Death carrying off an infant in his
arms. In the back-ground, the church-yard of the Innocents at Paris. 3.
Death walking away with a young child on his back. In the distance,
another view of the above cemetery. 4. Death carrying off a female on his
shoulders, with her head downwards, followed at a distance by another
Death holding a corpse in his arms. 5. Death dragging a reluctant old man
towards a grave, in which another Death, with an hour-glass in his hand,
awaits him. All these are extremely fine, and executed in the artist's
best time. There is a sixth of the series, representing Death throwing a
young man into a well, but it is very inferior to the others. It was begun
by Della Bella a short time before his death, and finished by his pupil
Galestruzzi, about 1664. Della Bella likewise etched a long print of the
triumph of Death.

VIII. A single anonymous French engraving on copper, 14-1/2 by 6-1/2,
containing three subjects. 1. Death and the soldier. 2. Death standing
with a pruning knife in his right hand, and a winged hour-glass in his
left. Under him are three prostrate females, one plays on a violin; the
next, who represents Pride, holds a peacock in one hand and a mirror in
the other; the third has a flower in her left hand. 3. Death and the lady.
He holds an hour-glass and dart, and she a flower in her right hand. Under
each subject are French verses. This may perhaps be one only of a set.

IX. A German Dance of Death, in eight oblong engravings on copper, 11 by
8-1/2, consisting of eight sheets and twenty-five subjects, as follow. 1.
A fantastic figure of a Death, with a cap and feathers, in the attitude of
dancing and playing on a flute. He is followed by another dancing skeleton
carrying a coffin on his shoulder. 2. Pope. 3. Emperor. 4 Empress. 5.
Cardinal. 6. King. 7. Bishop. 8. Duke or General. 9. Abbot. 10. Knight.
11. Carthusian. 12. Burgomaster. 13. Canon. 14. Nobleman. 15. Physician.
16. Usurer. 17. Chaplain. 18. Bailiff or Steward. 19. Churchwarden. 20.
Merchant. 21. Hermit. 22. Peasant. 23. Young Man. 24. Maiden. 25. Child.
This is a complete set of the prints, representing the Lubeck painting,
already described in p. 43. In the translation of the inscriptions, as
given by Dr. Nugent, two more characters are added at the end, viz. the
Dancing Master and the Fencing Master. On the spectator's left hand of No.
1. of these engravings, is a column containing the following inscription
in German, in English as follows: "Silence, fool-hardy one, whoever thou
art, who, with needless words, profanest this holy place. This is no
chapel for talking, but thy sure place is in Death's Dance. Silence then,
silence, and let the painting on these silent walls commune with thee, and
convince thee that man is and will be earth:" and on Nos. 4 and 5, the
words "Zu finden in Lubeck by Christian Gotfried Donatius."

X. The following entry is in the Stationers' books:

  28 b.                  v{o} Januarij [1597.]
  Tho. Purfoote, sen.} Entered their c. Mr. Dix and Wm. M. The
  Tho. Purfoote, jun.}   roll of the Daunce of Death, with pictures
                     }   and verses upon the same           VI_d_.

XI. In the catalogue of the library of R. Smith, secretary of the Poultry
Compter, which was sold by auction in 1682, is this article "Dance of
Death in the cloyster of Paul's, with figures, very old." Probably a
single sheet.

XII. "The Dance of Death;" a single sheet, engraved on copper, with the
following figures. In the middle, Death leading the king; the beggar hand
in hand with the king; Death leading the old man, followed by a child; the
fool; the wise man, as an astrologer, led by Death. On the spectator's
left hand, Death bringing a man before a judge; with the motto, "The
greatest judge that sits in honour's seat, must come to grave, where't
boots not to intreate." A man and woman in a brothel, Death behind; with
the motto, "Leave, wanton youth, thou must no longer stay; if once I call
all mortals must obey." On the opposite side, the Miser and Death; the
motto, "Come, worldling, come, gold hath no power to save, leave it thou
shalt, and dance with me to grave." Death and the Prisoner; the motto,
"Prisoner arise, ile ease thy fetterd feet, and now betake thee to thy
winding sheet." In the middle of the print sits a minstrel on a stool
formed of bones placed on a coffin with a pick-axe and spade. He plays on
a tabor and pipe; with this motto, "Sickness, despaire, sword, famine,
sudden death, all these do serve as minstrells unto Death; the beggar,
king, fool, and profound, courtier and clown all dance this round." Under
the above figures is a poem of sixty-six lines on the power of Death,
beginning thus:

  Yea, Adam's brood and earthly wights which breath now on the earth,
  Come dance this dance, and mark the song of this most mighty Death.
  Full well my power is known and seen in all the world about,
  When I do strike of force do yeeld both noble, wise, and stout, &c.

Printed cullored and sould by R. Walton at the Globe and Compasses at the
West end of St. Paules church turning down towards Ludgate.

XIII. A large anonymous German engraving on copper, in folio. In the
middle is a circular Dance of Death, with nine females, from the Empress
to the Fool. In the four corners, two persons kneeling before a crucifix;
saints in heaven; the temptation; and the infernal regions. At top, a
frame with these verses:

  Vulneris en nostri certam solamque medelam
  En data divina praemia larga manu.
  Der Todt Christi Zunicht hat gmacht
  Den Todt und Sleben wider bracht.

At bottom in a similar frame:

  Per unius peccatum Mors intravit in mundum.
  Den Todt und ewig hellisch pein
  Hat veruhr sagt die Sund allein.

This is within a broad frame, containing a Dance of Death, in twelve
ovals. The names of the characters are in German: 1. The Pope. 2. Emperor.
3. King. 4. Cardinal. 5. Bishop. 6. Duke. 7. Earl. 8. Gentleman. 9.
Citizen. 10. Peasant. 11. Soldier and Beggar. 12. Fool and Child. Under
each subject is an appropriate inscription in Latin and German. In the
middle at top, a Death's head and bones, an hour-glass and a dial. In the
middle at bottom, a lamp burning on a Death's head, and a pot of holy
water with an aspergillum. On the sides, in the middle, funereal
implements.

XIV. Heineken, in his "Dictionnaire des Graveurs," iii. 77, mentions a
Dance of Death engraved about 1740 by Maurice Bodenehr of Friburg, but
without any further notice.

XV. Another very large print, 2 feet by 1-1/2, in mezzotinto, the subject
as in No. 10. but the figures varied, and much better drawn. At bottom,
"Joh. El. Ridinger excud. Aug. Vindel."

XVI. Newton's Dances of Death. Published July 12, 1796, by Wm. Holland,
No. 50, Oxford Street, consisting of the following grotesque subjects
engraved on copper. The size 6 inches by 5. 1. Auctioneer. 2. Lawyer. 3.
Old Maid on Death's back. 4. Gamblers. 5. Scolding Wife. 6. Apple-woman.
7. Blind Beggar. 8. Distressed Poet and Bailiff. 9. Undertaker. 10.
Sleeping Lady. 11. Old Woman and her Cats. 12. Gouty Parson feeding on a
tythe pig. 12. Same subject differently treated. 13. Sailor and
Sweetheart. 14. Physician, Gravedigger, and Death dancing a round. 15.
Market-man. 16. Doctor, sick Patient, and Nurse. 17. Watchman. 18.
Gravedigger putting a corpse into the grave. 19. Old maid reading, Death
extinguishes the candle. 20. Gravedigger making a grave. 21. Old Woman.
22. Barber. 23. Lady and Death reflected in the mirror. 24. Waiter. 25.
Amorous Old Man and Young Woman. 26. Jew Old Clothes-man. 27. Miser. 28.
Female Gin-drinker.

XVII. The Dance of Death modernised. Published July 13, 1800, and designed
by G. M. Woodward, Berners' Street, Oxford Street. Contains the following
caricatures. Size 5 by 4-1/2.

1. King. "Return the diadem and I'll follow you."

2. Cardinal. "Zounds, take care of my great toe, or I shall never rise
higher than a cardinal."

3. Bishop. "I cannot go, I am a bishop."

4. Old Man. "My good friend, I am too old, I assure you."

5. Dancing-master. "I never practised such an Allemande as this since I
have been a dancing-master."

6. Alderman. "If you detain me in this way my venison will be quite cold."

7. Methodist Preacher. "If you wo'nt take I, I'll never mention you or the
Devil in my sarmons as long as I lives."

8. Parson. "I can't leave my company till I've finish'd my pipe and
bottle."

9. Schoolmaster. "I am only a poor schoolmaster, and sets good examples in
the willage."

10. Miser. "Spare my money, and I'll go contented."

11. Politician. "Stay till I have finished the newspaper, for I am told
there is great intelligence from the continent."

12. Press-gang Sailor. "Why d-- me I'm one of your apprentices."

13. Beggar. "This is the universal dance from a king to a beggar."

14. Jockey. "I assure you I am engaged at Newmarket."

15. Undertaker. "A pretty dance this for an undertaker."

16. Gouty Man. "Buzaglo's exercise was nothing to this."

17. Poet. "I am but a poor poet, and always praised the ode to your honour
written by the late King of Prussia."

18. Physician. "Here's fine encouragement for the faculty."

19. Lawyer. "The law is always exempt by the statutes."

20. Old Maid. "Let me but stay till I am married, and I'll ask no longer
time."

21. Fine Lady. "Don't be so boisterous, you filthy wretch. I am a woman of
fashion."

22. Empress. "Fellow, I am an empress."

23. Young Lady. "Indeed, Sir, I am too young."

24. Old Bawd. "You may call me old bawd, if you please, but I am sure I
have always been a friend to your worship."

XVIII. Bonaparte's Dance of Death. Invented, drawn, and etched by Richard
Newton, 7 by 5.

1. Stabb'd at Malta. 2. Drown'd at Alexandria. 3. Strangled at Cairo. 4.
Shot by a Tripoline gentleman. 5. Devoured by wild beasts in the desert.
6. Alive in Paris.




CHAPTER XII.

    _Books in which the subject is occasionally introduced._


To offer any thing in the shape of a perfect list of these, would be to
attempt an impossibility, and therefore such only as have come under the
author's immediate inspection are here presented to the curious reader.
The same remark will apply to the list of single prints that follows.

There is a very singular book, printed, as supposed, about 1460, at
Bamberg, by Albert Pfister. It is in German, and a sort of moral allegory
in the shape of complaints against Death, with his answers to these
accusations. It is very particularly described from the only known perfect
copy in the royal library at Paris, by M. Camus, in vol. ii. of "Memoires
de l'institut. national des sciences et arts: litterature et beaux arts,"
p. 6 et seq. It contains five engravings on wood, the first of which
represents Death seated on a throne. Before him stands a man with an
infant to complain that Death has taken the mother, who is seen wrapped in
a shroud upon a tomb. The second cut represents Death also on a throne
with the same person as before, making his complaint, accompanied by
several other persons at the feet of Death, sorrowfully deposing the
attributes of their respective conditions, and at the head of them a Pope
kneeling with one knee on the ground. The third cut has two figures of
Death, one of which, on foot, mows down several boys and girls; the other
is on horseback, and pursues some cavaliers, against whom he shoots his
arrows. The fourth cut is in two compartments, the upper representing, as
before, a man complaining to Death seated on a throne with a crown on his
head. Below, on the spectator's left hand, is a convent whence several
monks are issuing towards a garden encircled with hurdles, in which is a
tree laden with fruit by the side of a river; a woman is seen crowning a
child with a chaplet, near whom stands another female in conversation with
a young man. M. Camus, in the course of his description of this cut, has
fallen into a very ludicrous error. He mistakes the very plain and obvious
gate of the garden, for a board, on which, he says, _several characters
are engraved which may be meant to signify the arts and sciences, none of
which are competent to protection against the attacks of Death_. These
supposed characters, however, are nothing more than the flowered hinges,
ring or knocker, and lock of the door, which stands ajar. The fifth cut is
described as follows, and probably with greater accuracy than in M. Camus,
by Dr. Dibdin, from a single leaf of this very curious work in the
Bibliotheca Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 104, accompanied with a copy of part
of it only. "Above the figures there seen sits the Almighty upon a throne,
with an attendant angel on each side. He is putting the forefinger of his
left hand into the centre of his right, and upon each of the hands is an
eye, denoting, I presume, the omniscience of the Deity." The fac-simile
cut partly corresponds with M. Camus's description of Death, and the
complainant before Christ seated on a throne in a heaven interspersed with
stars. The above fourth cut among these is on a single leaf in the
possession of the author, which had Dr. Dibdin seen, he would not have
introduced M. Camus's erroneous account of it, who has also referred to
Heineken's Idee, &c. p. 276, where it certainly is not in the French
edition of 1771. 8vo.

In the celebrated Nuremberg Chronicle, printed in that city, 1493, large
folio, there is at fo. cclxiiii. a fine wood-cut of three Deaths dancing
hand in hand, another playing to them on a haut-boy. Below is a skeleton
rising from a grave. It is inscribed IMAGO MORTIS.

In the "Stultifera navis" of Sebastian Brant, originally printed in German
at Basle and Nuremberg, 1494, are several prints, finely cut on wood, in
which Death is introduced. In an edition printed at Basle, 1572, 12mo.
with elegant wood engravings, after the designs of Christopher Maurer, and
which differ very materially from those in the early editions, there is a
cut of great merit to the verses that have for their title, "Qui alios
judicat." It represents a man on his death bed; and as the poet's
intention is to condemn the folly of those who, judging falsely or
uncharitably of others, forget that they must die themselves, Death is
introduced as pulling a stool from under a fool, who sits by the bed-side
of the dying man. In the original cut the fool is tumbling into the jaws
of hell, which, as usual, is represented by a monstrous dragon.

In the "Calendrier des Bergers," Paris, 1500, folio, at sign. g. 6, is a
terrific figure of Death on the pale horse; and at sign. g. 5. Death in a
cemetery, with crosses and monuments; in his left hand the lid of a coffin
in which his left foot is placed. These cuts are not in the English
translation.

"Ortulus Rosarum," circa 1500, 12mo. A wood-cut of Death bearing a coffin
on his shoulder, leads a group consisting of a pope, a cardinal, &c.

In the dialogue "Of lyfe and death," at the end of "the dialoges of
creatures moralysed," probably printed abroad without date or printer's
name soon after 1500, are two engravings in wood, one representing Death
appearing to a man with a falcon on his fist, the other Death with his
spade leading an emperor, a king, and a duke. The latter is not found in
the Latin editions of this work, and has probably formed a part of some
very old Dance of Death.

In an edition of "Boetius de consolatione," Strasburg, 1501, folio, is a
figure of Death on a lean horse throwing his dart at a group of warriors.

In the "Freidanck," Strasburg, 1508, 4to, near the end is a wood-cut of a
garden, in which two men and two women are feasting at a table. They are
interrupted by the unexpected appearance of Death, who forcibly seizes one
of the party, whilst the rest make their escape.

In the "Mortilogus" of Conrad Reitter, Prior of Nordlingen, printed at
Augsbourg by Erhard Oglin and Geo. Nadler, 1508, 4to. there is a wood-cut
of Death in a church-yard, holding a spade with one hand and with the
other showing his hour-glass to a young soldier; and another of Death
shooting an arrow at a flying man.

In "Heures a l'usaige de Sens," printed at Paris by Jean de Brie, 1512,
8vo. the month of December in the calendar is figured by Death pulling an
old man towards a grave; a subject which is, perhaps, nowhere else to be
found as a representation of that month. It is certainly appropriate, as
being at once the symbol of the termination of the year and of man's life.

In the "Chevalier de la Tour," printed by Guillaume Eustace, Paris, 1514,
folio, there is an allegorical cut, very finely engraved on wood, at fo.
xxii. nearly filling the page. The subject is the expulsion of Adam and
Eve from Paradise, the gate of which exhibits a regular entrance, with
round towers and portcullis. Behind this gate is seen the forbidden tree,
at the bottom of which is the Devil, seemingly rejoicing at the expulsion,
with an apple in his hand. Near the gate stands the angel with his sword,
and a cross on his head. Between him and the parties expelled is a
picturesque figure of Death with a scythe ready for action.

"Horae ad usum Romanum," printed for Geoffrey Tory of Tours, 1525. Before
the Vigiliae Mortuorum is a wood-cut of a winged Death holding a clock in
one hand; with the other he strikes to the ground and tramples on several
men and women. Near him is a tree with a crow uttering CRAS CRAS. In
another edition, dated 1527, is a different cut of a crowned figure of
Death mounted on a black mule and holding a scythe and hour-glass. He is
trampling on several dead bodies, and is preceded by another Death, armed
also with a scythe, whilst a third behind strikes the mule, who stops to
devour one of the prostrate figures. Above is a crow.

In a beautiful Officium Virg. printed at Venice, 1525, 12mo. is a vignette
of Death aiming an arrow at a group consisting of a pope, cardinal, &c.
Another Death is behind, on the spectator's left.

In "Heures de Notre Dame mises en reyne, &c." par Pierre Gringoire, 1527,
8vo. there is a cut at fo. lx. before the vigilles de la mort, of a king
lying on a bier in a chapel with tapers burning, several mourners
attending, and on the ground a pot of holy water. A hideous figure of
Death holding a scythe in one hand and a horn in the other, tramples on
the body of the deceased monarch.

In a folio missal for the use of Salisbury, printed at Paris by Francis
Regnault, 1531, there is a singular cut prefixed to the Officium
Mortuorum, representing two Deaths seizing a body that has the horrible
appearance of having been some time in its grave.

In a Flemish metrical translation of Pope Innocent III.'s work, "De
vilitate conditionis humanae," Ghend, 1543, 12mo. there is a wood-cut of
Death emerging from hell, armed with a dart and a three-pronged fork,
with which he attacks a party taking their repast at a table.

In the cuts to the Old Testament, beautifully engraved on wood by Solomon
or le petit Bernard, Lyons, 1553, 12mo. Death is introduced in the vision
of Ezekiel, ch. xxxvii. In this work the expulsion from Paradise is
imitated from the same subject in the Lyons wood-cuts.

In "Hawes's History of Graund Amoure and la bel Pucell, called the Pastime
of Pleasure," printed by R. Tottel, 1555, 4to. are two prints; the first
exhibits a female seated on a throne, in contemplation of several men and
animals, some of whom are lying dead at her feet; behind the throne Death
is seen armed with a dart, which he seems to have been just making use of:
there is no allusion to it in the text, and it must have been intended for
some other work. The second print has two figures of Death and a young
man, whom he threatens with a sort of mace in his right hand, whilst he
holds a pickaxe with his left.

"Imagines elegantissimae quae multum lucis ad intelligendos doctrinae
Christianae locos adferre possunt, collectae a Johann Cogelero verbi divini
ministro, Stetini." Viteberg, 1560, 12mo. It contains a wood-print, finely
executed, of the following subject. In the front Death, armed with a
hunting-spear, pushes a naked figure into the mouth of hell, in which are
seen a pope and two monks. Behind this group, Moses, with a pair of bulls'
horns, and attended by two Jews, holds the tables of the law. In the
distance the temptation, and the brazen serpent.

A German translation of the well known block book, the "Ars Moriendi," was
printed at Dilingen, 1569, 12mo. with several additional engravings on
wood. It is perhaps the last publication of the work. On the title-page is
an oval cut, representing a winged boy sleeping on a scull, and Death
shooting an arrow at him. The first cut exhibits a sort of Death's dance,
in eight small compartments. 1. A woman in bed just delivered of a child,
with which Death is running away. 2. A man sitting at a table, Death
seizes him behind, and pulls him over the bench on which he is sitting. 3.
Death drowning a man in a river. 4. Flames of fire issue from a house,
Death tramples on a man endeavouring to escape. 5. Two men fighting, one
of whom pierces the other with his sword. The wounded man is seized by
Death, the other by the Devil. 6. A man on horseback is seized by Death
also mounted behind. 7. Death holds his hour-glass to a man on his
death-bed. 8. Death leading an aged man to the grave. At the end of this
curious volume is a singular cut, intitled "Symbolum M. Joannis Stotzinger
Presbyteri Dilingensis." It exhibits a young man sitting at a table, on
which is a violin, music books, and an hour-glass. On the table is written
RESPICE FINEM. Near him his guardian angel holding a label, inscribed
ANGELVS ASTAT. Behind them Death about to strike the young man with his
dart, and over him MORS MINATVR. At the end of the table Conscience as a
female, whom a serpent bites, with the label CONSCIENTIA MORDET, and near
her the Devil, with the label DIABOLVS ACCVSAT. Above is the Deity looking
down, and the motto DEVS VIDET.

"Il Cavallero Determinado," Antwerp, 1591, 4to. A translation from the
French romance of Olivier de la Marche, with etchings by Vander Borcht.
The last print represents Death, armed with a coffin lid as a shield,
attacking a knight on horseback. In several of the other prints Death is
represented under the name of Atropos, as president in tournaments. In
other editions the cuts are on wood by the artist with the mark [monogram:
A].

In the margins of some of the Horae, printed by Thielman Kerver, there are
several grotesque figures of Death, independently of the usual Dance.

In many of the Bibles that have prints to the Revelations, that of Death
on the pale horse is to be noticed.

In Petrarch's work "de remediis utriusque fortunae," both in the German and
Latin editions, there are several cuts that relate materially to the
subject. It may be as well to mention that this work has been improperly
ascribed to Petrarch.

In many of the old editions of Petrarch's works which contain the
triumphs, that of Death is usually accompanied with some terrific print of
Death in a car drawn by oxen, trampling upon all conditions of men from
the pope to the beggar.

"Guilleville, Pelerin de la vie humaine." The pilgrim is conducted by
Abstinence into a refectory, where he sees many figures of Death in the
act of feeding several persons sitting at table. These are good people
long deceased, who during their lives have been bountiful to their
fellow-creatures. At the end, the pilgrim is struck by Death with two
darts whilst on his bed.

Death kicking at a man, his wife, and child. From some book printed at
Strasburg in the 16th century.

Death, as an ecclesiastic, sitting on the ground and writing in a book.
Another Death holding an inscribed paper in one hand, seizes with the
other a man pointing to a similar paper. The Deity in a cloud looking on.
From the same book.

"Mors," a Latin comedy, by William Drury, a professor of poetry and
rhetoric in the English college at Douay. It was acted in the refectory of
the college and elsewhere, and with considerable applause, which it very
well deserved. There is as much, and sometimes more, wit and humour in it
than are found in many English farces. It was printed at Douay, 1628,
12mo. with two other Latin plays, but not of equal interest.

A moral and poetical Drama, in eleven scenes, intitled, "Youth's Tragedy,
by T. S." 1671 and 1707, 4to. in which the interlocutors are, Youth, the
Devil, Wisdom, Time, Death, and the Soul. It is miserable stuff.

"La Historia della Morte," Trevigi, 1674, 4to. four leaves only. It is a
poem in octave stanzas. The author, wandering in a wood, is overwhelmed
with tears in reflecting on the approach of Death and his omnipotent
dominion over mankind. He is suddenly accosted by the king of terrors, who
is thus described:

  Un ombra mi coperse prestamente
  Che mi fece tremar in cotal sorte
  Ell'era magra, e longa in sua figura,
  Che chi la vede perde gioco, e festa,
  Dente d'acciaio haveva in bocca oscura,
  Corna di ferro due sopra la testa
  Ella mi fe tremar dalla paura, &c.

The work consists of a long dialogue between the parties. The author
enquires of Death if he was born of father and mother. Death answers that
he was created, by Jesus Christ, "che e signor giocondo," with the other
angels; that after Adam's sin he was called _Death_. The author tells him
that he seems rather to be a malignant spirit, and presses for some
further information. He is referred to the Bible, and the account of
David's destroying angel:

  Quando Roma per me fu tribulata
  Gregorio videmi con suo occhio honesto
  Con una spada ch'era insanguinata
  Al castel de Sant Angelo chiamato
  Da l'hora in qua cosi fu appellato.

This corresponds with the usual story, that during a plague Gregory saw an
angel hovering over the castle, who, on the Pope's looking up to him,
immediately sheathed his flaming sword. More questions are then propounded
by Death, particularly as to the use of his horns and teeth, and the
curiosity of the author is most condescendingly gratified.

Bishop Warburton and Mr. Malone have referred to old Moralities, in which
the fool escaping from the pursuit of Death is introduced. Ritson has
denied the existence of any such farces, and he is perhaps right with
respect to printed ones; but vestiges of such a drama were observed
several years ago at the fair of Bristol by the present writer. See the
notes to Measure for Measure, Act iii. sc. 1, and to Pericles, Act iii.
sc. 2.

In "Musart Adolescens Academicus sub institutione Salomonis," Duaci, 1633,
12mo. is an engraving on copper of a modern Bacchus astride upon a wine
cask drawn by two tigers. In one hand he holds a thyrsus composed of
grapes and vine leaves, and in the other a cup or vase, from which a
serpent springs, to indicate poison. Behind this Bacchus Death is seated,
armed with his scythe and lying in wait for him. The motto, "Vesani
calices quid non fecere," a parody on the line, "Fecundi calices quem non
fecere disertum?" Horat. lib. i. epist. v. 1. 19.

In "Christopher Van Sichem's Bibels' Tresoor," 1646, 4to. there is a
wood-cut of Death assisting Adam to dig the ground, partly copied from the
subject of "the Curse," in the work printed at Lyons.

In "De Chertablon, maniere de se bien preparer a la mort, &c." Anvers,
1700, 4to. there is an allegorical print in which a man is led by his
guardian angel to the dwelling of Faith, Hope, and Charity, but is
violently seized by Death, who points to his last habitation, in the shape
of a sepulchral monument.

In Luyken's "Onwaardige wereld," Amst. 1710, 12mo. are three allegorical
engravings relating to this subject.

In a very singular book, intitled "Confusio disposita rosis
rhetorico-poeticis fragrans, sive quatuor lusus satyrico morales, &c.
authore Josepho Melchiore Francisco a Glarus, dicto Tschudi de Greplang."
Augsburg, 1725, 12mo. are the following subjects. 1. The world as Spring,
represented by a fine lady in a flower-garden, Death and the Devil behind
her. 2. Death and the Devil lying in wait for the miser. 3. Death and the
Devil hewing down the barren fig-tree. 4. A group of dancers at a ball
interrupted by Death. 5. Death striking a lady in bed attended by her
waiting maid. 6. Death gives the coup-de-grace to a drunken fellow who had
fallen down stairs. 7. Death mounted on a skeleton-horse dashes among a
group of rich men counting their gold, &c. 8. A rich man refused entrance
into heaven. He has been brought to the gate in a sedan chair, carried by
a couple of Deaths in full-bottom periwigs.

In Luyken's "Vonken der lief de Jezus," Amst. 1727, 12mo. are several
engravings relating to the subject. In one of them Death pours a draught
into the mouth of a sick man in bed.

In Moncrief's "March of Intellect," 1830, 18mo. scene a workhouse, Death
brings in a bowl of soup, a label on the ground, inscribed "Death in the
pot." An engraving in wood after Cruikshank.

In Jan Huygen's "Beginselen van Gods koninryk," Amst. 1738, 12mo. with
engravings by Luyken, a dying man attended by his physician and friends;
Death at the head of the bed eagerly lying in wait for him.

In one of the livraisons of "Goethe's Balladen und Romanzen," 1831, in
folio, with beautiful marginal decorations, there is a Dance of Death in a
church-yard, accompanied with a description, of which an English
translation is inserted in the "Literary Gazette" for 1832, p. 731, under
the title of "The Skeleton Dance," with a reference to another indifferent
version in the "Souvenir."

The well-known subjects of Death and the old man with the bundle of
sticks, &c. and Cupid and Death in many editions of AEsopian fables.




CHAPTER XIII.

    _Books of emblems and fables.--Frontispieces and title-pages, in some
    degree connected with the Dance of Death._


EMBLEMS AND FABLES.

It is very seldom that in this numerous and amusing class of books a
subject relating to Death, either moral or of a ludicrous nature does not
occur. It may be sufficient to notice a few of them.

"La Morosophie de Guillaume de la Perriere," 1553, 12mo.

"Emblemes ou devises Chretiennes," par Georgette de Montenaye, 1571, 4to.

"Le Imprese del S. Gab. Symeoni." Lyons, 1574, 4to.

"Enchiridion artis pingendi, fingendi et sculpendi. Auth. Justo Ammanno,
Tig." Francof. 1578, 4to. This is one of Jost Amman's emblematical books
in wood, and contains at the end a figure of Death about to cut off two
lovers with his scythe, Cupid hovering over them.

"Apologi creaturarum." Plantin, 1590, 4to. with elegant etchings by Marc
Gerard. It has one subject only of Death summoning a youth with a hawk on
his fist to a church-yard in the back-ground.

Reusner's "aureolorum emblematum liber singularis," Argentorati, 1591,
12mo. A print of Death taking away a lady who has been stung by a serpent;
designed and engraved by Tobias Stimmer.

"De Bry Proscenium vitae humanae," Francof. 1592 and 1627, 4to. This
collection has two subjects: 1. Death and the Young Man. 2. Death and the
Virgin.

"Jani Jacobi Boissardi Emblematum liber, a Theodoro de Bry sculpta."
Francof. 1593. Contains one print, intitled "Sola virtus est funeris
expers." The three Fates, one of whom holds a tablet with SIC VISVM
SVPERIS. Death attending with his hour-glass. Below, crowns, sceptres, and
various emblems of human vanity. On the spectator's left, a figure of
Virtue standing, with sword and shield.

"De Bry Emblemata." Francof. 1593, 4to. The last emblem has Death striking
an old man, who still clings to the world, represented as a globe.

"Rolandini variar. imaginum, lib. iii." Panormi, 1595, 12mo.

"Alciati Emblemata," one of the earliest books of its kind, and a
favourite that has passed through a great many editions.

"Typotii symbola divina et humana Pontificum Imperatorum, Regum, &c."
Francofurti, 1601, folio.

"Friderich's Emblems," 1617, 8vo. Several engravings on the subject.

"Das erneurte Stamm-und Stechbuchlein." By Fabian Athyr. Nuremberg, 1654.
Small obl. 4to.

"Mannichii Emblemata." Nuremberg, 1624, 4to.

"Minne Beelden toe-ghepast de Lievende Jonckheyt," Amst. 1635, 12mo. The
cuts on the subject are extremely grotesque and singular.

"Sciographia Cosmica." A description of the principal towns and cities in
the world, with views engraved by Paul Furst, and appropriate emblems. By
Daniel Meisner: in eight parts. Nuremberg, 1637. Oblong 4to. In the print
of the town of Freyburg, Death stands near an old man, and holds a clock
in one hand. In that of the city of Toledo Death accompanies a female who
has a mirror in her hand.

In the same work, at vol. A. 4, is a figure of Death trampling on Envy,
with the motto, "Der Todt mach dem Neyd ein ende." At A. 39, Death
intercepting a traveller, the motto, "Vitam morti obviam procedit." At A.
74, Death standing near a city, the motto, "Tros Tyriusve mihi nullo
discrimine habetur." At C. 9, a man and woman in the chains of matrimony,
which Death dissolves by striking the chain with a bone, the motto,
"Conjugii vinculum firmissimum est." At C. 30, Death about to mow down a
philosopher holding a clock, the motto, "Omnis dies, omnis hora, quam
nihil sumus ostendit." At E. 32, Death standing in the middle of a
parterre of flowers, holding in one hand a branch of laurel, in the other
a palm branch, the motto, "Ante mortem nullus beatus est." At E. 35, Death
shooting with a cross-bow at a miser before his chest of money, the motto,
"Nec divitiis nec auro." At E. 44, Death seizes a young man writing the
words, "sic visum superis" on a tablet, the motto, "Viva virtus est
funeris expers." At G. 32, Death pursues a king and a peasant, all on
horseback, the motto, "Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat." At G. 66, a woman
looking in a mirror sees Death, who stands behind her reflected, the
motto, "Tota vita sapientis est meditatio mortis." At H. 66, a company of
drunkards. Death strikes one of them behind when drinking, the motto,
"Malus inter poculo mos est." At H. 80, Death cuts down a genealogical
tree, with a young man and woman, the motto, "Juventus proponit, mors
disponit."

"Conrad Buno Driestandige Sinnbilder," 1643. Oblong 4to.

"Amoris divini et humani antipathia." Antw. 1670. 12mo.

"Typotii Symbola varia diversorum principum sacrosanctae ecclesiae et sacri
Imperii Romani." Arnheim, 1679. 12mo.

In Sluiter's "Somer en winter leven," Amst. 1687, 12mo. is a figure of
Death knocking at the door of a house and alarming the inhabitants with
his unexpected visit. The designer most probably had in his recollection
Horace's "Mors aequo pede pulsat pauperum tabernas regumque turres."

"Euterpe soboles hoc est emblemata varia, &c." with stanzas in Latin and
German to each print. No date. Oblong 4to. The engravings by Peter Rollo.
Republished at Paris, with this title, "Le Centre de l'amour, &c." A Paris
chez Cupidon. Same form, and without date. This edition has several
additional cuts.

"Rollenhagii nucleus Emblematum." The cuts by Crispin de Passe.

In Herman Krul's "Eerlyche tytkorting, &c." a Dutch book of emblems, 4to.
n. d. there are some subjects in which Death is allegorically introduced,
and sometimes in a very ludicrous manner.

Death enters the study of a seated philosopher, from whose mouth and
breast proceed rays of light, and presents him with an hour-glass. Below a
grave, over which hangs one foot of the philosopher. A. Venne invent. Obl.
5-1/2 by 4-1/2.

"Catz's Emblems," in a variety of forms and editions, containing several
prints relating to the subject.

"Oth. Vaenii Emblemata Horatiana." Several editions, with the same prints.

"Le Centre de l'Amour decouvert soubs divers emblesmes galans et
facetieux. A Paris chez Cupidon." Obl. 4to. without date. One print only
of a man sitting in a chair seized by Death, whilst admiring a female,
who, not liking the intrusion, is making her escape. The book contains
several very singular subjects, accompanied by Latin and German subjects.
It occurs also under the title of "Euterpae soboles hoc est emblemata
varia eleganti jocorum mistura, &c."

"Fables nouvelles par M. de la Motte." 4to. edition. Amsterd. 1727, 12mo.

"Apophthegmata Symbolica, &c." per A. C. Redelium Belgam. Augspurg, 1700.
Oblong 4to. Death and the soldier; Death interrupting a feast; Death and
the miser; Death and the old man; Death drawing the curtain of life, &c.
&c.

"Choice emblems, divine and moral." 1732. 12mo.


FRONTISPIECES AND TITLE PAGES TO BOOKS.

"Arent Bosman." This is the title to an old Dutch legend of a man who had
a vision of hell, which is related much in the manner of those of Tundale
and others. It was printed at Antwerp in 1504, 4to. The frontispiece has a
figure of Death in pursuit of a terrified young man, and may probably
belong to some other work.

On a portion of the finely engraved wood frontispiece to "Joh. de Bromyard
Summa predicantium." Nuremberg, 1518, folio. Death with scythe and
hour-glass stands on an urn, supported by four persons, and terrifies
several others who are taking flight and stumbling over each other.

"Schawspiel Menchliches Lebens." Frankfort, 1596, 4to. Another edition in
Latin, intitled, "Theatrum vitae humanae," by J. Boissard, the engravings by
De Bry. At the top of the elegant title or frontispiece to this work is an
oblong oval of a marriage, interrupted by Death, who seizes the
bridegroom. At bottom a similar oval of Death digging the grave of an old
man who is looking into it. On one side of the page, Death striking an
infant in its cradle; on the other, a merchant about to ship his goods is
intercepted by Death.

On the title-page to a German jeu d'esprit, in ridicule of some anonymous
pedant, there is a wood-cut of Death mounted backwards on an ass, and near
him a fool hammering a block of some kind on an anvil. The title of this
satirical morsel is "Res Mira. Asinus sex linguarum jucundissimis
anagrammatismis et epigrammatibus oneratus, tractionibus, depositionibus,
et fustuariis probe dedolatus, hero suo remissus, ac instar prodromi
praemissus, donec meliora sequantur, Asininitates aboleantur, virique boni
restituantur: ubi etiam ostenditur ab asino salso intentata vitia non esse
vitia. Ob variam ejus jucunditatem, suavitatem et versuum leporem recusus,
anno 1625." The address to the reader is dated from Giessen, 19th June,
1606, and the object of the satire disguised under the name of Jonas
Melidaeus.

"Les Consolations de l'ame fidelle contre les frayeurs de la mort, par
Charles Drelincourt." Amsterdam, 1660. 8vo.

"Deugden Spoor De Vijfte Der-Eeringe Aen de Medicijas met sampt Monsieur
Joncker Doctor Koe-Beest ende alle sijne Complicen." Death introduces an
old man to a physician who is inspecting a urinal. 12mo.

Death leading an old man with a crutch, near a charnel-house, inscribed
MEMENTO MORI. At top these verses:

  Il faut sans diferer me suivre
    Tu dois etre pret a partir
  Dieu ne t'a fait si longtemps vivre
    Que pour l'aprendre a bien mourir.

A Amsterdam chez Henri Desbordes. Another print, with the same design. "Se
vendent a Londres par Daniel Du Chemin." On a spade, the monogram
[monogram: HF] 8vo.

"Reflexions sur les grands hommes." In the foreground various pranks of
Death. In the distance, a church-yard with a regular dance, in a circle,
of men, women, and Deaths, two of the latter sitting on a monument and
playing on a violin and violoncello. Engraved by A. D. Putter. 12mo.

"La Dance Macabre, or Death's Duell," by W. C. _i. e._ Colman. Printed by
Wm. Stansby, no date, 12mo. It has an elegantly engraved frontispiece by
T. Cecill, with eight compartments, exhibiting Death with the pope, the
emperor, the priest, the nobles, the painter, the priest, and the peasant.
The poem, in six line stanzas, is of considerable merit, and entirely
moral on the subject of Death, but it is not the Macaber Dance of Lydgate.
At the end, the author apologizes for the title of his book, which, he
says, was injuriously conferred by Roger Muchill upon a sermon of Dr.
Donne's, and adds a satirical epistle against "Muchill that never did
good." There certainly was a sermon by Donne, published by Muchill or
Michel, with the title of "Death's Duell."

There appears to have been another edition of this book, the title-page
only of which is preserved among Bagford's collections among the Harl.
MSS. No. 5930. It has the same printed title, with the initials W. C. and
the name of W. Stansby. It is also without date. This frontispiece is on a
curtain held by two winged boys. At the top, a figure of Death, at bottom
another of Time kneeling on a globe. In the right-hand corner, which is
torn, there seems to have been a hand coupe with a bracelet as a crest; in
the left, a coat of arms with a cross boutonne arg. and sable, and four
mullets, arg. and sable. On each side, four oval compartments, with the
following subjects. 1. A pope, a cardinal, and four bishops. 2. Several
monks and friars. 3. Several magistrates. 4. A schoolmaster reading to his
pupils. 5. An emperor, a king, a queen, a duke, a duchess, and a male
attendant. 6. A group of noblemen or gentlemen. 7. A painter painting a
figure of Death, in the back ground a woman who seems to be purchasing
articles of dress. 8. Two men with spades, one of them digging. This very
beautiful print is engraved by T. Cecil. On the top of each of the above
compartments, Death holds a string with both his hands.

"Theatrum omnium miserarum." A theatre filled with a vast number of
people. In the centre, an obelisk on a pedestal, behind which is a small
stage with persons sitting. In the foreground, Death holding a cord, with
which three naked figures are bound, and another Death with a naked figure
in a net. Between these figures symbols of the world, the flesh, and the
Devil. 4to.

"Les Consolations de l'Ame fidelle contre les frayeurs de la mort." Death
holds his scythe over a group of persons, consisting of an old man and a
child near a grave, who are followed by a king, queen, and a shepherd,
with various pious inscriptions. 8vo.

"La maniere de se bien preparer a la mort, par M. de Chertablon." Anvers,
1700, 4to.

In an engraved frontispiece, a figure of Time or Death trampling upon a
heap of articles expressive of worldly pomp and grandeur, strikes one end
of his scythe against the door of a building, on which is inscribed
"STATVTVM EST OMNIBVS HOMINIBVS. SEMEL MORI. Hebr. ix."

At the bottom, within a frame ornamented with emblems of mortality, a
sarcophagus with the skeleton of a man raised from it. Two Deaths are
standing near, one of whom blows a trumpet, the other points upward with
one hand, and holds a scythe in the other. On one side of the sarcophagus
are several females weeping; on the other, a philosopher sitting, who
addresses a group of sovereigns, &c. who are looking at the skeleton.

"Palingenii Zodiacus Vitae." Rotterdam, 1722. 12mo. Death seizes a sitting
figure crowned with laurel, perhaps intended for Virtue, who clings to a
bust of Minerva, &c.

Death leading a bishop holding his crosier. He is preceded by another
Death as a bellman with bell and lanthorn. Above, emblems of mortality
over a label, inscribed "A Vision." 12mo.

Scene, a church-yard. Death holding an hour-glass in one hand levels his
dart at a young man in the habit of an ecclesiastic, with a mask in his
hand. "Worlidge inv. Boitard sculp." The book unknown. 8vo.

Three figures of Death uncovering a circular mirror, with a group of
persons dying, &c. At bottom, INGREDIMVR. CVNCTI. DIVES. CVM. PAUPERE.
MIXTVS. J. Sturt sculp.

Death touching a globe, on which is inscribed VANITY, appears to a man in
bed. "Hayman inv. C. Grignion sc." 8vo.

To a little French work, intitled "Spectriana," Paris, 1817, 24mo. there
is a frontispiece on copper representing the subject of one of the
stories. A figure of Death incumbered with chains beckons to an armed man
to follow him into a cave.




CHAPTER XIV.

    _Single prints connected with the Dance of Death._


1500-1600.

(N. B. The right and left hands are those of the spectator. The prints on
_wood_ are so specified.)

An ancient engraving, in the manner of Israel Van Meckenen. Death is
playing at chess with a king, who is alarmed at an impending check-mate. A
pope, cardinal, bishop, and other persons are looking on. Above are three
labels. Bartsch x. 55. No. 32.

Albert Durer's knight preceded by Death, and followed by a demon, a
well-known and beautiful engraving.

A very scarce and curious engraving, representing the interior of a
brothel. At the feet of a bed a man is sitting by a woman almost naked,
who puts her hand into his purse, and clandestinely delivers the money she
takes from it to a fellow standing behind one of the curtains. On the
opposite side is a grinning fool making significant signs with his fingers
to a figure of Death peeping in at a window. This singular print has the
mark L upon it, and is something in the manner of Lucas Van Leyden, but is
not mentioned in Bartsch's catalogue of his prints. Upright 7-1/2 by
5-1/2.

A small etching, very delicately executed, and ascribed to Lucas Van
Leyden, whose manner it certainly resembles. At a table on the left a
family of old and young persons are assembled. They are startled by the
appearance of a hideous figure of Death with a long beard and his head
covered. Near him is a young female, crowned with a chaplet of flowers,
holding in her hand a scull, Death's head, and hour-glass, and which the
father of the family turns round to contemplate. Above is an angel or
genius shooting an arrow at the family, and as it were at random. At top
on the right is the letter L, and the date 1523. See Bartsch, vol. vii. p.
435. Oblong, 5-1/2 by 4.

A small upright print of Death with a spade on his shoulder, and leading
an armed soldier. The mark L below on a tablet. Not mentioned by Bartsch.

A small circular engraving, of several persons feasting and dancing. Death
lies in wait behind a sort of canopy. Probably a brothel scene, as part of
the story of the prodigal son. The mark is L. Not noticed by Bartsch.

A reverse of this engraving, marked S.

An engraving on wood of Death presenting an hour-glass, surmounted by a
dial, to a soldier who holds with both his hands a long battle-axe. The
parties seem to be conversing. With Albert Durer's mark, and the date
1510. It has several German verses. See Bartsch, vii. 145, No. 132.

A wood print of Death in a tree pointing with his right hand to a crow on
his left, with which he holds an hour-glass. At the foot of the tree an
old German soldier holding a sword pointed to the ground. On his left,
another soldier with a long pike. A female sitting by the side of a large
river with a lap-dog. The mark of Urs Graaf [monogram: VG] and the date
1524 on the tree. Upright, 8 by 4-1/2.

Death as a buffoon, with cap, bauble, and hour-glass, leading a lady. The
motto, OMNEM IN HOMINE VENVSTATEM MORS ABOLET. With the mark and date
[monogram] 1541. Bartsch, viii. 174.

An engraving of Adam and Eve near the tree of life, which is singularly
represented by Death entwined with a serpent. Adam holds in one hand a
flaming sword, and with the other receives the apple from Eve, who has
taken it from the serpent's mouth. At top is a tablet with the mark and
date [monogram] 1543. A copy from Barthol. Beham. Bartsch, viii. 116.

Death seizing a naked female. A small upright engraving. The motto, OMNEM
IN HOMINE VENVSTATEM MORS ABOLET. With the mark and date [monogram] 1546.
Bartsch, viii. 175.

A small upright engraving, representing Death with three naked women, one
of whom he holds by the hair of her head. A lascivious print. The mark
[monogram] on a label at bottom. Bartsch, viii. 176, who calls the women
sorceresses.

A small upright engraving of Death holding an hour-glass and dial to a
soldier with a halberd. At top, the mark and date [monogram] 1532.
Bartsch, viii. 276.

An upright engraving of Death seizing a soldier, who struggles to escape
from him. Below, an hour-glass. In a corner at top, the mark [monogram].

An upright engraving of Death trampling upon a vanquished soldier, who
endeavours to parry with his sword a blow that with one hand his adversary
aims at him, whilst with the other he breaks the soldier's spear. In a
corner at top, the mark [monogram]. A truly terrific print, engraved also
by [monogram: AC]. Bartsch, viii. 277.

A naked female seized by a naked man in a very indecent manner. Death who
is behind seizes the man whose left hand is placed on a little boy taking
money out of a bag. The motto, HO: MORS VLTIMA LINEA RERVM, with the mark
and date [monogram] 1529. See Bartsch, viii. 176.

Near the end of an English Primer, printed at Paris, 1538, 4to. is a small
print of Death leading a pope, engraved with great spirit on wood, but it
has certainly not formed part of a series of a Dance of Death.

An upright engraving of a pair of lovers interrupted by Death with scythe
and hour-glass, with the mark and date [monogram: HM] 1550. Not in
Bartsch.

A small wood print of a gentleman conducting a lady, whose train is held
up by Death with one hand, whilst he holds up an hour-glass with the
other. In a corner below, the supposed mark of Jost de Negher, [monogram].
Upright, 2 by 1-3/4.

A German anonymous wood print of the prodigal son at a brothel, a female
fool attending. Death unexpectedly appears and takes him by the hand,
whilst another female is caressing him. Oblong, 4-1/2 by 4.

An upright engraving on wood, 14 by 11, of a naked female on a couch.
Death with a spade and hour-glass approaches her. With her left hand she
holds one corner of a counterpane, Death seizing the other, and trampling
upon it. Under the counterpane, and at the foot of the couch is a dead and
naked man grasping a sword in one hand. There is no indication of the
artist of this singular print.

An upright wood engraving, 14-1/2 by 11, of a whole-length naked female
turning her head to a mirror, which she holds behind her with both hands.
Death, unnoticed, with an hour-glass, enters the apartment; before him a
wheel. On the left at bottom a blank tablet, and near the woman's left
foot a large wing.

An engraving on wood by David Hopfer of Death and the Devil surprizing a
worldly dame, who admires herself in a mirror. Oblong, 8 inches by 5-1/2.

An upright engraving of a lady holding in one hand a bunch of roses and in
the other a glove. Death behind with his hour-glass; the motto, OMNEM IN
HOMINE VENVSTATEM MORS ABOLET. and the mark F. B. Bartsch, ix. 464.

A wood print of Death seizing a child. On the left, at top, is a blank
tablet. Upright, 2-1/2 by 2.

A small oblong anonymous engraving of a naked female asleep on a couch. A
winged Death places an hour-glass on her shoulder. A lascivious print.

An ancient anonymous wood print: scene, a forest. Death habited as a
woodman, with a hatchet at his girdle and a scythe, shoots his arrows into
a youth with a large plume of feathers, a female and a man lying prostrate
on the ground; near them are two dead infants with amputated arms; the
whole group at the foot of a tree. In the back-ground, a stag wounded by
an arrow, probably by the young man. 4to. size.

A small wood-cut of Death seizing a child. Anonymous, in the manner of A.
Durer. 2-1/4 by 1-7/8.

A very old oblong wood-cut, which appears to have been part of a Dutch or
Flemish Macaber Dance. The subjects are, Death and the Pope, with "Die
doot seyt," "die paens seyt," &c. and the Cardinal with "Die doot seyt,"
and "Die Cardinael seyt." There have been verses under each character.
9-1/2 by 6-1/2.

A small wood print of a tree, in which are four men, one of whom falls
from the tree into a grave at the foot of it. Death, as a woodman, cuts
down the tree with a hatchet. In the back-ground, another man fallen into
a grave.

A figure of Death as a naked old man with a long beard. He leans on a
pedestal, on which are placed a scull and an hour-glass, and with his left
hand draws towards him a draped female, who holds a globe in her left
hand. At the bottom of the print, MORS OMNIA MVTAT, with the unknown
monogram [monogram: BAD]. Upright, 5 inches by 2-3/4. It is a very rare
print on copper, not mentioned by Bartsch.

A small anonymous wood print of Death playing on a vielle, or beggar's
lyre.

An ancient anonymous copper engraving of Death standing on a bier, and
laying hands upon a youth over whom are the words, "Ach got min sal ich,"
and over Death, "hie her by mich." Both inscriptions on labels. Bartsch,
x. p. 54, No. 30.

An allegorical engraving on copper by Cuerenhert, after Martin Heemskirk,
1550. A naked man bestrides a large sack of money, on which a figure or
statue of Hope is standing. Death with one hand levels his dart at the
terrified man, and holds a circle in the other. The money is falling from
the sack, and appears to have demolished the hour-glass of Death. Upright,
11 inches by 8. At bottom, these lines:

  Maer als hemdie eininghe doot comt voer ogen
  Dan vint hii hem doer uedele hope bedrogen.

There is a smaller copy of it.

A circular engraving, two inches diameter, of a pair of lovers in a
garden. The lady is playing on a harp, her companion's lute is on the
ground. They are accompanied by a fool, and Death behind is standing with
a dart in his hand ready for aim at the youthful couple.

A very large engraving on wood tinted in chiaroscuro. It represents a sort
of triumphal arch at the top of which is a Death's head, above, an
hour-glass between two arm bones, that support a stone; evidently borrowed
from the last cut of the arms of Death in the Lyons wood-cuts. Underneath,
the three Fates between obelisks crowned with Deaths' heads and crosses,
with the words [Greek: MNEMONEUE APOPSYCHEIN] and ITER AD VITAM. In the
middle, a circle with eight compartments, in which are skeleton heads of a
pope, an emperor, &c. with mottoes. In the extremity of the circle, the
words "Post hoc autem judicium statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori."
The above obelisks are supported by whole length figures of Death, near
which are shields with BONIS BONA and MALIS MALA. On the pedestals that
support the figures of Death are shields inscribed MEMENTO MORI and
MEMORARE NOVISSIMA. Underneath the circle, a sort of table monument with
Death's head brackets, and on its plinth a sceptre, cardinal's cross,
abbot's crozier, a vessel with money, and two books. Between the brackets,
in capitals:

  TRIA SUNT VERE
  QVAE ME FACIVNT
      FLERE.

And underneath in italics:

  Primum quidem durum, quia scio me moriturum.
  Secundum vero plango, quia moriar, et nescio quando.
  Tertium autem flebo, quia nescio ubi manebo.

In a corner at bottom, "Ill. D. Petro Caballo J. C. Poutrem Relig. D.
Steph. ordinisq. milit. Ser. M. D. Hetr: Auditori mon: Joh. Fortuna
Fortunius Inven. Seni..... MDLXXXVIII." It is a very fine print, engraved
with considerable spirit.


1600-1700.

A very beautiful engraving by John Wierix, of a large party feasting and
dancing, with music, in a garden. Death suddenly enters, and strikes a
young female supported by her partner. At bottom, "Medio, lusu, risuque
rapimur aeternum cruciandi." Oblong, 6-1/2 by 4-1/2.

Its companion--Death, crowned with serpents, drags away a falling female,
round whom he has affixed his chain, which is in vain held back by one of
the party who supplicates for mercy. At bottom these lines:

  Divitibus mors dura venit, redimita corona
  Anguifera, et risus ultimo luctus habet.

On the top of the print, "O mors quam amara est memoria tua homini pacem
habenti in substantiis suis, etc." Eccl. cap. xli.

An allegorical print by one of the Wierxes, after H. Van Balen. The Virgin
Mary and a man are kneeling before and imploring Christ, who is about to
strike a bell suspended to the branch of a tree, the root of which Death
cuts with an axe, whilst the Devil assists in pulling at it with a rope.
Upright, 4-1/2 by 3-1/2.

Time holding a mirror to two lovers, Death behind waiting for them. At
bottom, "Luxuries predulce malum cui tempus, &c." Engraved by Jerom Wierx.
Oblong, 12 by 8.

An allegorical engraving by Jerom Wierx, after Martin De Vos, with four
moral stanzas at bottom, beginning "Gratia magna Dei caelo demittitur
alto." A figure of Faith directs the attention of a man, accompanied with
two infants, to a variety of worldly vanities scattered in a sun-beam. On
the right, a miser counting his gold is seized and stricken by Death. At
top, four lines of Latin and Dutch. Oblong, 13 by 10.

A rare etching, by Rembrant, of a youthful couple surprized by Death.
Date, 1639. Upright, 4-1/4 by 3.

Rembrant's "Hour of Death." An old man sitting in a tent is visited by a
young female. He points to a figure of Death with spade and hour-glass.
Upright, 5-1/4 by 3-1/2.

An engraving by De Bry. In the middle, an oblong oval, representing a
marriage, Death attending. On the sides, grotesques of apes, goats, &c. At
bottom, S. P. and these lines:

  Ordo licet reliquos sit praestantissimus inter
  Conjugium, heu nimium saepe doloris habet.

Oblong, 5-1/2 by 2-1/4.

Its companion--Death digging a grave for an old man, who looks into it.
Psal. 49 and 90.

An engraving by Crispin de Pas of Death standing behind an old man, who
endeavours, by means of his money spread out upon a table, to entice a
young female, who takes refuge in the arms of her young lover. At bottom,
the following dialogue.

  SENEX.

  Nil aurei? nil te coronati juvant?
    Argenteis referto bulga nil movet?


  MORS.

  Varios quid at Senex amores expetis:
    Tumulum tuae finemque vitae respice.


  JUVENIS.

  Quid aureorum me beabit copia.
    Amore si privata sim dulcissimo.

Its companion--Death with his hour-glass stands behind an old woman, who
offers money to a youth turning in disdain to his young mistress. At
bottom, these lines:

  JUVENIS.

  Facie esse quid mihi gratius posset tua
    Ipsius haud Corinthi gaza divitis.


  VETULA.

  Formam quid ah miselle nudam respicis
    Cum plus beare possit auri copia.


  MORS.

  At tu juventa quid torquere frustra anus
    Quin jam sepulchri instantis es potius memor.

Both oblong, 6 by 4.

An engraving by Bosse of a queen reposing on a tent bed, Death peeps in
through the curtains, another Death stands at the corner of the bed,
whilst a female with a shield, inscribed PIETAS, levels a dart at the
queen. Underneath, these verses:

  Grand Dieu je suis donc le victime
      Qu'une vengeance legitime
      Doit immoler a tes autels
  Je n'ay point de repos qui n'augmente ma peine
  Et les tristes objets d'une face inhumaine
      Me sont autant de coups mortels.

Oblong, 4-1/2 by 3.

An engraving by John Sadeler, after Stradanus, of an old couple, with
their children and grandchildren, in the kitchen of a farm-house. Death
enters, fantastically crowned with flowers and an hour-glass, and with a
bagpipe in his left hand. Round his right arm and body is a chain with a
hook at the extremity. He offers his right hand to the old woman, who on
her knees is imploring him for a little more delay. In the back-ground, a
man conducted to prison; beggars receiving alms, &c. At bottom, these
lines:

  "Pauperibus mors grata venit; redimita corona
  Florifera, et luctus ultima risus habet."

On the top of the print, "O mors bonum est judicium tuum homini indigenti,
et qui minoratur viribus defecto aetate, &c." Eccl. cap. xli. Oblong, 11 by
8-1/2.

An exceedingly clever etching by Tiepolo of a group of various persons, to
whom Death, sitting on the ground and habited grotesquely as an old woman,
is reading a lecture. Oblong, 7 by 5-1/2.

A small circle, engraved by Le Blond, of Death appearing to the
astrologer, copied from the same subject in the Lyons wood-cuts.

A print, painted and engraved by John Lyvijus of two card players
quarrelling. Death seizes and strikes at them with a bone. Below,

  Rixas atque odia satagit dispergere serpens,
  Antiquus, cuncta at jurgia morte cadunt.

Oblong, 10 by 7-1/2.

An engraving by Langlois. Death with a basket at his shoulder, on which
sits an owl, and holding with one hand a lantern, seizes the dice of a
gambler sitting at a table with his winnings spread before him. At top,
these verses:

  Alarme O le pipeur, chassez, chassez le moy,
  Je ne veux pas jouer a la raffle avec toy.

  LA MORT.

  A la raffle je joue avec toutes personnes
  Toutes pieces je prends, tant meschantes que bonnes.

At bottom, a dialogue between the gambler and Death, in verse, beginning
"J'ay ramene ma chance il n'y a plus remede." Upright, 10 by 7-1/2.

A print by De Gheyn, but wanting his name, of an elegantly attired lady,
with a feather on her head, and a fan mirror in her hand. She is
accompanied by Death handsomely attired, with a similar feather, and
holding an hour-glass. At bottom,

  Qui genio indulges, media inter gaudia morti
  Non dubiae certum sis memor esse locum.

Upright, 8 by 5-1/2.

Hollar's etching in Dugdale's Monasticon and his history of St. Paul's,
from the old wood-cut in Lydgate's Dance of Macaber, already described,
and an outline copy in Mr. Edwards's publication of Hollar's Dance of
Death.

Death and two Misers, 11-3/4 by 10. Engraved by Michael Pregel, 1616. At
bottom, six Latin lines, beginning "Si mihi divitiae sint omnes totius
orbis."

An oblong allegorical print, 14 by 10-1/2. Death and Time at war with man
and animals. In the foreground, Death levels three arrows at a numerous
group of mortals of all ranks and conditions, who endeavour, in every
possible way, to repel his attack. In the back-ground, he shoots a single
arrow at various animals. It is a very rare and beautiful engraving by
Bolsverd, after Vinck-boons, dated 1610. At bottom, six lines in Latin, by
J. Semmius, beginning "Cernis ut imperio succumbant omnia Mortis."

An oblong print, 18-1/2 by 13, intitled, "Alle mans vrees," _i. e._ "Every
man's terror," and engraved by Cornelius Van Dalen, after Adrian Van
Venne. It exhibits Death armed with a spade, and overturning and putting
to flight a variety of persons. At bottom, four stanzas of Dutch verses,
beginning "Dits de vrees van alle man."

A large allegorical oblong engraving, 18-1/2 by 13, by Peter Nolpe, after
Peter Potter. On the left, a figure of religion, an angel hovering over
her with a crown and palm branch. She points to several figures bearing
crosses, and ascending a steep hill to heaven. On the right, the Devil
blowing into the ear of a female, representing worldly vanity. In the
middle, Death beating a drum to a man and woman dancing. In the
back-ground, several groups of people variously employed, and a city in
flames.

An anonymous Venetian engraving of Death striking a lady sitting at a
table covered with various fruits, a lute, &c. She falls into the arms of
her lover or protector. Oblong, 9-1/2 by 7.

A print, after Martin Heemskirk, of Charon ferrying over souls. On the
right, a winged Death supporting an emperor about to enter the fatal boat.
Below, four lines, beginning "Sed terris debentur opes, quas linquere
fato."

An oblong engraving, 14 by 12, after John Cossiers. On the right, Death
entering at a door, seizes a young man. In the middle, a music-master
teaching a lady the lute, Death near them holding a violin and music-book.
On the left, in another apartment, Death in a dancing attitude, with a
double bagpipe, leads an aged man with a rosary in his left hand, and
leaning on a staff with his right. At bottom, three stanzas of French
verses, beginning "La Mort qui n'a point d'oreilles."

A very small wood print, that seems to have belonged to some English book,
about 1600. It represents Death behind a female, who sees his reflected
image in a mirror which she holds, instead of her own. 1-1/2 by 1-1/2.

The Devil's Ruff shop, into which a young gallant introduces his mistress,
whose ruff one of the Devils is stiffening with a poking-stick. Death,
with a ruff on his neck, waits at the door, near which is a coffin. This
very curious satirical print, after Martin De Vos, is covered with
inscriptions in French and Dutch. Oblong, 11-1/2 by 8.

A small anonymous engraving of two Deaths hand in hand; the one holds a
flower, the other two serpents; a man and woman also hand in hand; the
latter holds a flower in her hand; they are preceded by a little boy on a
cock-horse and a girl with a doll. Underneath, four lines, beginning "Quid
sit, quid fuerit, quid tandem aliquando futurus."

An anonymous engraving of a young gallant looking up to an image of Hope
placed on a bag of money, near which plate, jewels, and money lie
scattered on the ground. Death enters at a door, holding a circle in one
hand and a dart with the other, in a menacing attitude. At bottom, these
Latin lines:

  Namque ubi Mors trucibus supra caput adstitit armis,
  Hei quam tunc nullo pondere nummus erit.

The same in Dutch. Upright, 8-1/2 by 6. This print was afterwards copied
in a reduced form into a book of emblems, with the title, "Stulte hoc
nocte repetent animam tuam," with verses in Latin, French, and German.

A small anonymous wood engraving of five Deaths dancing in a circle; the
motto, DOODEN DANS OP LESTEM, _i. e._ the last Dance of Death.

A very clever etching of a winged and laurelled Death playing on the
bagpipe and making his appearance to an old couple at table. The man puts
off his cap and takes the visitor by the hand, as if to bid him welcome.
Below, two Dutch lines, beginning "Maerdie hier sterven, &c." At top, on
the left, "W. V. Valckert, in. fe. 1612." Oblong, 8-1/2 by 6-1/2.

A very complicated and anonymous allegorical print, with a great variety
of figures. In the middle, Death is striking with a sledge-hammer at a
soul placed in a crucible over a sort of furnace. A demon with bellows is
blowing the fire, and a female, representing the world, is adding fuel to
it. In various parts of the print are Dutch inscriptions. Oblong, 10-1/2
by 6.

Two old misers, a man and a woman. She weighs the gold, and he enters it
in a book. Death with an hour-glass peeps in at one window, and the Devil
at another. On the left, stands a demon with a book and a purse of money.
On the right, in a corner, I. V. BRVG: F. "Se vend chez Audran rue S.
Jaques aux deux piliers d'or." An upright mezzotint, 11-1/2 by 8-1/2.

Two old misers, a man and a woman. He holds a purse, and she weighs the
money. Death behind lies in wait for them. Below, a French stanza,
beginning "Fol en cette nuit on te redemande ton ame," and the same in
Latin. Below, "J. Meheux sculp. A Paris chez Audran rue St. Jaques aux
deux pilliers d'or." An upright mezzotint, 10 by 7-1/2.

An oval engraving in a frame of slips of trees. Death pulling down a fruit
tree; a hand in a cloud cutting a flower with a sickle. Motto, "Fortior
frango, tenera meto." Upright, 6-1/2 by 4.

An anonymous engraving of a lady sitting at her toilet. She starts at the
reflected image of Death standing behind her, in her looking glass. Her
lover stands near her in the act of drawing his sword to repel the
unwelcome visitor. Upright, 7-1/4 by 6-1/2. To some such print or
painting, Hamlet, holding a scull in his hand, evidently alludes in Act v.
Sc. 1. "Now get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her let her paint an
inch thick, to this favour she must come."

A print of the tree of knowledge, the serpent holding the apple in his
mouth. Below, several animals, as in the usual representations of
Paradise. On one side a youth on horseback with a hawk on his fist; on the
other, Death strikes at him with his dart. On the right, at bottom, the
letters R. P. ex. and these verses:

  Nor noble, valiant, youthfull or wise, have
  The least exemption from the gloomy grave.

Upright, 6 by 4.

A large oblong engraving, on copper, 22 by 17. On the left, is an arched
cavern, from which issue two Deaths, one of whom holds a string, the end
of which is attached to an owl, placed as a bird decoy, on a pillar in the
middle of the print. Under the string, three men reading. On the left,
near a tree, is a ghastly sitting figure, whose head has been flayed. On
the opposite side below, a musical group of three men and a woman. In the
back-ground, several men caught in a net; near them, Death with a hound
pursuing three persons who are about to be intercepted by a net spread
between two trees. In the distance, a vessel with a Death's head on the
inflated sail. On the top of the arched cavern, a group of seven persons,
one of whom, a female, points to the interior of an urn; near them a
flying angel holding a blank shield of arms. In the middle of the print,
at bottom, some inscription has been erased.

A print, intitled "Cursus Mundi." A woman holds, in one hand, a broken
vessel with live coals; in the other, a lamp, at which a little boy is
about to light a candle. Death appears on the left. At bottom, a Latin
inscription stating that the picture was painted by William Panneels, the
scholar of Rubens, in 1631, and that it is in the palace of Anselm
Casimir, archbishop of Mentz. Upright, 9-1/2 by 6-1/2.

A small anonymous engraving of Death sitting on a large fractured
bass-viol, near which, on the ground, is a broken violin.

An elegant small and anonymous engraving of a young soldier, whom Death
strikes with his dart whilst he despoils him of his hat and feather. At
bottom, six couplets of French verses, beginning "Retire toy de moy O
monstre insatiable." Upright, 3-3/4 by 2-3/4.

A small anonymous engraving of a merchant watching the embarkation of his
goods, Death behind waiting for him. Motto from Psalm 39, "Computat et
parcit nec quis sit noverit, haeres, &c." Upright, 3-1/4 by 1-1/2.

Its companion--Death striking a child in a cradle. Job 14. "Vita brevis
hominum variis obnoxia curis, &c." These were probably part of a series.

An anonymous engraving of a man on his death-bed. On one side, the vision
of a bishop saint in a cloud; on the other, Death has just entered the
room to receive his victim. Oblong, 5-1/2 by 2-1/2.

An anonymous engraving of a woman sitting under a tree. Sin, as a boy,
with PECCATVM inscribed on his forehead, delivers a globe, on which a
serpent is entwined, to Death. At bottom, "A muliere initium factum est
peccati et per illam omnes morimur. Eccl. C. XXV."

A small anonymous engraving of Death interrupting a Turkish sultan at
table. In the back ground, another Turk contemplating a heap of sculls.

A mezzotint by Gole, of Death appearing to a miser, treading on an
hour-glass and playing on the violin. In the back-ground, a room in which
is Death seizing a young man. The floor is covered with youthful
instruments of recreation. This subject has been painted by Old Franks
and Otho Vaenius. Upright, 9 by 6-1/2. Another mezzotint of the same
subject by P. Schenck is mentioned by Peignot, p. 19. It is inscribed
"Mortis ingrata musica."

A very singular, anonymous, and unintelligible engraving of a figure that
seems intended for a blacksmith, who holds a large hammer in his hand. On
his right, two monks, and behind him, Death folding his arms to his
breast. Below, writing implements, &c. Upright, 4 by 3.

The triumphal car of Time drawn by genii, and accompanied by a pope,
cardinal, emperor, king, queen, &c. At the top of the car, Death blows a
trumpet, to which a banner is suspended, with "Je trompe tout le monde."
In the back-ground a running fountain, with "Ainsi passe la gloire du
monde." An anonymous upright engraving, 4 by 2-1/2.

A very neat engraving by Le Blon of several European coins. In the centre,
a room in which Death strikes at two misers, a man and a woman sitting at
a table covered with money. On the table cloth, "Luc. 12 ca."

Its companion--Death and the Miser. The design from the same subject in
the Lyons wood-cuts. A label on the wall, with "Luc. 12." Oblong, 6-1/2 by
3-1/2.

A German anonymous print, apparently from a book of emblems, representing
Death waiting with a scythe to cut off the following persons: 1. A lady.
2. A gentleman. 3. An advocate. 4. A soldier: and, 5. A preacher. Each has
an inscription. 1. Ich todt euch alle (I kill you all). 2. Ich erfrew euch
alle (I rejoice you all). 3. Ich eruhr euch alle (I honour you all). 4.
Ich red fur euch alle (I speak for you all). 5. Ich fecht fur euch alle (I
fight for you all). 6. Ich bett fur euch alle (I pray for you all). With
verses at bottom, in Latin and German. Oblong, 5-1/4 by 4.

An anonymous engraving of a naked youth who with a sword strikes at the
head of Death pursuing another youth. Oblong, 9-1/2 by 5-1/2.

An upright engraving, 5-1/2 by 4, representing a young man on horseback
holding a hawk on his fist, and surrounded by various animals. Death
holding an hour-glass, strikes at him with his dart. Behind, the tree of
knowledge, with the serpent and apple. At bottom, on the right, are the
initials T. P. ex.

An engraving of the Duke of Savoy, who, attended by his guards, receives
petitions from various persons. Before him stands in a cloud the angel of
Death, who points towards heaven. At bottom, on the left, "Delphinus
pinxit. Brambilla del. 1676," and on the right, "Nobilis de Piene S. R. C.
Prim. caelator f. Taur." Oblong, 10-1/2 by 7-1/2.

An engraving by De Gheyn, intitled, "Vanitas, idelheit." A lady is sitting
at a table, on which is a box of jewels and a heap of money. A hideous
female Death strikes at her with a flaming dart, which, at the same time,
scatters the leaves of a flower which she holds in her left hand. Upright,
9 by 7.

A very small circular wood-cut, apparently some printer's device,
representing an old and a young man, holding up a mirror, in which is
reflected the figure of Death standing behind them, with the motto,
"Beholde your glory."

An anonymous print of Death and the miser. Death seizes his money, which
he conveys into a dish. Upright, 3-1/2 by 2-1/2. It is a copy from the
same subject in the Lyons wood-cuts.


1700-1800.

An anonymous modern copy of Death and the bridegroom, copied from the
Lyons wood-cuts, edition 1562.

An etching of Death, with an hour-glass in one hand and a cane in the
other, entering a room where a poor poet has been writing, and who would
willingly dispense with the visit. At bottom "And when Death himself
knocked at my door, ye bad him come again; and in so gay a tone of
careless indifference did ye do it, that he doubted of his commission.
There must certainly be some mistake in this matter, quoth he." The same
in Italian. This is one of Patch's caricatures after Ghezzi. Upright,
16-1/2 by 12.

A print intitled "Time's lecture to man," with eight stanzas in verse,
beginning "Why start you at that skeleton." It consists of three
divisions. At top a young man starts at the appearance of time and death.
Under the youth "Calcanda semel via lethi." At each extremity of this
division is a figure of Death sitting on a monument. The verses, in double
columns, are placed between two borders with compartments. That on the
right a scull crowned with a mitre; an angel with a censer; time carrying
off a female on his back; Death with an infant in his arms; Death on
horseback with a flag; Death wrestling with a man. The border on the left
has a scull with a regal crown; an angel dancing with a book; Death
carrying off an old man; Death leading a child; Death with a naked corpse;
Death digging a grave. At bottom "Sold by Clark and Pine, engravers, in
Castle Yard, near Chancery Lane, T. Witham, frame-maker, in Long Lane,
near West Smithfield, London." With a vignette of three Deaths' heads. 13
by 9-1/2.

There is a very singular ancient gem engraved in "Passeri de Gemmis
Astriferis," tom. ii. p. 248. representing a skeleton Death standing in a
car drawn by two animals that may be intended for lions; he holds a whip
in his hand, and is driving over other skeletons. It is covered with
barbarous and unintelligible words in Greek characters, and is to be
classed among those gems which are used as amulets or for magical
purposes. It seems to have suggested some of the designs that accompany
the old editions of Petrarch's Triumph of Death.

A folio mezzotint of J. Daniel von Menzel, an Austrian hussar. Behind him
is a figure of Death with the hussar's hat on his head, by whom he is
seized. There are some German verses, and below

  Mon amis avec moi a la danse
  C'est pour vous la juste recompense.

The print is dated 1744.

A Dutch anonymous oblong engraving on copper, 10-1/2 by 10, intitled
"Bombario, o dood! te schendig in de nood." Death leads a large group of
various characters. At bottom verses beginning "De Boertjes knappen al
temaal." On each side caricatures inscribed Democritus and Heraclitus. It
is one of the numerous caricatures on the famous South Sea or Mississippi
bubble.

An engraving, published by Darly, entitled "Macaronies drawn after the
life." On the left a macaroni standing. On the floor dice and dice-box. On
a table cards and two books. On the right, Death with a spade, leaning on
a sarcophagus, inscribed "Here lies interred Dicky Daffodil, &c." Oblong,
9 by 6.

A very clever private etching by Colonel Turner, of the Guards, 1799,
representing, in the foreground, three Deaths dancing in most grotesque
attitudes. In the distance several groups of skeletons, some of whom are
dancing, one of them beating a drum. Oblong, 5-1/2 by 3-1/2.

A small engraving by Chodowiecki. Death appears to a medical student
sitting at a table; underneath these lines,

  De grace epargne moi, je me fais medecin,
  Tu recevras de moi la moitie des malades.

Upright, 3-1/2 by 2. This is not included in his Dance of Death.

The same slightly retouched, with German verses.

A small engraving, by Chodowiecki, of Death approaching a dying man
attended by his family and a physician. Oblong, 2-1/2 by 2.

A modern engraving, intitled "An emblem of a modern marriage." Death
habited as a beau stands by a lady, who points to a monument inscribed
"Requiescat in pace." Above a weeping Cupid with an inverted torch. At
bottom

          ... No smiles for us the Godhead wears,
  His torch inverted and his face in tears.

Drawn by M. H. from a sketch cut with a diamond on a pane of glass.
Published according to act of parliament, June 15, 1775.

A modern caricature intitled "A patch for t'other eye." Death is about to
place a patch on the right eye of an old general, who has one already on
the other. His hat and truncheon lie on the ground, and he is drawing his
sword for the purpose of opposing the intention of his grim adversary,
exclaiming at the same time, "Oh G--d d--n ye, if that's your sport, have
at ye." Upright, 8 inches by 7.

A small engraving by Chr. de Mechel, 1775, of an apothecary's shop. He
holds up a urinal to a patient who comes to consult him, behind whom Death
is standing and laying hands upon him. Below these verses:

  Docteur, en vain tu projettes
    De prononcer sur cette eau,
  La mort rit de tes recettes
    Et conduit l'homme au tombeau.

Oblong, 4 by 3.

An anonymous and spirited etching of Death obsequiously and with his arms
crossed entering a room in which is a woman in bed with three infants.
With uplifted arms she screams at the sight of the apparition. Below in a
corner the husband, accompanied with four other children. Upright, 11 by
10-1/2.

"The lawyer's last circuit." He is attacked by four Deaths mounted on
skeleton horses. He is placed behind one of them, and all gallop off with
him. A road-post inscribed "Road to hell." Below, the lines from Hamlet,
"Where be his quiddits now? his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his
tricks, &c." Published April 25, 1782, by R. Smith, opposite the Pantheon,
Oxford Street. Oblong, 10 by 6-1/2.


1800.

A modern wood-cut of a drinking and smoking party. Demons of destruction
hover over them in the characters of Poverty, Apoplexy, Madness, Dropsy,
and Gout. In the bowl on the table is a monstrous head inscribed
"Disease." Behind, a gigantic figure of Death with scythe and hour-glass.
Oblong, 3-1/2 by 3.

A Sketch by Samuel Ireland, after Mortimer, in imitation of a chalk
drawing, apparently exhibiting an Englishman, a Dutchman, and a Spaniard.
Death behind stretching his arms upon all of them. Oblong 10-1/2 by 8.

A wood print intitled "Das betruhte Brautfest." Death seizes a man looking
at a table covered with wedding-cakes, &c. From a modern Swiss almanack.
Oblong 6-1/2 by 5-1/2.

A mezzotint of a physician, who attending a sick patient in bed is
attacked by a group of Deaths bearing standards, inscribed "Despair,"
"l'amour," "omnia vincit amor," and "luxury." Oblong, 11 by 8-1/2.

An etching from a drawing by Van Venne of Death preaching from a
charnel-house to a group of people. His text book rests on the figure of a
skeleton as a reading desk. It is prefixed to Mr. Dagley's "Death's
Doings," mentioned in p. 157. Oblong, 5-1/2 by 4-1/4.

Mr. Dagley, in the second edition of his "Death's Doings," p. 9, mentions
a print of "a man draining an enormous bowl, and Death standing ready to
confirm the title of the print, "the last drop."

An etching by Dagley, after Birch, of Baxter, a famous cricketer, bowled
out by Death. Below, his portrait at full length. Oblong, 9 by 7.

"Sketches of the celebrated skeletons, originally designed on the long
wall between Turnham-Green and Brentford." Etchings of various groups; the
subjects, billiards, drafts, cards, dice, toss, and pitch. Oblong, 18 by
11.

"Humorous sketches of skeletons engaged in the various sciences of
Singing, Dancing, Music, Oratory, Painting, and Sculpture." Drawn by H.
Heathcote Russell as a companion to the skeletons copied from the long
wall at Brentford. Published 3d June, 1830. Same size as the preceding
print.

A lithographic print of a conjurer pointing with his magic wand to a table
on which are cups, a lanthorn, &c. In the back-ground, the Devil running
away with a baker, and a group of three dancing Deaths. Below, birds in
cages, cards, &c. Oblong, 8 by 6.

A small modern wood-cut of Death seizing a lady at a ball. He is disguised
as one of the party. Underneath, "Death leads the dance."--_Young--Night
5._

From "the Christian's Pocket Magazine." Oblong, 2-1/2 by 1-1/2.

A design for the ballad of Leonora, by Lady Diana Beauclerc. A spectre, as
Death, carrying off a lady on horseback, and striking her with his dart.
Other Death-like spectres waiting for her. Oblong, 11-3/4 by 9.

A small modern engraving of Death presenting a smelling bottle to a
fainting butcher with one hand, and with the other fanning him. The motto,
"A butcher overcome with extreme sensibility, is as strangely revived."

A modern halfpenny wood-cut of several groups, among which is a man
presenting an old woman to Death. The motto, "Death come for a wicked
woman."

An oval etching, by Harding, intitled "Death and the Doctor." Upright,
4-1/2 by 3-1/2.

A modern etching of Death striking a sleeping lady leaning on a table, on
which little imps are dancing. At bottom, "Marks fecit." Oblong, 4 by 3.

An anonymous modern wood-cut of Death seizing a usurer, over whom another
Death is throwing a counterpane. Square, 4 by 4.

An etching, intitled "the Last Drop." A fat citizen draining a punch-bowl.
Death behind is about to strike him with his dart. Upright, 8-1/2 by
6-1/2.

In an elegant series of prints, illustrative of the poetical works of
Goethe, there is a poem of seven stanzas, intitled "Der Todtentanz," where
the embellishment represents a church-yard, in which several groups of
skeletons are introduced, some of them rising, or just raised, from their
graves; others in the attitude of dancing together or preparing for a
dance. These prints are beautifully etched in outline in the manner of the
drawings in the margins of Albert Durer's prayer-book in the library of
Munich.

Prefixed to a poem by Edward Quillinan, in a volume of wood-cuts used at
the press of Lee Priory, the seat of Sir Egerton Brydges, intitled "Death
to Doctor Quackery," there is an elegant wood-cut, representing Death
hob-and-nobbing with the Doctor at a table.

In the same volume is another wood-cut on the subject of a dance given by
the Lord of Death in Clifton Halls. A motley group of various characters
are dancing in a circle whilst Death plays the fiddle.

In 1832 was published at Paris "La Danse des Morts, ballade dediee a
Madame la Comtesse de Tryon Montalembert. Paroles et musique de P.
Merruau." The subject is as follows: A girl named Lise is admonished by
her mother not to dance on a Saturday, the day on which Satan calls the
dead to the infernal _Sabbat_. She promises obedience, but whilst her
mother is napping, escapes to the ball. She forgets the midnight hour,
when a company of damned souls, led by Satan, enter the ball-room
hand-in-hand, exclaiming "Make way for Death." All the party escape,
except Lise, who suddenly finds herself encircled by skeletons, who
continue dancing round her. From that time, on every Saturday at midnight,
there is heard under ground, in the church-yard, the lamentation of a soul
forcibly detained, and exclaiming "Girls beware of dancing Satan!" At the
head of this ballad is a lithographic print of the terrified Lise in
Satan's clutches, surrounded by dancing, piping, and fiddling Deaths.

About the same time there appeared a silly ballad, set to music, intitled
"the Cork Leg," accompanied by a print in which the man with the cork leg
falling on the ground drops his leg. It is seized by Death, who stalks
away with it in a very grotesque manner.




CHAPTER XV.

    _Initial or capital Letters with the Dance of Death._


It is very well known that the use of initial or capital letters,
especially with figures of any kind, is not coeval with the invention of
printing. It was some time before they were introduced at all, a blank
being left, or else a small letter printed for the illuminators to cover
or fill up, as they had been accustomed to do in manuscripts; for,
although the art of printing nearly put an end to the occupation of that
ingenious class of artists, they continued to be employed by the early
printers to decorate their books with elegant initials, and particularly
to illuminate the first pages of them with beautiful borders of foliage or
animals, for the purpose of giving them the appearance of manuscripts.

It has more than once been most erroneously asserted by bibliographers and
writers on typography, that Erhard Ratdolt, a printer at Venice, was the
first person who made use of initial letters about the year 1477; for
instances are not wanting of their introduction into some of the earliest
printed books. Among the latter the most beautiful specimen of an
ornamented capital letter is the B in the Psalter of 1457, of which Dr.
Dibdin has given a very faithful copy in vol. I. p. 107, of the
Bibliotheca Spenceriana. This truly elegant letter seems to have been
regarded as the only one of its kind; but, in a fragment of an undescribed
missal in folio, printed in the same type as the above-mentioned Psalter,
there is an equally beautiful initial T, prefixed to the "Te igitur"
canon of the mass. It is ornamented with flowers and foliage, and in both
these precious volumes there are many other smaller capitals, but whether
printed with the other type, or afterwards stamped, may admit of some
doubt. This unique and valuable fragment is in the collection of the
present writer.

As the art of printing advanced, the initial letters assumed every
possible variety of form, with respect to the subjects with which they
were ornamented. Incidents from scripture and profane history, animals of
every kind, and the most ludicrous grotesques, constitute the general
materials; nor has the Dance of Death been forgotten. It was first
introduced into the books printed at Basle by Bebelius and Cratander about
the year 1530, and for one or the other of these celebrated printers an
alphabet of initial letters was constructed, which, in elegance of design
and delicacy of engraving, have scarcely ever been equalled, and certainly
never exceeded. Whether they were engraved in relief on blocks of type or
printer's metal, in the manner of wood-cutting, or executed in wood in the
usual manner, is a matter of doubt, and likely to remain so. They may, in
every point of view be regarded as the chef d'oeuvre of ancient block
engraving, and to copy them successfully at this time might require the
utmost efforts of such artists as Harvey, Jackson, and Byfield.[134]

A proof set of this alphabet, in the possession of the present writer, was
shown to M. De Mechel when he was in London, on which occasion he stated
that he had seen in the public library of Basle another proof set on a
single sheet, with the inscription "Hans Lutzelburger," who is elsewhere
called _formschneider_, or block-cutter, of which he has written a
memorandum on the leaf containing the first abovementioned set of proofs.
M. de Mechel, with great probability, inferred that this person was either
the designer or engraver of the alphabet as well as of the cuts to the
"Historiees faces de la mort," on one of which, as already stated, the
mark [monogram: HL] is placed;[135] but to whomsoever this mark may turn
out to belong, certain it is that Holbein never made use of it.[136] These
letters measure precisely 1 inch by 7/8 of an inch, and the subjects are
as follow:

A. A group of Deaths passing through a cemetery covered with sculls. One
of them blows a trumpet, and another plays on a tabor and pipe.

B. Two Deaths seize upon a pope, on whom a demon fastens, to prevent their
dragging him along.

C. An emperor in the clutches of two Deaths, one of whom he resists,
whilst the other pulls off his crown.

D. A king thrown to the ground and forcibly dragged away by two Deaths.

E. Death and the cardinal.

F. An empress sitting in a chair is attacked by two Deaths, one of whom
lifts up her petticoat.

G. A queen seized by two Deaths, one of whom plays on a fife.

H. A bishop led away by Death.

I. A duke with his hands clasped in despair is seized behind by Death in
the grotesque figure of an old woman.

K. Death with a furred cap and mantle, and a flail in his right hand,
seizes a nobleman.

L. Death in the habit of a priest with a vessel of holy water takes
possession of the canon.

M. Death behind a physician in his study lays his hand on a urinal which
he is inspecting.

N. One Death lays hold on a miser, whilst another carries off his money
from a table.

O. Death carries off a terrified monk.

P. Combat between Death and the soldier.

Q. Death very quietly leads away a nun.

R. Death and the fool who strikes at him with his bauble.

S. Exhibits two Deaths, one of whom is in a very licentious action with a
female, whilst the other runs off with an hour-glass on his back.

T. A minstrel with his pipe, lying prostrate on the ground, is dragged
away by one Death, whilst another pours something from a vessel into his
mouth.

V. A man on horseback endeavouring to escape from Death is seized by him
behind.

W. Death and the hermit.

X. Death and the Devil among the gamblers.

Y. Death, the nurse, and the infant.

Z. The last Judgment.

But they were not only used at Basle by Bebelius Isingrin and Cratander,
but also at Strasburg by Wolfgang Cephaleus, and probably by other
printers; because in an edition of Huttichius's "Romanorum principum
effigies," printed by Cephaleus at Strasburg in 1552, they appear in a
very worn and much used condition. In his Greek Bible of 1526, near half
the alphabet were used, some of them by different hands.

They were separately published in a very small volume without date, each
letter being accompanied with appropriate scriptural allusions taken from
the Vulgate Bible.

They were badly copied, and with occasional variations, for books printed
at Strasburg by J. Schott about 1540. Same size as the originals. The same
initials were used by Henry Stainer of Augsburg in 1530.

Schott also used two other sets of a larger size, the same subjects with
variations, and which occur likewise in books printed at Frankfort about
1550 by Cyriacus Jacob.

Christopher Froschover, of Zurich, used two alphabets with the Dance of
Death. In Gesner's "Bibliotheca Universalis," printed by him in 1545,
folio, he used the letters A. B. C. in indifferent copies of the originals
with some variation. In a Vulgate Bible, printed by him in 1544, he uses
the A and C of the same alphabet, and also the following letters, with
different subjects, viz. F. Death blowing a trumpet in his left hand, with
the right seizes a friar holding his beads and endeavouring to escape. O.
Death and the Swiss soldier with his battle-axe; and, S. a queen between
two Deaths, one of whom leads her, the other holds up her train. The
Gesner has also a Q from the same alphabet of Death and the nun. This
second alphabet is coarsely engraved on wood, and both are of the same
size as the originals.

In Francolin's "Rerum praeclare gestarum, intra et extra moenia civitatis
Viennensis, pedestri et equestri praelio, terra et aqua, elapso Mense Junio
Anni Domini MDLX. elegantissimis iconibus ad vivum illustratarum, in
laudem et gloriam sere. poten. invictissimique principis et Domini, Domini
Ferdinandi electi Roma: imperatoris, &c. Vienna excudebat Raphael
Hofhalter," at fo. xxii. b. the letter D is closely copied in wood from
the original, and appears to have been much used. This very rare work is
extremely interesting for its large and spirited etchings of the various
ceremonies on the above occasion, but more particularly for the
tournaments. It is also valuable for the marks of the artists, some of
which are quite unknown.

Other copies of them on wood occur in English books, but whether the whole
alphabet was copied would be difficult to ascertain. In a Coverdale's
Bible, printed by James Nicolson in Southwark, the letters A. I. and T.
occur. The subject of the A. is that of the fool and Death, from the R. of
the originals, with the addition of the fool's bauble on the ground: the
two other letters are like the originals. The size 2 inches by 1-1/2. The
same letters, and no others, occur in a folio English Bible, the date of
which has not been ascertained, it being only a fragment. The A is found
as late as 1618 in an edition of Stowe's "Survey of London." In all these
letters large white spots are on the back-ground, which might be taken for
worm-holes, but are not so. The I occurs in J. Waley's "table of yeres of
kings," 1567, 12mo.

An X and a T, an inch and 1/2 square, with the same subjects as in the
originals, and not only closely copied, but nearly as well engraved on
wood, are in the author's collection. Their locality has not been traced.

Hollar etched the first six letters of the alphabet from the initials
described in p. 214. They are rather larger than the originals, but
greatly inferior to them in spirit and effect.

Two other alphabets, the one of peasants dancing, the other of boys
playing, by the same artists, have been already described in p. 101, and
were also used by the Basle and other printers.

In Braunii Civitates Orbis terrarum, Par. I. No. 37, edit. 1576, there is
an H, inch and 1/2 square. The subject, Death leading a Pope on horseback.
It is engraved on wood with much spirit.

In "Prodicion y destierro de los Moriscos de Castilla, por F. Marcos de
Guadalajara y Xavier." Pamplona, 1614, 4to. there is an initial E cut in
wood with the subject of the cardinal, varied from that in Lutzenberger's
alphabet.

A Greek [Greek: P] on wood, with Death leading away the pope, was used by
Cephalaeus in a Testament.

In "Fulwell's Flower of Fame," printed by W. Hoskins, 1575, 4to. is an
initial of Death leading a king, probably belonging to some alphabet.

An S rudely cut on wood with Death seizing two children was used by the
English printers, J. Herford and T. Marshe.

An A well cut on wood, representing Death striking a miser, who is
counting his money at a table. It occurs at fo. 5 of Quad's "fasciculus
geographicus." Cologne, 1608, small folio, printed by John Buxemacher.

An R indifferently cut on wood, two inches square. The subject, Death in a
grave pulls an old man towards him. A boy making his escape. From some
unknown book.

An S indifferently cut on wood, two inches square. Death shovelling two
sculls, one crowned, into a grave. On the shovel the word IDEM, and below,
the initials of the engraver or designer, I. F. From some unknown book.

An H, an inch and half square, very beautifully cut on wood. The letter is
surrounded by a group of people, over whom Death below is drawing a net.
It is from some Dutch book of emblems, about 1640.

An M cut on wood in p. 353 of a Suetonius, edited by Charles Patin, and
printed 1675, 4to. "Basle typis Genathianis." The subject is, Death
seizing Cupid. Size, 1-1/2 square.

A W, 2-1/8 square, engraved on copper, with the initials of Michael
Burghers. A large palm tree in the middle, Death with his scythe
approaches a shepherd sitting on a bank and tending his flock.

In the second volume of Braun and Hogenberg Civitates orbis terrarum, and
prefixed to a complimentary letter from Remaglus Lymburgus, a physician
and canon of Liege, there is an initial letter about an inch and a half
square, representing a pope and an emperor playing at cards. They are
interrupted by Death, who offers them a cup which he holds in his left
hand whilst he points to them with his right. Other figures are
introduced. This letter is very finely engraved on wood.

In Vol. II. p. 118 (misprinted 208) of Steinwich's "Bibliothecae
Ecclesiasticae." Colon. Agrip. 1599, folio. There is a single initial
letter V only, which may have been part of an alphabet with a Dance of
Death. The subject is Death and the queen. The size nearly an inch square.

At fo. 1. of "F. Marco de Guadalajara y Xavier, Memorable expulsion y
justissimo destierro de los Moriscos de Espana, Pamplona, 1613, 4to."
there is an initial E, finely drawn and well engraved in wood. The subject
has been taken from two cuts in the Lyons Dance of Death, viz. the
cardinal and the emperor. From the first, the figures of the cardinal and
Death seizing his hat; and from the other, the figures of the kneeling
man, and of Death seizing the emperor's crown, are introduced as a
complete group in the above initial letter. Size, 1-1/2 inch square.

In p. 66 of the same work there is another letter that has probably
belonged to a set of initials with a Dance of Death. It is an H, and
copied from the subject of the bishop taken by Death from his flock, in
the Lyons series. It is engraved in a different and inferior style from
that last mentioned, yet with considerable spirit. Size, 1-1/2 inch.




CHAPTER XVI.

    _Paintings.--Drawings.--Miscellaneous._


Rene of Anjou is said to have painted a sort of Death's Dance at Avignon,
which was destroyed in the French revolution.

In one of the wardrobe accounts of Henry VIII. a picture at Westminster is
thus described: "Item, a table with the picture of a woman playing upon a
lute, and an old manne holding a glasse in th' one hande and a deadde
mannes headde in th' other hande." MS. Harl. No. 1419.

A round painting in oil, by or from Hans Holbein. The subject, an old man
making love to a young girl. Death pulling him back, hints at the
consequences, whilst the absurdity is manifested by the presence of a
fool, with cockscomb and bauble, on the other side. Diameter, 15 inches.
From the striking resemblance in the features of the old lover to those of
Erasmus, there is no doubt that Holbein intended by this group to retort
upon his friend, who, on one of the drawings which Holbein had inserted in
a copy of Erasmus's Praise of Folly, now in the public library at Basle,
and which represented a fat epicure at table embracing a wench, had
written the name of HOLBEIN, in allusion to his well-known intemperance.
In the present writer's possession.

The small painting by Isaac Oliver, from Holbein, formerly at Whitehall,
of Death with a green garland, &c. already more particularly described at
p. 145.

A small painting in oil, by Old Franks, of a gouty old miser startled at
the unexpected appearance of Death, who approaches him playing on a
violin, one of his feet resting on an hour-glass. In the distance, and in
another room, Death is seen in conversation with a sitting gentleman.
Upright, 7-1/2 by 5-1/2.

The same subject, painted in oil by Otho Vaenius, in which a guitar is
substituted for the violin. This picture was in the collection of Richard
Cosway, Esquire. Upright, 12 by 6, and is now belonging to the present
writer.

A Mr. Knowles, a modern artist, is said to have painted a miser counting
his hoard, and Death putting an extinguisher over him.

At p. 460 of the memoirs of that most ingenious artist, Charles Alfred
Stothard, by his widow, mention is made of an old picture, at Nettlecombe
Hall, Somersetshire, belonging to its owner, a clergyman, of a Dance of
Death.

Mr. Tyssen, a bookseller at Bristol, is said to possess a will of the 15th
century, in which the testator bequeaths a painting of the Dance of Death.


DRAWINGS.

In a beautifully illuminated Psalter, supposed to have been made for
Richard II. and preserved among the Cotton MSS. Domit. xvii. is a very
singular painting, representing part of the choir of a cathedral, with ten
monks sitting in their stalls, and chaunting the service. At the top of
these stalls, and behind it, are five grotesque Deaths looking down on the
monks. One of the Deaths has a cardinal's hat, two have baronial crowns on
their heads, and those of the remaining two are decorated with a sort of
imperial crowns, shaped like the papal tiara. A priest celebrates mass at
the altar, before which another priest or monk prostrates himself. What
the object of the painter was in the introduction of these singular
figures of Death is difficult to comprehend.

[Illustration]

In the manuscript and illuminated copies of the "Romance of the Rose," the
"Pelerin de la vie humaine" and the "Chevalier Delibere," representations
of Death as Atropos, are introduced.

A very ancient and masterly drawing of Death and the beggar, the outlines
black on a blue ground, tinted with white and red. The figures [monogram]
at bottom indicate its having been part of a Macaber Dance. Upright, 5-1/4
by 4. In the author's possession.

Sir Thomas Lawrence had four very small drawings by Callot that seemed to
be part of an intended series of a Dance of Death. 1. Death and the
bishop. 2. Death and the soldier. 3. Death and the fool. 4. Death and the
old woman.

An extremely fine drawing by Rembrandt of four Deaths, their hands joined
in a dance, their faces outwards. One has a then fashionable female cap on
his head, and another a cap and feather. Upright, 9-1/2 by 6-1/2. In the
author's possession.

A very singular drawing in pen and ink and bistre. In the middle, a
sitting figure of a naked man holding a spindle, whilst an old woman,
leaning over a tub on a bench, cuts the thread which he has drawn out.
Near the old woman Death peeps in behind a wall. Close to the bench is a
woman sitting on the ground mending a piece of linen, a child leaning on
her shoulder. On the other side is a sitting female weaving, and another
woman in an upright posture, and stretching one of her hands towards a
shelf. Oblong, 11-1/4 by 8. In the author's possession.

An anonymous drawing in pen and ink of a Death embracing a naked woman.
His companion is mounted on the back of another naked female, and holds a
dart in each hand. Oblong, 4 by 3-1/4. In the author's possession.

A single sheet, containing four subjects, skilfully drawn with a pen and
tinted in Indian ink. 1. An allegorical, but unknown figure sitting on a
globe, with a sort of sceptre in his right hand. Death seizes him by his
garment with great vigour, and endeavours to pull him from his seat. 2.
Two men eating and drinking at a table. Death, unperceived, enters the
room, and levels his dart at them. 3. Death seizes two naked persons very
amorously situated. 4. Death seizes a miser counting his money. In the
author's possession.

Twenty-four very beautiful coloured drawings by a modern artist from those
in the public library at Berne that were copied by Stettler from Kauw's
drawings of the original painting by Nicolas Manuel Deutch. In the
author's possession, together with lithographic copies of them that have
been recently published at Berne.[137]

A modern Indian ink drawing of a drunken party of men and women. Death
above in a cloud levels his dart at them. Upright, 5-1/4 by 3-1/2. In the
author's possession.

A spirited drawing in Indian ink of two Deaths as pugilists with their
bottle-holders. Oblong, 7 by 4-1/2. In the author's possession.

A pen and ink tinted drawing, intitled "The Last Drop." A female seated
before a table on which is a bottle of gin or brandy. She is drinking a
glass of it, Death standing by and directing his dart at her. In the
author's possession.

Mr. Dagley, in the second edition of his "Death's Doings," p. 7, has
noticed some very masterly designs chalked on a wall bordering the road
from Turnham-Green towards Kew-Bridge. They exhibited figures of Death as
a skeleton ludicrously occupied with gamblers, dancers, boxers, &c. all
of the natural size. They were unfortunately swept away before any copies
were made to perpetuate them, as they well deserved. It was stated in The
Times newspaper that these sketches were made by a nephew of Mr. Baron
Garrow, then living in retirement near the spot, but who afterwards
obtained a situation in India. These drawings were made in 1819.

Four very clever coloured drawings by Rowlandson, being probably a portion
of an unfinished series of a Death's Dance. 1. The Suicide. A man seated
near a table is in the act of discharging a pistol at his head. The sudden
and terrific appearance of Death, who, starting from behind a curtain,
significantly stares at him through an eye-glass. One of the candles is
thrown down, and a wine-glass jerked out of the hand of the suicide, who,
from a broken sword and a hat with a cockade, seems intended for some
ruined soldier of fashion. A female servant, alarmed at the report of the
pistol, rushes into the apartment. Below, these verses:

  Death smiles, and seems his dart to hide,
  When he beholds the suicide.

2. The Good Man, Death, and the Doctor. A young clergyman reads prayers to
the dying man; the females of his family are shedding tears. Death
unceremoniously shoves out the physician, who puts one hand behind him, as
expecting a fee, whilst with the other he lifts his cane to his nostrils.
Below, these lines:

  No scene so blest in Virtue's eyes,
  As when the man of virtue dies.

3. The Honey-moon. A gouty old fellow seated on a sopha with his youthful
bride, who puts her hand through a window for a military lover to kiss it.
A table covered with a desert, wine, &c. Death, stretching over a screen,
pours something from a bottle into the glass which the husband holds in
his hand. Below, these verses:

  When the old fool has drunk his wine,
  And gone to rest, I will be thine.

4. The Fortune-teller. Some females enter the conjurer's study to have
their fortunes told. Death seizes the back of his chair and oversets him.
Below, these verses:

  All fates he vow'd to him were known,
  And yet he could not tell his own.

These drawings are oblong, 9 by 5 inches. In the author's possession.


MISCELLANEOUS.

A circular carving on wood, with the mark of Hans Schaufelin [monogram:
HS], representing Death seizing a naked female, who turns her head from
him with a very melancholy visage. It is executed in a masterly manner.
Diameter, 4 inches. In the author's possession.

In Boxgrove church, Sussex, there is a splendid and elaborately sculptured
monument of the Lords Delawar; and on the side which has not been engraved
in Mr. Dallaway's history of the county, there are two figures of Death
and a female, wholly unconnected with the other subjects on the tomb.
These figures are 9-1/2 inches in height, and of rude design. Many persons
will probably remember to have seen among the ballads, &c. that were
formerly, and are still exhibited on some walls in the metropolis, a poem,
intitled "Death and the Lady." This is usually accompanied with a
wood-cut, resembling the above figures. It is proper to mention likewise
on this occasion the old alliterative poem in Bishop Percy's famous
manuscript, intitled _Death and Liffe_, the subject of which is a
vision wherein the poet sees a contest for superiority between "our
Lady Dame Life," and the "ugly fiend, Dame Death." See "Percy's Reliques
of ancient English poetry," in the Essay on the Metre of Pierce Plowman's
Vision. Whether there may have been any connexion between these respective
subjects must be left to the decision of others. There is certainly some
reason to suppose so.

[Illustration]

The sculptures at Berlin and Fescamp have been already described.

Among the subjects of tapestry at the Tower of London, the most ancient
residence of our kings, was "the Dance of Macabre." See the inventory of
King Henry VIII.'s Guardrobe, &c. in MS. Harl. 1419, fo. 5.

Two panes of glass with a portion of a Dance of Death. 1. Three Deaths,
that appear to have been placed at the beginning of the Dance. Over them,
in a character of the time of Henry VII. these lines:

  ... ev'ry man to be contented w{t} his chaunce,
  And when it shall please God to folowe my daunce.

2. Death and the Pope. No verses. Size, upright, 8-1/2 by 7 inches. In the
author's possession. They have probably belonged to a Macaber Dance in the
windows of some church.




CHAPTER XVII.

    _Trois vifs et trois morts.--Negro figure of Death.--Danse aux
    Avengles._


The first of these subjects, as connected with the Macaber Dance, has been
already introduced at p. 31-33; what is now added will not, it is
presumed, be thought unworthy of notice.

It is needless to repeat the descriptions that have been given by M.
Peignot of the manuscripts in the Duke de la Valliere's catalogue. The
following are some of the printed volumes in which representations of the
_trois vifs et trois morts_ occur.

They are to be found in all the editions of the Danse Macabre that have
already been described, and in the following Horae and other service books
of the catholic church.

"Horae ad usum Sarum," 1495, no place, no printer. 4to. Three Deaths, three
horsemen with hawks and hounds. The hermit, to whom the vision appeared,
in his cell.

"Heures a l'usaige de Rome." Paris. Nicolas Higman, for Guil. Eustace,
1506, 12mo.

"Horae ad usum Traject." 1513. 18mo.

"Breviarium seu horarium domesticum ad usum Sarum." Paris, F. Byrckman,
1516. Large folio. Three Deaths and three young men.

"Horae ad usum Romanum." Paris. Thielman Kerver, 1522. 8vo. And again,
1535. 4to.

A Dutch "Horae." Paris. Thielman Kerver, 1522. 8vo.

"Heures a l'usage de Paris." Thielman Kerver's widow, 1525. 8vo.

"Missale ad usum Sarum." Paris, 1527. Folio. Three horsemen as noblemen,
but without hawks or hounds.

"Enchiridion preclare ecclesie Sarum." Paris. Thielman Kerver, 1528. 32mo.

"Horae ad usum fratrum predicatorum ordinis S. Dominici." Paris. Thielman
Kerver, 1529. 8vo.

"Horae ad usum Romanum." Paris. Yolande Bonhomme, widow of T. Kerver, 1531.
8vo.

"Missale ad usum Sarum." Paris. F. Regnault, 1531. Three Deaths only;
different from the others.

"Prayer of Salisbury." Paris. Francois Regnault, 1531, 12mo.

"Horae ad usum Sarum." Paris. Widow of Thielman Kerver, 1532. 12mo.

"Heures a l'usage de Paris." Francois Regnault, 1535. 12mo.

"Horae ad usum Romanum." Paris. Gilles Hardouyn, 1537. 18mo. The subject is
different from all the others, and very curiously treated.

"Heures a l'usage de Paris." Thielman Kerver, 1558. 12mo.

"Heures a l'usage de Rome." Paris. Thielman Kerver, 1573. 12mo.

"Heures a l'usage de Paris." Jacques Kerver, 1573. 12mo. And again, 1575.
12mo.

In "The Contemplation of Sinners," printed by Wynkyn de Worde. 4to.

All the above articles are in the collections of the author of this
dissertation.

In an elegant MS. "Horae," in the Harl. Coll. No. 2917, 12mo. three Deaths
appear to a pope, an emperor, and a king coming out of a church. All the
parties are crowned.

At the end of Desrey's "Macabri speculum choreae mortuorum," a hermit sees
a vision of a king, a legislator, and a vain female. They are all lectured
by skeletons in their own likenesses.

In a manuscript collection of unpublished and chiefly pious poems of John
Awdeley, a blind poet and canon of the monastery of Haghmon, in
Shropshire, anno 1426, there is one on the "_trois vifs et trois morts_,"
in alliterative verses, and composed in a very grand and terrific style.


NEGRO FIGURE OF DEATH.

In some degree connected with the old painting of the Macaber Dance in the
church-yard of the Innocents at Paris, was that of a black man over a
vaulted roof, constructed by the celebrated N. Flamel, about the year
1390. This is supposed to have perished with the Danse Macabre; but a copy
of the figure has been preserved in some of the printed editions of the
dance. It exhibits a Negro blowing a trumpet, and was certainly intended
as a personification of Death. In one of the oldest of the above editions
he is accompanied with these verses:

  CRY DE MORT.

  Tost, tost, tost, que chacun savance
  Main a main venir a la danse
  De Mort, danser la convient,
  Tous et a plusieurs nen souvient.
  Venez hommes femmes et enfans,
  Jeunes et vieulx, petis et grans,
  Ung tout seul nen eschapperoit,
  Pour mille escuz si les donnoit, &c.

Before the females in the dance the figure is repeated with a second "Cry
de Mort."

  Tost, tost, venez femmes danser
  Apres les hommes incontinent,
  Et gardez vous bien de verser,
  Car vous danserez vrayment;
  Mon cornet corne bien souvent
  Apres les petis et les grans.
  Despecte vous legierement,
  Apres la pluye vient le beau temps.

These lines are differently given in the various printed copies of the
Danse Macabre.

This figure is not to be confounded with an alabaster statue of Death that
remained in the church-yard of the Innocents, when it was entirely
destroyed in 1786. It had been usually regarded as the work of Germain
Pilon, but with greater probability belonged to Francois Gentil, a
sculptor at Troyes, about 1540. It was transported to Notre Dame, after
being bronzed and repaired, by M. Deseine, a distinguished artist. It was
saved from the fury of the iconoclast revolutionists by M. Le Noir, and
deposited in the Museum which he so patriotically established in the Rue
des petits Augustins, but it has since disappeared. It was an upright
skeleton figure, holding in one hand a lance which pointed to a shield
with this inscription:

  Il n'est vivant, tant soit plein d'art,
    Ne de force pour resistance,
  Que je ne frappe de mon dart,
    Pour bailler aux vers leur pitance.
                  Priez Dieu pour les trespasses.

It is engraved in the second volume of M. Le Noir's "Musee des monumens
Francais," and also in his "Histoire des arts en France," No. 91.


DANSE AUX AVEUGLES.

There is a poetical work, in some degree connected with the subject of
this dissertation, that ought not to be overlooked. It was composed by
one Pierre Michault, of whom little more seems to be known than that he
was in the service of Charles, Count of Charolois, son of Philip le Bon,
Duke of Burgundy. It is intitled "La Danse aux Aveugles," and the object
of it is to show that all men are subject to the influence of three blind
guides, Love, Fortune, and Death, before whom several persons are
whimsically made to dance. It is a dialogue in a dream between the Author
and Understanding, and the respective blind guides describe themselves,
their nature, and power over mankind, in ten-line stanzas, of which the
following is the first of those which are pronounced by Death:

  Je suis la Mort de nature ennemie,
  Qui tous vivans finablement consomme,
  Anichillant a tous humains la vie,
  Reduis en terre et en cendre tout homme.
  Je suis la mort qui dure me surnomme,
  Pour ce qu'il fault que maine tout affin;
  Je nay parent, amy, frere ou affin
  Que ne face tout rediger en pouldre,
  Et suis de Dieu ad ce commise affin,
  Que l'on me doubte autant que tonnant fouldre.

Some of the editions are ornamented with cuts, in which Death is
occasionally introduced, and that portion of the work which exclusively
relates to him seems to have been separately published, M. Goujet[138]
having mentioned that he had seen a copy in vellum, containing twelve
leaves, with an engraving to every one of the stanzas, twenty-three in
number. More is unnecessary to be added, as M. Peignot has elaborately and
very completely handled the subject in his interesting "Recherches sur les
Danses des Morts." Dijon, 1826. octavo.




CHAPTER XVIII.

    _Errors of various writers who have introduced the subject of the
    Dance of Death._


To enumerate even a moiety of these mistakes would almost occupy a
separate volume, but it may be as well to notice some of them which are to
be found in works of common occurrence.

TRAVELLERS.--The erroneous remarks of Bishop Burnet and Mr. Coxe have been
already adverted to. See pp. 79, 134, and 138.

Misson seems to regard the old Danse Macabre as the work of Holbein.

The Rev. Robert Gray, in "Letters during the course of a tour through
Germany and Switzerland in the year 1791 and 1792," has stated that Mechel
has engraved _Rubens's designs_ from the Dance of Death, now perishing on
the walls of the church-yard of the Predicant convent, where it was
sketched in 1431.

Mr. Wood, in his "View of the History of Switzerland," as quoted in the
Monthly Review, Nov. 1799, p. 290, states, that "the Dance of Death in the
church-yard of the Predicants has been falsely ascribed to Holbein, as it
is proved that it was painted _long after the death of that artist, and
not before he was born_, as the honourable Horace Walpole supposes." Here
the corrector stands in need himself of correction, unless it be possible
that he is not fairly quoted by the reviewer.

Miss Williams, in her Swiss tour, 1798, when speaking of the Basle Dance
of Death, says it was painted by Kleber, a _pupil of Holbein_.

Those intelligent and amusing travellers, Breval, Keysler, and Blainville
have carefully avoided the above strange mistakes.

WRITERS ON PAINTING AND ENGRAVING.--Meyssens, in his article for Holbein
in "the effigies of the Painters," mentions his "Death's Dance, in the
town-hall of Basle, the design whereof he first neatly cut in wood and
afterwards painted, which appeared so fine to the learned Erasmus, &c."
English edition, 1694, p. 15.

Felibien, in his "Entretiens sur les vies des Peintres," follows Meyssens
as to the painting in the town-hall.

Le Comte places the supposed painting by Holbein in the fish-market, and
in other respects copies Meyssens. "Cabinet des Singularites, &c." tom.
iii. p. 323, edit. 1702, 12mo.

Bullart not only places the painting in the town-hall of Basle, but adds,
that he afterwards engraved it in wood. "Acad. des Sciences et des Arts,"
tom. ii. p. 412.

Mr. Evelyn, in his "Sculptura," the only one of his works that does him no
credit, and which is a meagre and extremely inaccurate compilation, when
speaking of Holbein, actually runs riot in error and misconception. He
calls him a Dane. He makes what he terms "the licentiousness of the friars
and nuns," meaning probably Hollar's sixteen etchings after Holbein's
satire on monks and friars and other members of the Romish church as the
persecutors of Christ, and also the "Dance Machabre and Mortis imago," to
have been cut in wood, and one or both of the latter to have been painted
in the church of Basle. Mr. Evelyn's own copy of this work, with several
additions in manuscript, is in the possession of Mr. Taylor, a retired and
ingenious artist, of Cirencester-place. He probably intended to reprint
it, and opposite the above-mentioned word "Dane," has inserted a query.

Sandrart places the Dance of Death in the fish-market at Basle, and makes
Holbein the painter as well as the engraver. "Acad. artis pictoriae," p.
238, edit. 1683, folio.

Baldinucci speaks of twenty prints of the Dance of Death painted by
Holbein in the Senate-house of Basle. "Notizie de professori del disegno,
&c." tom. iii. 313 and 319.

M. Descamps inadvertently ascribes the old Dance of Death on the walls of
the church-yard of Saint Peter to the pencil of Holbein. "Vie des Peintres
Flamandi," &c. 1753. 8vo. Tom. i. p. 75.

Papillon, in his account of the Dance of Death, abounds with inaccuracies.
He says, that a magistrate of Basle employed him to paint a Dance of Death
in the fish-market, near a church-yard; that the work greatly increased
his reputation, and made much noise in the world, although it has many
anatomical defects; that he engraved this painting on small blocks of wood
with unparalleled beauty and delicacy. He supposes that they first
appeared in 1530 at Basle or Zuric, and as he thinks with a title and
German verses on each print. Now he had never seen any edition so early as
1530, nor any of the cuts with German verses, and having probably been
misled on this occasion, he has been the cause of misleading many
subsequent writers, as Fournier, Huber, Strutt, &c. He adopts the error as
to the mark [monogram: HL] on the thirty-sixth subject belonging to
Holbein. He is entirely ignorant of the nature and character of the fool
or idiot in No. xliii. whom he terms "un homme lascif qui a leve le devant
de sa robbe:" and, to crown the whole, he makes the old Macaber Dance an
_imitation_ of that ascribed to Holbein.

De Murr, in tom. ii. p. 535 of his "Bibliotheque de Peinture, &c."
servilely copies Papillon in all that he has said on the subject, with
some additional errors of his own.

The Abbe Fontenai, in the article for Holbein in his "Dictionnaire des
Artistes," Paris, 1776, 8vo. not only makes him the painter of the old
Macaber Dance, but places it in the town-house at Basle.

Mr. Walpole, or rather Vertue, in the "Anecdotes of Painting in England,"
corrects the error of those who give the old Macaber Dance to Holbein, but
inadvertently makes that which is usually ascribed to him to have been
borrowed from the other.

Messrs. Huber and Rost make Holbein the engraver of the Lyons wood-cuts,
and suppose the original drawings to be preserved in the public library at
Basle. They probably allude to the problematical drawings that were used
by M. de Mechel, and which are now in Russia. "Manuel des curieux et des
amateurs de l'art." Tom. i. p. 155.

In the "Notices sur les graveurs," Besancon, 1807, 8vo. a work that has,
by some writers, been given to M. Malpe, and by others to the Abbe
Baverel, Papillon is followed with respect to the supposed edition of
1530, and its German verses.

Mr. Janssen is more inaccurate than any of his predecessors, some of whom
have occasionally misled him. He makes Albert Durer the inventor of the
designs, the greater part of which, he says, are from the Dance of Death
at Berne. He adopts the edition of 1530, and the German verses. He
condemns the title-page of the edition of 1562 for stating an addition of
seventeen plates, whereas, says he, there are but five; but the editor
meant only that there were seventeen more cuts than in the original, which
had only forty-one.

MISCELLANEOUS WRITERS.--Charles Patin, a libeller of the English nation,
has made Holbein the engraver on wood of a Dance of Death, which, he says,
is "not much unlike that in the church-yard of the Predicants at Basle,
painted, as some say, from the life, by Holbein." He ought to have known
that this work was executed near a century before Holbein was born.
"Erasmi stultitiae laus." Basileae, 1676, 8vo. at the end of the list of
Holbein's works.

Martiniere, in his Geographical Dictionary, makes Holbein the inventor of
the Macaber Dance at Basle.

Goujet, in his very useful "Bibliotheque Francoise," tom. x. p. 436, has
erroneously stated that the Lyons engravings on wood were by the
celebrated artist Salomon Bernard, usually called "Le petit Bernard." The
mistake is very pardonable, as it appears that Bernard chiefly worked in
the above city.

M. Compan, in his "Dictionnaire de Danse," 1787, 12mo. under the article
_Macabree_, very gravely asserts that the author took his work from the
Maccabees, "qui, comme tout le monde scait danserent, et en ont fait
epoque pour les morts." He then quotes some lines from a modern edition of
the "Danse Macabre," where the word _Machabees_ is ignorantly substituted
for "Machabre."

M. Fournier states that Holbein painted a Dance of Death in the
fish-market at Basle, reduced it, and engraved it. "Dissertation sur
l'imprimerie," p. 70.

Mr. Warton has converted the imaginary Machabree into _a French poet_, but
corrects himself in his "Hist. of Engl. Poetry." He supposes the single
cut in Lydgate to represent _all_ the figures that were in St. Paul's
cloister. He atones for these errors in referring to Holbein's cuts in
Cranmer's Catechism, as entirely different in style from those published
at Lyons, _but which he thinks, are probably the work of Albert Durer_,
and also in his conjecture that the painter Reperdius might have been
concerned in the latter. See "Observations on the Fairy Queen of Spenser,"
vol. ii. 116, &c. In his most elegant and instructive History of English
Poetry he relapses into error when he states that Holbein painted a Dance
of Death in the Augustine monastery at Basle in 1543, and that Georgius
AEmylius published this Dance at Lyons, 1542, one year before Holbein's
painting at Basle appeared. Hist. Engl. Poetry, vol. ii. p. 364, edit.
Price.

The Marquis de Paulmy ascribes the old Macaber Dance at Basle to Holbein,
and adds, "le sujet et l'execution en sont aussi singuliers que
ridicules." "Melanges tires d'une grande bibliotheque," tom. Ff. 371.

M. Champollion Figeac in Millin's "Magazin encyclopedique," 1811, tom. vi.
has an article on an edition of the "Danse Macabre anterieure a celle de
1486." In this article he states that Holbein painted a fresco Dance of
Death at Basle near the end of the 15th century (Holbein was not born till
1498!); that this Dance resembled the Danse Macabre, all the characters of
which are in Holbein's style; that it is still more like the Dance in the
Monasticon Anglicanum in a single print; and that the English Dance
belongs to John Porey, an author who appears, however, to be unknown to
all biographers. We should have been obliged to M. Figeac if he had
mentioned where he met with this John Porey, whom he again mentions, but
in such a manner as to leave a doubt whether he means to consider him as a
poet or a painter. Even M. Millin himself, from whom more accuracy might
have been expected, speaks of Holbein's work as at the Dominican convent
at Basle.

The "Nouveau Dictionnaire Historique," 1789, 8vo. gives the painting on
the walls of the cemetery of St. Peter at Basle, to Holbein, confounding
the two works as some other French biographical dictionaries have done,
especially one that has cited an edition of the Danse Macabre in 1486 as
the first of Holbein's painting, though it immediately afterwards states
that artist to have been born in 1498.

In that excellent work, the "Biographie universelle," in 42 vols. 8vo.
1811-1828, M. Ponce, under the article "Holbein," inaccurately refers to
"the Dance of Death painted in 1543 on the walls of a cemetery at Basle,"
at the same time properly remarking that it was not Holbein's. He refers
to the supposed original drawings of Holbein's work at Petersburg that
were engraved by De Mechel, and concludes his brief note with a reference
to a dissertation of M. Raymond in Millin's "Magazin encyclopedique,"
1814, tom. v. which is nothing more than a simple notice of two editions
of the Danse Macabre, described in the present dissertation.

And lastly--The Reviewer of the first edition of the present dissertation
prefixed to Mr. Edwards's engravings or etchings by Wenceslaus Hollar, has
displayed considerable ingenuity in his attempt to correct supposed
errors, by a lavish substitution of many of his own, some of which are the
following:

That the Dance of Death is found in _carvings in wood in the choirs of
churches_. Not a single instance can be produced.

That Hollar's etchings are on _wood_.

"Black letter" is _corrected_ to "Black letters."

That the book would have been more _complete if Lydgate's stanzas_ had
been quoted, in common with others in _Piers Plowman_. Now all the stanzas
of Lydgate are given, and not a single one is to be found in Piers
Plowman.

And they most _ingeniously and scientifically_ denominate the skeleton
figure of Death "the Gothic monster of Holbein!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A short time after the completion of the present Dissertation, the author
accidentally became possessed of a recently published German life of
Holbein, in which not a single addition of importance to what has been
gleaned from preceding writers can possibly be found. It contains a
general, but extremely superficial account of the works of that artist,
including the Dance of Death, which, as a matter of course, is ascribed to
him. As the author, a Mr. Ulrich Hegner, who is said to be a _Swiss
gentleman and amateur_, has not conducted himself with that urbanity and
politeness which might have been looked for from such a _character_, and
has thought proper, in adverting to the slight Essay by the present
writer, prefixed, at the instance of the late Mr. Edwards, to his
publication of Hollar's etchings of the Dance of Death, to speak of it
with a degree of contempt, which, even with all its imperfections, others
may think it may not have deserved; the above _gentleman_ will have but
little reason to complain should he meet with a somewhat uncourteous
retort in the course of the following remarks on his compilation.

Had Mr. Hegner written with a becoming diffidence in his opinions, his
work might have commanded and deserved respect, though greatly abounding
in error and false conceit. He has undertaken a task for which he has
shown himself wholly unqualified, and with much unseemly arrogance, and
its usual concomitant, ignorance, has assumed to himself a monopoly of
information on the subject which he discusses. His arguments, if worthy of
the name, are, generally speaking, of a most weak and flimsy texture. In
support of his dogmatical opinion that the original designs for the Lyons
Dance of Death exclusively belong to Holbein he has not adduced a single
fact. He has not been in possession of a tenth part of the materials that
were necessary for the proper investigation of his subject, nor does he
appear to have even seen them. The very best judges of whatever relates to
the history and art of engraving are quite satisfied that most of the
persons who have written on them, with the exception of Mr. Ottley, and of
the modest and urbane Monsieur Peignot, are liable to the charge of
extreme inaccuracy and imperfection in their treatment of the Dance of
Death, and the list of such writers may now be closed with the addition of
Herr Hegner.

Some of his positions are now to be stated and examined.

He makes Holbein the author of a new Dance of Death in the Crozat or
Gallitzin drawings in Indian ink which have been already described in the
present dissertation, adding that he also _engraved_ them, and suppressing
any mention in this place of the monogram on one of the cuts which he
_elsewhere admits not to belong to Holbein_. Soon afterwards, and with
very good reason, he doubts the originality of the drawings, which he says
M. de Mechel caused to be copied by Rudolph Schellenberg, a skilful
artist, already mentioned as the author of a Dance of Death of his own
invention; and proceeds to state, that from these copies De Mechel
employed some inferior persons in his service to make engravings;
advancing all this without the accompaniment of any proof whatever, and in
direct contradiction to De Mechel's authority of having himself engraved
them. An apparently bitter enemy to De Mechel, whose posthumous materials,
now in the library at Basle, he nevertheless admits to have used for his
work, he invidiously enlarges on the discrepancies between his engravings
and the Lyons wood-cuts, both in size and manner; and then concludes that
they were copied from the wood-cuts, the copyist allowing himself the
privilege of making arbitrary variations, especially in the figure of the
Eve in the second cut, which, he says, is of the family of Boucher, who,
in spite of Hegner's opinion, is regarded by better judges as a clever
painter. Whether the remarks on any deviations of De Mechel's prints from
the Crozat drawings are just or otherwise can now be decided by comparison
only, and Hegner does not appear to have seen them, or at least does not
tell us so. His criticisms on the merit of the engravings in De Mechel's
work cannot be justified, for though they may occasionally be faulty, they
are very neatly, and many will think beautifully executed.

What Hegner has said respecting the alphabets of initial letters, is at
once futile and inaccurate; but his comment on Hans Lutzenberger deserves
the severest censure. Adverting to the inscription with the name of this
fine artist on one of the sets of the initials, he terms him "an itinerant
_bookseller_, who had bought the blocks and put his name on them;" and
this after having himself referred to a print on which Lutzenberger is
called FORMSCHNEIDER, _i. e._ woodcutter: making in this instance a clumsy
and dishonest effort to get rid of an excellent engraver, who stands so
recorded in opposition to his own untenable system.

The very important and indelible expressions in the dedication to the
first known edition of the Lyons wood-cuts, he very modestly terms "a play
upon words," and endeavours to account for the death of the painter by
supposing Holbein's absence in England would warrant the language of the
dedication. This is indeed a most desperate argument. Frellon, the
publisher and proprietor of the work, must have known better than to have
permitted the dedication to accompany his edition had it been susceptible
of so silly a construction.

He again adheres to the improbable notion that _Holbein engraved_ the cuts
to the Lyons book, and this in defiance of the mark or monogram [monogram:
HL] which this painter never used; nor will a single print with Holbein's
accredited name be found to bear the slightest resemblance to the style of
the wood-cuts. Even those in Cranmer's catechism, which approach the
nearest to them, are in a different manner. His earlier engravings on
wood, whether in design only, or as the engraver, resemble those by Urs
Graaf, who, as well as Holbein, decorated the frontispieces or titles to
many of the books printed at Basle. It is not improbable that Urs Graaf
was at that time a pupil of Holbein.

Hegner next endeavours to annihilate the painting at Whitehall recorded in
Nieuhoff's etchings and dedications, but still by arguments of an entirely
negative kind. He lays much stress on this painting not being specifically
mentioned by Sandrart or Van Mander, who were in England; but where does
it appear that the latter, during his short stay in this country, had
visited Whitehall? Even admitting that both these persons had seen that
palace, it is most probable that the fresco painting of the Dance of
Death, would, from length of time, dampness of the walls, and neglect,
have been in a condition that would not warrant the exhibition of it, and
it was, moreover, placed in a gallery which scarcely formed, at that time,
a part of Whitehall, and which was, probably, not shown to visitors. It
must not, however, be omitted to mention that Sandrart, in p. 239 of his
Acad. Pict. states, though ambiguously, that "there was still remaining at
Whitehall a work by Holbein that would constitute him the Apelles of his
time," an expression which we may remember had been also applied to
Holbein by his friend Borbonius in the complimentary lines on a Dance of
Death.

The Herr Hegner has thought fit to speak of Mr. T. Nieuhoff in terms of
indecorous and unjust contempt, describing him as "an unknown and
unimportant Dutch copper-plate engraver," and arraigning his evidence as
being in manuscript only; as if manuscripts that have never been printed
were of no authority. But where has Hegner discovered that Nieuhoff was a
Dutch copper-plate engraver, by which is meant a professed artist; or even
though he had been such, would that circumstance vitiate his testimony? In
his dedication to Lord William Benting the expressions allusive to his
ardent love of the arts, seem to constitute him an amateur attempter of
etching; for what he has left us in that way is indeed of a very
subordinate character, and unworthy of a professed artist. He appears to
have been one of the Dutchmen who accompanied King William to England, and
to have had apartments assigned to him at Whitehall. At the end of his
dedication to Lord W. Benting, he calls himself an old servant of that
person's father, and subscribes himself "your and your illustrious
family's most obedient and humble servant."

The identification of William Benting must be left to the sagacity of
others. He could not have been the Earl of Portland created in 1689, or he
would have been addressed accordingly. He is, moreover, described as a
youth born at Whitehall, and then residing there, and whose dwelling
consisted of nearly the whole of the palace that remained after the fire.

Again,--We have before us a person living in the palace of Whitehall
anterior to its destruction, testifying what he had himself seen, and
addressing one who could not be imposed upon, as residing also in the
palace. There seems to be no possible motive on the part of Nieuhoff for
stating an untruth, and his most clear and unimpeachable testimony is
opposed by Hegner's wild and weak conjectures, and chiefly by the negative
argument that a few strangers who visited England in a hasty manner have
not mentioned the painting in question at Whitehall, amidst those
inaccurate and superficial accounts of England which, with little
exception, have been given by foreign travellers. Among these Hegner has
selected Patin and Sandrart. Before adducing the former, he would have
done well to have looked at his very imperfect and erroneous account of
Holbein's works, in his edition of the [Greek: MORIAS EGKOMION] of
Erasmus; and, with respect to the latter, the stamp of inaccuracy has been
long affixed to most of the works he has published. He has mentioned, that
being in company with Rubens in a Dutch passage boat "the conversation
fell upon Holbein's book of cuts, representing the Dance of Death; that
Rubens gave them the highest encomiums, advising him, who was then a young
man, to set the highest value upon them, informing him, at the same time,
that he in his youth had copied them."[139] On this passage Mr. Warton has
well remarked that if Rubens styled these prints Holbein's, in familiar
conversation, it was but calling them by the name which the world had
given them, and by which they were generally known; and that Sandrart has,
in another place, confounded them with the Basle painting.[140]

To conclude,--Juvenal's "hoc volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas,"
may be regarded as Herr Hegner's literary motto. He has advocated the
vague traditions of unauthenticated Dances of Death by Holbein, and has
made a most unjustifiable attempt to deprive that truly great artist of
the only painting on the subject which really appears to belong to him.
Yet, if by fair and candid argument, supported by the necessary proofs,
the usual and long standing claim on the part of Holbein can be
substantiated, no one will thereby be more highly gratified than the
author of this dissertation.




ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.


P. 59. After No. 17 add "La Danse Macabre." Paris, Nicole de la Barre,
1523, 4to. with very different cuts, and some characters omitted in former
editions.

P. 77, last line of the text. There is a German work intitled "The process
or law-suit of Death," printed, and perhaps written, by Conrad Fyner in
1477; but as it is not noticed in Panzer's list of German books, no
further account of it can be given than that it is briefly mentioned by
Joseph Heller, in a German work on the subject of engraving on wood, in
which one cut from it is introduced, that exhibits Death conversing with a
husbandman who holds a flail in one of his hands. It is probable that the
book would be found to contain other figures relating to a Macaber Dance.

P. 112, l. ult. There is another work by Glissenti, intitled "La Morte
innamorata." Venet. 1608, 24mo. with a dedication to Sir Henry Wotton, the
English ambassador at Venice, by Elisabetta Glissenti Serenella, the
author's niece; in which, after stating that Sir Henry had seen it
represented, she adds, that she had ventured to have it printed for the
purpose of offering it to him as a very humble donation, &c. It is a
moral, dramatic, and allegorical fable of five acts, in which _Man_, to
avoid _Death_, who has fallen in love with him, retires with his family to
the country of _Long Life_, where he takes up his abode in the house of
_the World_, by whom and his wife _Fraud_, who is in strict friendship
with _Fortune_, he is apparently made much of, and calculates on being
very happy. _Death_ follows the _Man_, and being unknown in the above
region, contrives, with the aid of _Infirmity_, the _Man's_ nurse, to make
him fall sick. The _World_ being tired of his guest, and very desirous to
get rid of, and plunder him of his property, under pretence of introducing
him to _Fortune_, and consequent happiness, enters into a plot with _Time_
to disguise _Death_, who is lodged in the same house with him, as
_Fortune_, and thus to give him possession of the _Man_, who imagines that
he is just about to secure _Fortune_. Each act of this piece is ornamented
with some wood-cut that had been already introduced into the other work of
Glissenti.

P. 118, line 32. Ebert, in his "Bibliographisches Lexicon," Leipsig. 1821,
4to. has mentioned some later editions of Denneker's engravings. See the
article Denecker, p. 972.

P. 126, l. 14. It is not impossible that Hollar may have copied a bust
carved in wood, or some other material, by Holbein, as Albert Durer and
other great artists are known to have practised sculpture in this manner.

P. 135, l. 25. These four prints are in the author's possession.

P. 137, l. ult. Other imitations of the Lyons cuts are, 1. A wood
engraving of Adam digging and Eve spinning, by Corn. Van Sichem in the
"Bibel's tresor," Amst. 1646, 4to. 2. The Astrologer, a small circular
print on copper by Le Blond. 3. The Bridegroom, an anonymous modern
engraving on wood. 4. The Miser, a small modern and anonymous print on
copper.

P. 147, l. 19. In the library at Lambeth palace, No. 1049, there is a copy
of this book in Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, English, and French,
printed by J. Day, 1569, 8vo. It was given by Archb. Tillotson, and from a
memorandum in it supposed to have been the Queen's own copy. The cut of
the Queen kneeling was used so late as 1652, in Benlowes' Theophila. Some
of the cuts have the unexplained mark [monogram: CI].

P. 164, Article xii. This print is a copy, with a few variations, of a
much older one engraved on wood, and probably unique, in the very curious
collection of single sheets and black letter ballads, belonging to George
Daniel, Esquire, of Islington. The figures are executed in a style of
considerable merit, and each of them is described in a stanza of four
lines. It may probably be the same as No. 1 or No. 2, mentioned in p. 76,
or either of Nos. x. or xi. described in p. 163.

P. 226, line 12. Another drawing by Rowlandson, intitled "Death and the
Drunkards." Five topers are sitting at a table and enjoying their punch.
Death suddenly enters and violently seizes one of them. Another perceives
the unwelcome and terrific intruder, whilst the rest are too intent on
their liquor to be disturbed at the moment. It is a very spirited and
masterly performance. 11 by 9. In the author's possession.

P. 239, l. 12. There is likewise in the "Biographie Universelle" an
article intitled "Macaber, poete Allemand" by M. Weiss, and it is to be
regretted that a writer whose learning and research are so eminently
conspicuous in many of the best lives in the work, should have permitted
himself to be misled in much that he has said, by the errors of
Champollion Figeac in the Magazin Encyclopedique. He certainly doubts the
existence of Macaber as a writer, but inclines to M. Van Praet's Arabic
_Magbarah_. He states, that the English version of the Macaber Dance
belongs to John Porey, _a poet who remains unknown even to his
countrymen_, and is inserted in the Monasticon Anglicanum. Now this
_unknown poet_, who is likewise adopted by M. Peignot, is merely the
person who contributed Hollar's plate in the Monasticon, already mentioned
in p. 52, and whose coat of arms is at the top of that plate, with the
following inscription, "Quo praesentes et posteri Mortis, ut vidimus, omni
Ordini comunis, sint magis memores, posuit IOHANNES POREY." Mr. Weiss has
likewise inadvertently adopted the error that Holbein painted the old
Dance of Macaber in the convent of the Augustines at Basle.

Two recently published Dances of Death have come to hand too late to have
been noticed in their proper places.

1. "Der Todtentantz. Ein Gedicht von Ludwig Bechstein, mit 48 kupfern in
treuen Conturen nach H. Holbein. Leipzig bei Friedrich August Leo, 1831."
8vo. These prints are executed in a faithful and elegant outline, and
accompanied with modern German verses.

2. "Hans Holbein's Todtentanz in 53 getreu nach den Holz schnitten
lithographirten Blattern. Heraus gegeben von J. Schlotthaver k. Professor
Mit erklaerendem Texte. Munchen, 1832, Auf Rosten des Heraus gegebers."
12mo. The prints are most accurately and elegantly lithographed in
imitation of wood engraving. The descriptions are in German verse, and
accompanied with some brief prefatory matter by Dr. H. F. Massmann, which
is said to have been amplified in one of the German journals or reviews.




DESCRIPTION OF THE CUTS GIVEN IN THE DISSERTATION.


I. The frontispiece is a design for the sheath of a dagger, probably made
by Holbein for the use of a goldsmith or chaser. The original drawing is
in the public library at Basle. See some remarks on it in p. 133.

II. These circular engravings by Israel Van Meckenen are mentioned in p.
160.

III. Copy of an ancient drawing, 1454, of Death and the Beggar. See p.
223.

IV. Figures of Death and the Lady, sculptured on a monument of the
Delawars, in Boxgrove church, Sussex. See p. 226.

V. A fac-simile of one of the cuts to a very early edition, printed
without date at Troyes by Nicolas le Rouge. It represents the story of the
_trois morts et trois vifs_, and the vision of Saint Macarius. See pp. 33,
34, and 59.

VI. A fac-simile of another cut from the edition of a Danse Macabre,
mentioned in No. V.




DESCRIPTION OF THE LYONS WOOD-CUTS OF THE DANCE OF DEATH.

    _The Copies have been made by MR. BONNER from the Cuts belonging to
    the "Imagines Mortis, Lugduni sub scuto Coloniensi, 1547," 12mo. and
    which have been usually ascribed to Holbein._


1. THE CREATION OF ALL THINGS. The Deity is seen taking Eve from the side
of Adam. "Formavit Dominus Deus hominem de limo terrae, &c." Gen. i.

2. THE TEMPTATION. Eve has just received the forbidden fruit from the
serpent, who, on the authority of venerable Bede, is here, as well as in
most ancient representations of the subject, depicted with a female human
face. She holds it up to Adam, and entices him to gather more of it from
the tree. "Quia audisti vocem uxoris tuae, et comedisti de ligno, &c." Gen.
iii.

3. THE EXPULSION FROM PARADISE. Adam and Eve are preceded by Death, who
plays on a vielle, or beggar's lyre, as if demonstrating his joy at the
victory he has obtained over man. "Emisit eum Dominum Deus de Paradiso
voluptatis, ut operaretur terram de qua sumptus est." Gen. iii.

4. THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL OF MAN. Adam is digging the ground,
assisted by Death. In the distance Eve is suckling her first-born and
holding a distaff. Whence the proverb in many languages:

  When Adam delv'd and Eve span
  Where was then the gentleman?

"Maledicta terra in opere tuo, in laboribus comedes cunctis diebus vitae
tuae, donec revertaris, &c." Gen. iii.

5. A CEMETERY, in which several Deaths are assembled, most of whom are
playing on noisy instruments of music, as a general summons to mortals to
attend them. "Vae, vae, vae habitantibus in terra." Apoc. viii.

6. THE POPE. He is crowning an Emperor, who kneels before him, two
Cardinals attending, one of whom is ludicrously personated by Death. In
the back-ground are bishops, &c. Death embraces the Pope with one hand,
and with the other leans on a crutch. Two grotesque Devils are introduced
into the cut, one of whom hovers over the Pope, the other in the air holds
a diploma, to which several seals are appended. "Moriatur sacerdos
magnus." Josue xx.

7. THE EMPEROR. Seated on a throne, and attended by his courtiers, he
seems to be listening to, or deciding, the complaint of a poor man who is
kneeling before him, against his rich oppressor, whom the Emperor, holding
the sword of justice, seems to regard with an angry countenance. Behind
him Death lays hands upon his crown. "Dispone domui tuae, morieris, enim
tu, et non vives." Isaiae xxxviii.

8. THE KING. He is sitting at his repast before a well-covered table,
under a canopy studded with fleurs-de-lis. Death intrudes himself as a
cupbearer, and presents the King with probably his last draught. The
figure of the King seems intended as a portrait of Francis I. "Sicut et
Rex hodie est, et cras morietur; nemo enim ex regibus aliud habuit."
Ecclesiast. x. et Sapient. vii.

9. THE CARDINAL. There is some difficulty in ascertaining the real meaning
of the designer of this subject. It has been described as the Cardinal
receiving the bull of his appointment, or as a rich man making a purchase
of indulgences. The latter interpretation seems warranted by the Latin
motto. Death is twisting off the Cardinal's hat. "Vae qui justificatis
impium pro muneribus, et justitiam justi aufertis ab eo." Isaiae v.

10. THE EMPRESS. Gorgeously attired and attended by her maids of honour,
she is intercepted in her walk by Death in the character of a shrivelled
old woman, who points to an open grave, and seems to say, "to this you
must come at last." "Gradientes in superbia potest Deus humiliare." Dan.
iv.

11. THE QUEEN. She has just issued from her palace, when Death
unexpectedly appears and forcibly drags her away. Her jester, in whose
habiliments Death has ludicrously attired himself, endeavours in vain to
protect his mistress. A female attendant is violently screaming. Death
holds up his hour-glass to indicate the arrival of the fatal hour.
"Mulieres opulentae surgite, et audite vocem meam: post dies et annum, et
vos conturbemini." Isaiae xxxii.

12. THE BISHOP. Quietly resigned to his fate he is led away by Death,
whilst the loss of the worthy Pastor is symbolically deplored by the
flight and terror of several shepherds in the distance amidst their
flocks. The setting sun is very judiciously introduced. "Percutiam
pastorem, et dispergentur oves gregis." Mat. xxvi. Mar. xiv.

13. THE DUKE. Attended by his courtiers, he is accosted in the street for
charity by a poor beggar woman with her child. He disdainfully turns aside
from her supplication, whilst Death, fantastically crowned with leaves,
unexpectedly lays violent hands upon him. "Princeps induetur moerore, et
quiescere faciam superbiam potentium." Ezech. viii.

14. THE ABBOT. Death having despoiled him of his mitre and crosier, drags
him away. The Abbot resists with all his might, and is about to throw his
breviary at his adversary. "Ipse morietur, quia non habuit disciplinam,
et in multitudine stultitiae suae decipietur."

15. THE ABBESS. Death, grotesquely crowned with flags, seizes the poor
Abbess by her scapulary. A Nun at the convent gate, with uplifted hands,
bewails the fate of her superior. "Laudavi magis mortuos quam viventes."
Eccles. iv.

16. THE GENTLEMAN. He vainly, with uplifted sword, endeavours to liberate
himself from the grasp of Death. The hour-glass is placed on his bier.
"Quis est homo qui vivet, et non videbit mortem, eruet animam suam de manu
inferi?"

17. THE CANON. Death holds up his hour-glass to him as he is entering a
cathedral. They are followed by a noble person with a hawk on his fist,
his buffoon or jester, and a little boy. "Ecce appropinquat hora." Mat.
xxvi.

18. THE JUDGE. He is deciding a cause between a rich and a poor man. From
the former he is about to receive a bribe. Death behind him snatches his
staff of office from one of his hands. "Disperdam judicem de medio ejus."
Amos ii.

19. THE ADVOCATE. The rich client is putting a fee into the hands of the
dishonest lawyer, to which Death also contributes, but reminds him at the
same time that his glass is run out. To this admonition he seems to pay
little regard, fully occupied in counting the money. Behind this group is
the poor suitor, wringing his hands, and lamenting that his poverty
disables him from coping with his wealthy adversary. "Callidus vidit
malum, et abscondit se: innocens pertransiit, et afflictus est damno."
Prover. xxii.

20. THE MAGISTRATE. A Demon is blowing corruption into the ear of a
magistrate, who has turned his back on a poor man, whilst he is in close
conversation with another person, to whose story he seems emphatically
attentive. Death at his feet with an hour-glass and spade. "Qui obturat
aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis, et ipse clamabit, et non exaudietur."
Prover. xxi.

21. THE PREACHER. Death with a stole about his neck stands behind the
preacher, and holds a jaw-bone over his head, typifying perhaps thereby
that he is the best preacher of the two. "Vae qui dicitis malum bonum, et
bonum malum: ponentes tenebras lucem, et lucem tenebras: ponentes amarum
in dulce, et dulce in amarum." Isaiae v.

22. THE PRIEST. He is carrying the viaticum, or sacrament, to some dying
person. Attendants follow with tapers and holy water. Death strides on
before, with bell and lanthern, to announce the coming of the priest. "Sum
quidem et ego mortalis homo." Sap. vii.

23. THE MENDICANT FRIAR. He is just entering his convent with his money
box and wallet. Death seizes him by the cowl, and forcibly drags him away.
"Sedentes in tenebris, et in umbra mortis, vinctos in mendicitate." Psal.
cvi.

24. THE NUN. Here is a mixture of gallantry and religion. The young lady
has admitted her lover into her apartment. She is kneeling before an
altar, and hesitates whether to persist in her devotions or listen to the
amorous music of the young man, who, seated on a bed, touches a theorbo
lute. Death extinguishes the candles on the altar, by which the designer
of the subject probably intimates the punishment of unlawful love. "Est
via quae videtur homini justa: novissima autem ejus deducunt hominem ad
mortem." Prover. iv.

25. THE OLD WOMAN. She is accompanied by two Deaths, one of whom, playing
on a stickado, or wooden psalter, precedes her. She seems more attentive
to her rosary of bones than to the music, whilst the other Death
impatiently urges her forward with blows. "Melior est mors quam vita."
Eccle. xxx.

26. THE PHYSICIAN. He holds out his hand to receive, for inspection, a
urinal which Death presents to him, and which contains the water of a
decrepid old man whom he introduces, and seems to say to the physician,
"Canst thou cure this man who is already in my power?" "Medice cura te
ipsum." Luc. iv.

27. THE ASTROLOGER. He is seen in his study, looking attentively at a
suspended sphere. Death holds out a skull to him, and seems, in mockery,
to say, "Here is a better subject for your contemplation." "Indica mihi si
nosti omnia. Sciebas quod nasciturus esses, et numerum dierum tuorum
noveras?" Job xxxviii.

28. THE MISER. Death has burst into his strong room, where he is sitting
among his chests and bags of gold, and, seated on a stool, deliberately
collects into a large dish the money on the table which the Miser had been
counting. In an agony of terror and despair, the poor man seems to implore
forbearance on the part of his unwelcome visitor. "Stulte, hac nocte
repetunt animam tuam: et quae parasti, cujus erunt?" Lucae xii.

29. THE MERCHANT. After having escaped the perils of the sea, and happily
reached the wished-for shore with his bales of merchandize; this too
secure adventurer, whilst contemplating his riches, is surprised by Death.
One of his companions holds up his hands in despair. "Qui congregat
thesauros lingua mendacii, vanus et excors est, et impingetur ad laqueos
mortis." Proverb. xxi.

30. THE SHIP IN A TEMPEST. Death is vigorously employed in breaking the
mast. The owner of the vessel is wringing his hands in despair. One man
seems perfectly resigned to his impending fate. "Qui volunt ditescere,
incidunt in tentationem et laqueum, et cupiditates multas, stultas ac
noxias, quae demergunt homines in exitium et interitum." 1 ad Tim. vi.

31. THE KNIGHT. After escaping the perils in his numerous combats, he is
vanquished by Death, whom he ineffectually resists. "Subito morientur, et
in media nocte turbabuntur populi, et auferent violentum absque manu." Job
xxxiv.

32. THE COUNT. Death, in the character of a ragged peasant, revenges
himself against his proud oppressor by crushing him with his own armour.
On the ground lie a helmet, crest, and flail. "Quoniam cum interierit non
sumet secum omnia, neque cum eo descendet gloria ejus." Psal. xlviii.

33. THE OLD MAN. Death leads his aged victim to the grave, beguiling him
with the music of a dulcimer. "Spiritus meus attenuabitur, dies mei
breviabuntur, et solum mihi superest sepulchrum." Job xvii.

34. THE COUNTESS. She receives from an attendant the splendid dress and
ornaments with which she is about to equip herself. On a chest are seen a
mirror, a brush, and the hour-glass of Death, who, standing behind her,
places on her neck a collar of bones. "Ducunt in bonis dies suos, et in
puncto ad inferna descendant." Job xxi.

35. THE NEW-MARRIED LADY. She is accompanied by her husband, who
endeavours to divert her attention from Death, who is insidiously dancing
before them and beating a tambour. "Me et te sola mors separabit." Ruth i.

36. THE DUCHESS. She is sitting up, dressed, in her bed, at the foot of
which are two Deaths, one of whom plays on a violin, the other is pulling
the clothes from the bed. "De lectulo, super quem ascendisti, non
descendes, sed morte morieris." 4 Reg. i.

37. THE PEDLAR. Accompanied by his dog, and heavily laden, he is
proceeding on his way, when he is intercepted by Death, who forcibly pulls
him back. Another Death is playing on a trump-marine. "Venite ad me omnes
qui laboratis, et onerati estis." Matth. xi.

38. THE HUSBANDMAN. He is assisted by Death, who conducts the horses of
his plough. "In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo." Gen. iii.

39. THE CHILD. A female cottager is preparing her family mess, when Death
enters and carries off the youngest of her children. "Homo natus de
muliere, brevi vivens tempore, repletur multis miseriis: qui quasi flos
egreditur, et conteritur, et fugit velut umbra." Job xiv.

40. THE SOLDIER. He is engaged in unequal combat with Death, who simply
attacks him with a bone. On the ground lie some of his demolished
companions. In the distance, Death is beating a drum, and leading on a
company of soldiers to battle. "Cum fortis armatus custodit atrium suum,
&c. Si autem fortior eo superveniens vicerit eum, universa ejus arma
aufert, in quibus confidebat." Luc. xi.

41. THE GAMESTERS. Death and the Devil are disputing the possession of one
of the gamesters, whom both have seized. Another seems to be interceding
with the Devil on behalf of his companion, whilst a third is scraping
together all the money on the table. "Quid prodest homini, si universum
mundum lucretur, animae autem suae detrimentum patiatur?" Mat. xvi.

42. THE DRUNKARDS. They are assembled in a brothel, and intemperately
feasting. Death pours liquor from a flaggon into the mouth of one of the
party. "Ne inebriemini vino, in quo est luxuria." Ephes. v.

43. THE IDEOT FOOL. He is mocking Death, by putting his finger in his
mouth, and at the same time endeavouring to strike him with his
bladder-bauble. Death smiling, and amused at his efforts, leads him away
in a dancing attitude, playing at the same time on a bag-pipe. "Quasi
agnus lasciviens, et ignorans, nescit quod ad vincula stultus trahatur."
Prover. vii.

44. THE ROBBER. Whilst he is about to plunder a poor market-woman of her
property, Death comes behind and lays violent hands on him. "Domine vim
patior." Isaiae xxxviii.

45. THE BLIND MAN. Carefully measuring his steps, and unconscious of his
perilous situation, he is led on by Death, who with one hand takes him by
the cloak, both parties having hold of his staff. "Caecus caecum ducit: et
ambo in foveam cadunt." Matt. xv.

46. THE WAGGONER. His cart, loaded with wine casks, has been overturned,
and one of his horses thrown down by two mischievous Deaths. One of them
is carrying off a wheel, and the other is employed in wrenching off a tie
that had secured one of the hoops of the casks. The poor affrighted
waggoner is clasping his hands together in despair. "Corruit in curru
suo." 1 Chron. xxii.

47. THE BEGGAR. Almost naked, his hands joined together, and his head
turned upwards as in the agonies of death, he is sitting on straw near the
gate of some building, perhaps an hospital, into which several persons are
entering, and some of them pointing to him as an object fit to be
admitted. On the ground lie his crutches, and one of his legs is swathed
with a bandage. A female is looking on him from a window of the building.
"Miser ego homo! quis me liberabit de corpore mortis hujus?" Rom. vii.

48. THE LAST JUDGMENT. Christ sitting on a rainbow, and surrounded by a
group of angels, patriarchs, &c. rests his feet on a globe of the
universe. Below, are several naked figures risen from their graves, and
stretching out their hands in the act of imploring judgment and mercy.
"Memorare novissima, et in aeternum non peccabis." Eccle. vii.

49. THE ALLEGORICAL ESCUTCHEON OF DEATH. The coat or shield is fractured
in several places. On it is a skull, and at top the crest as a helmet
surmounted by two arm bones, the hands of which are grasping a ragged
piece of stone, and between them is placed an hour-glass. The supporters
are a gentleman and lady in the dresses of the times. In the description
of this cut Papillon has committed some very absurd mistakes, already
noticed in p. 110.


I

THE CREATION

[Illustration]

Formavit Dominus Deus hominem de limo terrae, &c. _Gen._ i.


II

THE TEMPTATION

[Illustration]

Quia audisti vocem uxoris tuae, et comedisti de ligno, &c. _Gen._ iii.


III

THE EXPULSION

[Illustration]

Emisit eum Dominum Deus de Paradiso voluptatis, ut operaretur terram de
qua sumptus est. _Gen._ iii.


IV

THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL

[Illustration]

Maledicta terra in opere tuo, in laboribus comedes cunctis diebus vitae
tuae, donec revertaris, &c. _Gen._ iii.


V

A CEMETERY

[Illustration]

Vae, vae, vae habitantibus in terra. _Apoc._ viii.


VI

THE POPE

[Illustration]

Moriatur sacerdos magnus. _Josue_ xx.


VII

THE EMPEROR

[Illustration]

Dispone domui tuae, morieris, enim tu, et non vives. _Isaiae_ xxxviii.


VIII

THE KING

[Illustration]

Sicut et Rex hodie est, et cras morietur; nemo enim ex regibus aliud
habuit. _Eccles._ x. _et Sapient._ vii.


IX

THE CARDINAL

[Illustration]

Vae qui justificatis impium pro muneribus, et justitiam justi aufertis ab
eo. _Isaiae_ v.


X

THE EMPRESS

[Illustration]

Gradientes in superbia potest Deus humiliare. _Dan._ iv.


XI

THE QUEEN

[Illustration]

Mulieres opulentae surgite, et audite vocem meam: post dies et annum, et
vos conturbemini. _Isaiae_ xxxii.


XII

THE BISHOP

[Illustration]

Percutiam pastorem, et dispergentur oves gregis. _Mat._ xxvi. _Mar._ xiv.


XIII

THE DUKE

[Illustration]

Princeps induetur moerore, et quiescere faciam superbiam potentium.
_Ezech._ viii.


XIV

THE ABBOT

[Illustration]

Ipse morietur, quia non habuit disciplinam, et in multitudine stultitiae
suae decipietur.


XV

THE ABBESS

[Illustration]

Laudavi magis mortuos quam viventes. _Eccles._ iv.


XVI

THE GENTLEMAN

[Illustration]

Quis est homo qui vivet, et non videbit mortem, eruet animam suam de manu
inferi?


XVII

THE CANON

[Illustration]

Ecce appropinquat hora. _Mat._ xxvi.


XVIII

THE JUDGE

[Illustration]

Disperdam judicem de medio ejus. _Amos_ ii.


XIX

THE ADVOCATE

[Illustration]

Callidus vidit malum, et abscondit se: innocens pertransiit, et afflictus
est damno. _Prover._ xxii.


XX

THE MAGISTRATE

[Illustration]

Qui obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis, et ipse clamabit, et non
exaudietur. _Prover._ xxi.


XXI

THE PREACHER

[Illustration]

Vae qui dicitis malum bonum, et bonum malum: ponentes tenebras lucem, et
lucem tenebras: ponentes amarum in dulce, et dulce in amarum. _Isaiae_ v.


XXII

THE PRIEST

[Illustration]

Sum quidem et ego mortalis homo. _Sap._ vii.


XXIII

THE MENDICANT

[Illustration]

Sedentes in tenebris, et in umbra mortis, vinctos in mendicitate. _Psal._
cvi.


XXIV

THE NUN

[Illustration]

Est via quae videtur homini justa: novissima autem ejus deducunt hominem ad
mortem. _Prover._ iv.


XXV

THE OLD WOMAN

[Illustration]

Melior est mors quam vita. _Eccle._ xxx.


XXVI

THE PHYSICIAN

[Illustration]

Medice, cura te ipsum. _Luc._ iv.


XXVII

THE ASTROLOGER

[Illustration]

Indica mihi si nosti omnia. Sciebas quod nasciturus esses, et numerum
dierum tuorum noveras? _Job_ xxxviii.


XXVIII

THE MISER

[Illustration]

Stulte, hac nocte repetunt animam tuam: et quae parasti, cujus erunt?
_Lucae_ xii.


XXIX

THE MERCHANT

[Illustration]

Qui congregat thesauros lingua mendacii, vanus et excors est, et
impingetur ad laqueos mortis. _Proverb._ xxi.


XXX

THE SHIP IN A TEMPEST

[Illustration]

Qui volunt ditescere, incidunt in tentationem et laqueum, et cupiditates
multas, stultas, ac noxias, quae demergunt homines in exitium et interitum.
_1 ad Tim._ vi.


XXXI

THE KNIGHT

[Illustration]

Subito morientur, et in media nocte turbabuntur populi, et auferent
violentum absque manu. _Job_ xxxiv.


XXXII

THE COUNT

[Illustration]

Quoniam cum interierit, non sumet secum omnia, neque cum eo descendet
gloria ejus. _Psal._ xlviii.


XXXIII

THE OLD MAN

[Illustration]

Spiritus meus attenuabitur, dies mei breviabuntur, et solum mihi superest
sepulchrum. _Job_ xvii.


XXXIV

THE COUNTESS

[Illustration]

Ducunt in bonis dies suos, et in puncto ad inferna descendunt. _Job_ xxi.


XXXV

THE NEW-MARRIED LADY

[Illustration]

Me et te sola mors separabit. _Ruth_ i.


XXXVI

THE DUCHESS

[Illustration]

De lectulo super quem ascendisti, non descendes, sed morte morieris.
_4 Reg._ i.


XXXVII

THE PEDLAR

[Illustration]

Venite ad me, omnes qui laboratis, et onerati estis. _Matth._ xi.


XXXVIII

THE HUSBANDMAN

[Illustration]

In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo. _Gen._ iii.


XXXIX

THE CHILD

[Illustration]

Homo natus de muliere, brevi vivens tempore, repletur multis miseriis: qui
quasi flos egreditur, et conteritur, et fugit velut umbra. _Job_ xiv.


XL

THE SOLDIER

[Illustration]

Cum fortis armatus custodit atrium suum, &c. Si autem fortior eo
superveniens vicerit eum, universa ejus arma aufert, in quibus confidebat.
_Luc._ xi.


XLI

THE GAMESTERS

[Illustration]

Quid prodest homini, si universum mundum lucretur, animae autem suae
detrimentum patiatur? _Mat._ xvi.


XLII

THE DRUNKARDS

[Illustration]

Ne inebriemini vino, in quo est luxuria. _Ephes._ v.


XLIII

THE IDEOT FOOL

[Illustration]

Quasi agnus lasciviens, et ignorans, nescit quod ad vincula stultus
trahatur. _Prover._ vii.


XLIV

THE ROBBER

[Illustration]

Domine, vim patior. _Isaiae_ xxxviii.


XLV

THE BLIND MAN

[Illustration]

Caecus caecum ducit: et ambo in foveam cadunt. _Matt._ xv.


XLVI

THE WAGGONER

[Illustration]

Corruit in curru suo. _1 Chron._ xxii.


XLVII

THE BEGGAR

[Illustration]

Miser ego homo! quis me liberabit de corpore mortis hujus? _Rom._ vii.


XLVIII

THE LAST JUDGMENT

[Illustration]

Memorare novissima, et in aeternum non peccabis. _Eccle._ vii.


XLIX

ALLEGORICAL ESCUTCHEON OF DEATH

[Illustration]




MARKS OF ENGRAVERS.


[monogram: G S.] 41, 117

[monogram: HL] 93, 97, 98, 100, 111, 113, 114, 215, 235

[monogram: H =N=] 100

[monogram: S.] 113

[monogram: SA] 113, 114, 115, 116, 127, 130, 136, 174

[monogram: W] 117

[monogram: cross] 117

[monogram] 118

[monogram: A] 124

[monogram: UH] 125

[monogram: WH] 125

[monogram: HB] 126

[monogram: HH] 126

[monogram: HHolbein] inv. 126, 129

H. HOLBEIN, inv. 126.

[monogram: W.] 130

[monogram: L B.f.] 130

[monogram: CI] 147, 248

[monogram: AC] 160, 190

[monogram: HF] 184

[monogram: L] 189

[monogram: VG] 189

[monogram] 190

[monogram] 190

[monogram] 191

[monogram: HM] 191

[monogram] 191

[monogram: BAD] 193

[monogram: I. F.] 219

[monogram] 223

[monogram: HS] 226

These are the marks erroneously given to Holbein,

  BI.
  Hf.
  [monogram: HL]
  [monogram: HL B.]
  [monogram: HB.]
  [monogram: HH.]

And these the marks which really belong to him,

  HH.
  HANS HOLB.
  HANS HOLBEIN.
  [monogram: 1519 HF]
  [monogram: HF]
  II H.
  HANS HOLBEN.
  [monogram: AH 1517]
  [monogram: H [symbol] H]
  [monogram: H-H]




INDEX.


  A.

  AEmylius, Geo. his verses, 84.

  Alciatus, his emblems the earliest work of the kind, 180.

  Aldegrever, his Dance of Death, 160.

  Almanac, a Swiss one, with a Dance of Death, 76, 209.

  Alphabets, several curious, 100, 214, 217.

  Amman, Jost, a Dance of Death by him, 41.

  Ars moriendi, some account of the last edition of it, 173.

  Athyr, "Stamm-und Stechbuchlein," a rare and singular book of emblems,
      180.


  B.

  Baldinucci, a mistake by him corrected, 235.

  Basle, destruction of its celebrated painting of the Dance of Death, 39.
    engravings of it, 41.

  Beauclerc, Lady Diana, her ballad of Leonora, 210.

  Bechstein, Ludwig, his edition of the Lyons' wood-cuts, 136.

  Beham, Barthol., his Dance of Death, 190.

  Bernard, le petit, his fine wood-cuts to the Old Testament, 173.

  Berne almanac, a Dance of Death in one of them, 154.

  Bock, Hans, not the painter of the Basle Dance of Death, 39.

  Bodenehr, Maurice, a Dance of Death by him, 165.

  "Boetius de consolatione," a figure of Death in an old edition of it,
      171.

  Bonaparte, Napoleon, a Dance of Death relating to him, 167.

  Books in which a Dance of Death is occasionally introduced, 168.

  Borbonius, Nicolas, his portrait, 140.
    his verses, 92, 94, 139.
    in England, 140.

  Bosman, Arent, a singular old Dutch legend relating to him, 183.

  Bosse, a curious engraving by him, 196.

  Boxgrove church in Sussex, sculpture in, 226.

  Brant, Sebastian, his stultifera navis, 170.

  Bromiard, John De, his "Summa predicantium," a fine frontispiece to it,
      183.

  Buno, Conrad, a book of emblems by him, 181.

  Burnet, Bishop, his ambiguous account of a Dance of Death at Basle, 79,
      138.


  C.

  Calendrier des Bergers, 170.

  Callot, drawings by him of a Dance of Death in the collection of Sir
      Tho. Lawrence, 223.

  Camus, M. de, a ludicrous mistake by him, 169.

  Catz's emblems, 182.

  Cavallero determinado, 174.

  Centre de l'amour, a singular book of emblems, 182.

  Chertablon, "Maniere de se bien preparer a la mort," 177.

  "Chevalier de la tour," a singular print from this curious romance, 171.

  Chodowiecki, his engravings relating to the Dance of Death, 153, 207,
      208.

  Chorier, his "Antiquites de Vienne," 48.

  Cogeler, "Imagines elegantissimae, &c." 173.

  Coleraine, I. Nixon, his Dance of Death on a fan, 159.

  Colman's "Death's duell," 185.

  Compan, M. his mistake about a Dance of Death, 237.

  Coppa, a poem ascribed to Virgil, 3.

  Cossiers, John, a curious print after him, 199.

  Coverdale's Bible, with initials of a Dance of Death, 217.

  Coxe's travels in Switzerland, some account in them of M. Crozat's
      drawings, 134.

  Crozat, M. De, account of some supposed drawings by Holbein in his
      collection, 134.


  D.

  Dagger, design for the sheath of one by Holbein, 133.

  Dagley's "Death's doings," 157, 210, 224.

  Dance of Death, a pageant, 5.
    Danish one, 159.
    known to the ancients, 12.
    one at Pompeii, 13.
    the term sometimes improperly used, 81.
    verses belonging to it, 17.
    where sculptured and painted, 17.

  Dance, Mr. the painter, his imitation of a subject in the Dance of Death
      in his portrait of Mr. Garrick, 137.

  Dances of Death, with such text only as describes the subject, 160.
    anonymous, 161, 162, 163, 164.
    at the following places,
      Amiens, 47.
      Anneberg, 44.
      Avignon, 221.
      Basle, 36.
      Berlin, 48.
      Berne, 45.
      Blois, 47.
      Croydon, 54.
      Dijon, 35.
      Dresden, 44.
      Erfurth, 44.
      Fescamp, 47.
      Hexham, 53.
      Holland, 49.
      Italy, 49.
      Klingenthal, 42.
      Leipsic, 44.
      Lubeck, 43.
      Lucerne, 46.
      Minden, 35.
      Nuremberg, 45.
      Paris, 14, 33, 35.
      Rouen, 47.
      Salisbury, 52.
      St. Paul's, 51, 76.
      Spain, 50.
      Strasburg, 47.
      Tower of London, 54.
      Vienne, in Dauphine, 48.
      Wortley Hall, 53.

  Dancing in temples and churchyards, 5, 6.

  Daniel, Mr. an unique print of a Dance of Death in his possession, 248.

  Danse aux aveugles, 231.

  Death and the Lady, 226.
    how personified by the Ancients, 1.
    not in itself terrific, 4.
    to Dr. Quackery, 211.

  De Bry, prints by him, 180, 183, 195.

  Dedication to the first edition of the Lyons wood-cuts, 86.
    mistakes in it, 87.

  De Gheyn, prints by him, 198, 205.

  De la Motte's fables, 183.

  Della Bella, 162.

  De Murr, his mistake about the Dance of Death, 235

  Dennecker, or De Necker, Jobst, Dances of Death by him, 40, 42, 85, 118.

  De Pas, Crispin, description of a singular engraving by him, 196.

  Descamps, his mistake about the Dance of Death, 235.

  Deuchar, David, the Scottish Worlidge, his etchings of the Dance of
      Death, 135.

  Deutch, Nicolas Manuel, the painter of a Dance of Death at Berne, 224.

  Devil's ruff-shop, 200.

  De Vos, Martin, print after him of the Devil's ruff-shop, 200.

  Diepenbecke, Abraham, designer of the borders to Hollar's etchings of
      the Dance of Death, 125.

  Dialogue of life and death, in "Dialogues of creatures moralized," 170.

  Dominotiers, venders of coloured prints for the common people, 77.

  Drawings of the Dance of Death, 222.

  Druraei Mors, an excellent Latin comedy, 175.

  Dugdale, his Monasticon, 129.
    his St. Paul's, 129.

  Durer, Albert, some prints by or after him described, 188, 189.


  E.

  Ear, the seat of memory among the Ancients, 3.
    swearing by, 3.

  Edwards, Mr. the bookseller, the possessor of Hollar's etchings of the
      Dance of Death, 128.

  Elizabeth, her prayer-book with a Dance of Death, 147, 247.

  Emblems and fables relating to the Dance of Death, 179.

  Engravings on wood, the earliest impressions of them not always the
      best, 85, 90.
    commendations of them in books printed in France, Germany, and Italy,
      97.

  Errors of miscellaneous writers on the Dance of Death, 236.
    of travellers concerning it, 233.
    of writers on painting and engraving concerning it, 234.

  Evelyn, Mr. his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 235.


  F.

  Fables relating to the Dance of Death, 179.

  Faut mourir, le, 26.

  Felibien, his mistake about the Dance of Death, 235.

  Figeac, Champollion, his account of a Macaber Dance, 238.

  Fleischmann, Counsellor, of Strasburg, drawings of a Dance of Death in
      his possession, 134.

  Fontenai, Abbe, his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 236.

  Fool and Death in old moralities, 177.

  Fournier, his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 237.

  Fox, John, "Book of Christian Prayers," compiled by him, 147.

  Francis I. an importer of fine artists into France, 92.

  Francolin, a rare work by him described, 217.

  Freidanck, 171.

  Friderich's emblems, 180.

  Frontispieces connected with the Dance of Death, described, 183.

  Fulbert's vision of the dispute between the soul and the body, 32.

  Fuseli, Mr. his opinion concerning the Dance of Death, 83.

  Fyner, Conrad, his process or law-suit of Death.


  G.

  Gallitzin, Prince, some supposed drawings by Holbein of a Dance of Death
      in his possession, 134.

  Gem, an ancient one, with a skeleton as the representative of Death, 206.

  Gerard, Mark, some etchings of fables by him, 179.

  Gesner's Pandectae, remarks on a passage in that work, 84.

  Ghezzi, a figure of Death among his caricatures, 206.

  Glarus, Franciscus a, his "Confusio disposita, &c." noticed as a very
      singular work, 177.

  Glass, painted, with a Dance of Death, 227.

  Glissenti, his "Discorsi morali," 112.
    his "Morte inamorata," 246.

  Gobin le gay, a name of one of the shepherds in an old print of the
      Adoration, 69.

  Gobin, Robert, his "loups ravissans," remarkable for a Dance of Death,
      146.

  Goethe, a Dance of Death in one of his works, 178, 211.

  Gole, a mezzotinto by him of Death and the Miser, 203.

  Goujet, his mistake about the Dance of Death at Basle, 233.

  Graaf, Urs, a print by him, and his monogram described, 189.

  Grandville, "Voyage pour l'eternite," 157.

  Gray, Rev. Robert, his mistake about the Dance of Death at Basle, 233.

  Gringoire, Pierre, his "Heures de Notre Dame," 172.

  Grosthead, story from his "Manuel de Peche," 7.

  Guilleville, "Pelerin de la vie humaine," 175.


  H.

  Harding, an etching by him of "Death and the Doctor," 211.

  Hawes's "Pastime of Pleasure," two prints from it described, 173.

  Heemskirk, Martin, a print by him described, 193, 199.

  Hegner, his life of Holbein, 240.

  Heymans, Mynheer, a dedication to him, 141.

  Historia della Morte, a poem so called, 176.

  Holbein, a German, life of him by Hegner, 240.
    ambiguity with respect to the paintings at Basle ascribed to him, 81.
    dance of peasants by him, 80.
    engravings by him with his name, 95.
    his Bible prints, 94.
    his connexion with the Dance of Death, 78, 138.
    his death, in 1554, 144.
    his name not in the early editions of the Lyons wood-cuts, 92.
    lives of him very defective, 143.
    more particulars relating to him, 143.
    not the painter of the Dance of Death at Basle, 38, 43, 144.
    paints a Dance of Death at Whitehall, 141.
    satirical painting of Erasmus by him, 221.

  Hollar, his copies of the Dance of Death, 125.

  Hopfer, David, his print of Death and the Devil, 191.

  Horae, manuscripts of this service book with the Macaber Dance, 60.
    printed copies of it with the same, and some similar designs, 72.

  Huber and Rust, their mistake concerning Holbein, 236.


  I.

  Jacques, Maitre, his "le faut mourir," 26.

  Jansen, his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 236.

  Imitations of and from the Lyons wood-cuts, 137.

  Initial letters with a Dance of Death, 213, 214, 217.

  Innocent III. Pope, his work "de vilitate conditionis humanae," 172.


  K.

  Karamsin, Nicolai, his account of a Dance of Death, 44.

  Kauw, his drawing of a Dance of Death, at Berne, 224.

  Kerver, Thielman, his editions of "Horae," 174.

  Klauber, John Hugh, a painter of a Dance of Death at Basle, 36, 42.


  L.

  Langlois, an engraving by him described, 198.

  Larvae and lemures, confusion among the ancients as to their respective
      qualities, 4.

  "Last drop," an etching so intitled, 211.
    a drawing of the same subject, 224.

  Lavenberg calendar, prints by Chodowiecki in it, 153.

  Lawrence, Sir Thomas, drawings by Callot of a Dance of Death in his
      possession, 223.

  "Lawyer's last circuit," a caricature print, 209.

  Le Blon, a circular print by him described, 197.

  Le Comte, his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 235.

  Lubeck, a Dance of Death there, 163.

  Lutzenberger, Hans, the engraver of the Lyons wood-cuts of the Dance of
      Death, 98.
    alphabets by him, 100.
    various prints by him, 99.

  Luyken's Emblems, 177, 178.

  Lydgate, his Verses to the Macaber Dance, 29, 52.

  Lyons, all the editions of the wood-cuts of the Dance of Death published
      there described, 82, 103.
    copies of them by Hollar, 125.
    copies of them on copper, 121.
    copies of them on wood, 111.
    various imitations of some of them, 137.

  Lyvijus, John, a print by him of two card players, 197.


  M.

  Macaber, a word falsely applied as the name of a supposed German poet,
      28, 34.
    its etymology discussed, 30, 34.

  Macaber Dance, 13, 28.
    copies or engravings of it as painted at Basle, 40.
    destruction of the painting at Basle, 39.
    manuscripts in which it is represented, 72.
    not painted by Holbein, 38.
    printed books, in which it is represented, 55.
    representations of it at the following places:--
      Amiens, 47.
      Anneberg, 44.
      Basle, 36.
      Berlin, 48.
      Berne, 45.
      Burgos, 50.
      Croydon, 54.
      Dijon, 35.
      Dresden, 44, 76.
      Erfurth, 44.
      Hexham, 53.
      Holland, 49.
      Klingenthal, 42.
      Lubeck, 43.
      Lucerne, 46.
      Minden, 35.
      Naples, 49.
      Rouen, 47.
      Salisbury, 52.
      St. Paul's, 51, 76.
      Strasburg, 47.
      Tower of London, 54.
      Vienne, 48.
      Wortley Hall, 53.

  Macarius Saint, painting of a legend relating to him, by Orgagna, at the
      Campo Santo, 32, 33.

  Malpe, M., his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 236.

  Mannichius, 180.

  Manuel de Peche, by Grosthead, 7.

  Mapes, Walter de, an allusion by him to a Dance of Death, 24.
    vision of a dispute between the soul and the body, ascribed to him, 33.

  Marks or monograms of engravers, their uncertainty, 102.

  Marmi, Gio. Battista, his "Ritratte della Morte," 129.

  Mechel, Chretien de, 132, 208, 214.

  Meckenen, Israel Van, a Dance of Death by him, 160.

  Meisner, his "Sciographia Cosmica," 180.

  Melidaeus, Jonas, a satirical work under this disguised name, intitled
      "Res mira," 184.

  Meyers, Rodolph, his Dance of Death, 148.

  Meyssens, his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 234.

  Missal, an undescribed one, in the type of the psalter of 1457, 213.

  Misson, the traveller, his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 233.

  Mitelli, Gio. Maria, a kind of Death's Dance, by him, 161.

  Moncrief, his "March of Intellect," quoted for a print after Cruikshank,
      178.

  Montenaye, Georgette de, her emblems, 179.

  "Mors," an excellent Latin comedy, by William Drury, 175.

  Mortimer, a sketch by him of Death seizing several persons, 209.

  Mortilogus, 171.


  N.

  Negro figure of Death, 230.

  Newton's Dances of Death, 165.

  Nieuhoff, Piccard, 130, 140.

  Nuremberg Chronicle, a cut from it described, 170.
    a story from it, 6.


  O.

  Old Franks, a curious painting by him, 204, 221.

  Oliver, Isaac, his copy of a painting by Holbein, at Whitehall, 145, 221.

  Orgagna, Andrea, his painting at the Campo Santo, 32.

  Ortulus Rosarum, 170.

  Otho Vaenius, a curious painting by him, 204, 222.

  Ottley, Mr. his opinion in favour of Holbein as the designer of the
      Lyons wood-cuts, 88.
    proof impressions of the Lyons wood-cuts in his valuable collection,
      85.


  P.

  Palingenius, his "Zodiacus Vitae," a frontispiece to this work described,
      186.

  Panneels, William, a scholar of Rubens, mention of a painting by him,
      203.

  Papillon, his ludicrous mistakes noticed, 110, 114.

  Patin, Charles, a traveller, and a libeller of the English, 79, 138, 237.

  Paulmy, Marquis de, his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 238.

  Paul's St., mention of the Dance of Death formerly there, 51, 163.

  Peasants, a dance of, painted at Basle, by Holbein, 80.

  Peignot, M. author of "Les Danses de Mort," an interesting work, preface.
    his misconception relating to John Porey, 248.

  Perriere, his "Morosophie," 179.

  Petrarch, his triumph of Death, 175, 207.
    his work "de remediis utriusque fortunae," 175.

  Pfister, Albert, his "Tribunal Mortis," 168.

  Piccard, Nieuhoff, 130, 140.

  Piers Plowman, lines from, 54.

  Porey, John, a mistake concerning him corrected, 248.

  Potter, P. an allegorical engraving after him, 199.

  Prints, single, relating to the Dance of Death, list of, 188.

  Prior, Matthew, his lines on the Dance of Death, 145.

  Psalter of 1457, a beautiful initial letter in it noticed, 213.
    of Richard II., a manuscript in the British Museum, 222.


  R.

  Rabbi Santo, a Jewish poet, about 1360, 25.

  Ratdolt, a Venetian printer, not, as usually supposed, the inventor of
      initial or capital letters, 213.

  Rembrandt, drawing of a Dance of Death by him, 223.
    etching by him, 195.

  Rene, of Anjou, painted a Dance of Death, 221.

  Reperdius, Geo. an eminent painter at Lyons, 93.

  Revelations, prints of the, 175.

  Reusner, his emblems, 179.

  Rive, Abbe, his bibliography of the Macaber Dance, 75.

  Rivoire, his history of Amiens commended, 47.

  Roderic, bishop of Zamora, 17, 32.

  Rolandini's emblems, 180.

  Rollenhagius's emblems, 182.

  Roll of the Dance of Death, 1597, 163.

  Rowlandson's Dance of Death, 156, 225, 248.

  Rusting, Salomon Van, his Dance of Death, 131.


  S.

  [monogram: SA], some account of this monogram, 115.
    its owner employed by Plantin, the famous printer at Antwerp, 116.

  Salisbury missal, singular cut in one, 172.

  Sallaerts, an artist supposed to have been employed by Plantin the
      celebrated printer, 115, 116.

  Sancta Clara, Abraham, a description of his "universal mirror of Death,"
      151.

  Sandrart, his notice of a work by Holbein at Whitehall, 145.

  Schauffelin, Hans, a carving on wood by him described, 226.

  Schellenberg, I. R. a Dance of Death by him, 154.

  Schlotthaver, his edition of a Dance of Death, 249.

  Silvius, or Sylvius, Antony, an artist at Antwerp, account of a monogram
      supposed to belong to him, 115.

  Skeleton, use made of the human by the ancients, 3.

  "Spectriana," a modern French work, frontispiece to it described, 187.

  Stelsius, his edition of a spurious copy of Holbein's Bible cuts, 97.

  Stettler, his drawings of the Macaber Dance of Death at Berne, 224.

  "Stotzinger symbolum," description of a cut so intitled, 174.

  Stradanus, an engraving after him described, 197.

  Susanna, a Latin play, 18.

  Symeoni, "Imprese," 179.


  T.

  Tapestry at the Tower of London, 227.

  "Theatrum Mortis," a work with a Dance of Death described, 129.

  Tiepolo, a clever etching by him described, 197.

  Title-pages connected with the Dance of Death, list of, 183.

  Tory, Geoffrey, Horae printed by him described, 172.

  Tower of London, tapestry formerly there of a Dance of Death, 227.

  Trois mors et trois vifs, 31, 33, 228.

  Turner, Col., a Dance of Death by him, 207.

  Turnham Green, some account of chalk drawings of a Dance of Death on a
      wall there, 210, 224.

  Typotii symbola, 180, 182.


  U.

  Urs Graaf, his engravings noticed, 243.


  V.

  Vaenius, Otho, some of his works mentioned, 182, 204.

  Valckert, a clever etching by him described, 201.

  Van Assen, a Dance of Death by him, 158.

  Van Leyden, Lucas, 189.

  Van Meckenen, Israel, his Dance of Death in circles, 160.

  Van Sichem, his prints to the Bible, 177.

  Van Venne, prints after him, 157, 182, 199, 209.

  Verses that accompany the Dance of Death, 17.

  Von Menzel, 207.

  "Voyage pour l'eternite," a modern Dance of Death, 157.


  W.

  Walpole, Mr. his mistake concerning the Dance of Death, 236.

  Warton, Mr. his remarks on the Dance of Death, 237.

  Weiss, Mr. author of some of the best lives in the "Biographie
      Universelle," misled in his article "Macaber" by Champollion Figeac,
      249.

  Whitehall, fire at, 140.
    painting of a Dance of Death there by Holbein, 141.

  Wierix, John, some prints by him described, 194, 195.

  Williams, Miss, her mistake concerning the Dance of Death at Basle, in
      her Swiss tour, 233.

  Wolschaten, Geeraerdt Van, a Dance of Death by him, 130.

  Wood, engravings on, the first impressions of them not always the best,
      85.

  Wood, Mr. his mistake concerning the Dance of Death in his "View of
      Switzerland," 233.


  Y.

  "Youth's Tragedy," a moral drama, 1671, 175.


  Z.

  Zani, Abbate, of opinion that Holbein had no concern in the Lyons
      wood-cuts of the Dance of Death, 98, 101, 138.

  Zuinger, his account of paintings at Basle, 139.




C. WHITTINGHAM, TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Iliad, and after him Virgil, AEn. vi. 278.

[2] Iliad IX. On an ancient gem likewise in Ficoroni's Gemmae Antiquae
Litteratae, Tab. viii. No. 1, a human scull typifies mortality, and a
butterfly immortality.

[3] Lib. ii. 78.

[4] Diarium, p. 212.

[5] Lib. xiii. l. 474.

[6] Epist. xxiv.

[7] Apolog. p. 506, 507. edit. Delph. 4to.

[8] Lib. iii.

[9] Leg. Antiq. iii. 84.

[10] Folio clxxxvii.

[11] Folio ccxvii.

[12] Bibl. Reg. 20 B. xiv. and Harl. MS. 4657.

[13] Contest.

[14] Q. Cowick in Yorkshire?

[15] Leader.

[16] Glee.

[17] Called.

[18] A name borrowed from Merwyn, Abbess of Ramsey, temp. Reg. Edgari.

[19] Took.

[20] Leafy.

[21] Place.

[22] Went.

[23] Places.

[24] A falsehood.

[25] Whoever may be desirous of inspecting other authorities for the
story, may consult Vincent of Beauvais Speculum Historiale, lib. xxv. cap.
10; Krantz Saxonia, lib. iv.; Trithemii Chron. Monast. Hirsaugensis;
Chronicon Engelhusii ap. Leibnitz. Script. Brunsvicens. II. 1082;
Chronicon. S. AEgidii, ap. Leibnitz. iii. 582; Cantipranus de apibus; &
Caesarius Heisterbach. de Miraculis; in whose works several _veracious_ and
amusing stories of other instances of divine vengeance against dancing in
general may be found. The most entertaining of all the dancing stories is
that of the friar and the boy, as it occurs among the popular penny
histories, of which, in one edition at least, it is, undoubtedly, the very
best.

[26] Lib. i. Eleg. iii.

[27] AEn. lib. vi. l. 44.

[28] Millin. Magaz. Encycl. 1813, tom. i. p. 200.

[29] Gori Mus. Florentin. tom. i. pl. 91, No. 3.

[30] Hist. Engl. Poetry, vol. ii. p. 43, edit. 8vo. and Carpentier. Suppl.
ad Ducang. v. Machabaeorum chorea.

[31] Id. ii. 364.

[32] Hist. des Ducs des Bourgogne, tom. v. p. 1821.

[33] Hist. de Rene d'Anjou, tom. i. p. 54.

[34] Dulaure. Hist. Physique, &c. de Paris, 1821, tom. ii. p. 552.

[35] Recherches sur les Danses des Morts. Dijon et Paris, 1826, 8vo. p.
xxxiv. et seq.

[36] Mercure de France, Sept. 1742. Carpentier. Suppl. ad Ducang. v.
Machabaeorum chorea.

[37] Bibl. Reg. 8 B. vi. Lansd. MS. 397.

[38] Madrid. 1779, 8vo. p. 179.

[39] Bibl. Med. et Inf. AEtat. tom. v. p. 1.

[40] Recherches sur les Danses de Mort, pp. 79 80.

[41] Passim.

[42] Modern edition of the Danse Macabre.

[43] Journal de Charles VII.

[44] Lansd. MS. No. 397--20.

[45] Peignot Recherches, p. 109.

[46] Melange d'une Grande Bibliotheque, tom. vii. p. 22.

[47] Bibl. Instruc. No. 3109.

[48] Catal. La Valliere No. 2736--22.

[49] Vasari vite de Pittori, tom. i. p. 183, edit. 1568, 4to.

[50] Baldinucci Disegno, ii. 65.

[51] Morona Pisa Illustrata, i. 359.

[52] Du Breul Antiq. de Paris, 1612, 4to. p. 834, where the verses that
accompany the sculpture are given. See likewise Sandrart Acad. Picturae, p.
101.

[53] Peignot Recherches, xxxvii-xxxix.

[54] Urtisii epitom. Hist. Basiliensis, 1522, 8vo.

[55] Peignot Recherches, xxvi-xxix.

[56] Travels, i. 376.

[57] Travels, i. 138, edit. 4to.

[58] Heinecken Dictionn. des Artistes, iii. 67, et iv. 595. He follows
Keysler's error respecting Hans Bock.

[59] Peintre graveur, ix. 398.

[60] Essai sur l'Orig. de la Gravure, i. 120.

[61] Heinecken Dictionn. des Artistes, i. 222.

[62] Recherches, &c. p. 71.

[63] Heller Geschiche der holtzchein kunst. Bamberg, 1823, 12mo. p. 126.

[64] Basle Guide Book.

[65] Recherches, 11 et seq.

[66] More on the subject of the Lubeck Dance of Death may be found in 1.
An anonymous work, which has on the last leaf, "Dodendantz, anno domini
MCCCCXCVI. Lubeck." 2. "De Dodendantz fan Kaspar Scheit, na der utgave
fan, 1558, unde de Lubecker fan, 1463." This is a poem of four sheets in
small 8vo. without mention of the place where printed. 3. Some account of
this painting by Ludwig Suhl. Lubeck, 1783, 4to. 4. A poem, in rhyme, with
wood-cuts, on 34 leaves, in 8vo. It is fully described from the Helms.
library in Brun's Beitrage zu krit. Bearb. alter handschr. p. 321 et seq.
5. Jacob a Mellen Grundliche Nachbricht von Lubeck, 1713, 8vo. p. 84. 6.
Schlott Lubikischers Todtentantz. 1701. 8vo. 7. Berkenmeyer, le curieux
antiquaire, 8vo. p. 530; and, 8. Nugent's Travels, i. 102. 8vo.

[67] Biblioth. Med. et inf. aetat. v. 2.

[68] Travels, i. 195.

[69] Recherches, xlii.

[70] Pilkington's Dict. of Painters, p. 307, edit. Fuseli, who probably
follows Fuesli's work on the Painters. Merian, Topogr. Helvetiae.

[71] Peignot Recherches, xlv. xlvi.

[72] Rivoire descr. de l'eglise cathedrale d'Amiens. Amiens, 1806. 8vo.

[73] Recherches, xlvii.

[74] Recherches, xlviii.

[75] Recherches sur les antiquites de Vienne. 1659. 12mo, p. 15.

[76] Dr. Cogan's Tour to the Rhine, ii. 127.

[77] Travels, iii. 328, edit. 4to.

[78] Survay of London, p. 615, edit. 1618, 4to.

[79] In Tottel's edition these verses are accompanied with a single
wood-cut of Death leading up all ranks of mortals. This was afterwards
copied by Hollar, as to general design, in Dugdale's St. Paul's, and in
the Monasticon.

[80] Annales, p. 596, edit. 1631. folio. Sir Thomas More, treating of the
remembrance of Death, has these words: "But if we not only here this word
Death, but also let sink into our heartes, the very fantasye and depe
imaginacion thereof, we shall parceive therby that we wer never so gretly
moved by the beholding of the _Daunce of Death pictured in Poules_, as we
shal fele ourself stered and altered by the feling of that imaginacion in
our hertes. And no marvell. For those pictures expresse only y{e} lothely
figure of our dead bony bodies, biten away y{e} flesh," &c.--Works, p. 77,
edit. 1557, folio.

[81] Heylin's Hist. of the Reformation, p. 73.

[82] Cotton MS. Vesp. A. xxv. fo. 181.

[83] Leland's Itin. vol. iv. part i. p. 69.--Meas. for Meas. Act iii. sc.
1.

[84] Hutchinson's Northumberland, i. 98.

[85] Warton's H. E. Poetry, ii. 43, edit. 8vo.

[86] And see a portion of Orgagna's painting at the Campo Santo at Pisa,
mentioned before in p. 33.

[87] From the Author's own inspection.

[88] Recherches, p. 144, and see Catal. La Valliere, No. 295.

[89] Herbert's typogr. antiq. p. 888.

[90] Traite hist. de la gravure en bois, i. 182, 336.

[91] Letters containing an account of what seemed most remarkable in
Switzerland, Italy, &c. by G. Burnet, D. D. Rotterdam, 1686, 8vo. p. 265.

[92] Travels through Germany, &c. i. 138, edit. 4to.

[93] Relations historiques et curieuses de voyages en Allemagne, &c. Amst.
1695, 12mo. p. 124.

[94] See likewise Zuinger, Methodus Academica, Basle, 1577, 4to. p. 199.

[95] Remarks on several parts of Europe, 1738, vol. ii. p. 72.

[96] Peignot places the dance of peasants in the fish-market of Basle, as
other writers had the Dance of Death. Recherches, p. 15.

[97] Manuel de l'Amateur d'estampes, ii. 131.

[98] Manuel des curieux, &c. i. 156.

[99] Some give it to the Abbe Baverel.

[100] Lib. ult. p. 86.

[101] The dedicator has apparently in this place been guilty of a strange
misconception. The Death is not sucking the wine from the cask, but in the
act of untwisting the fastening to one of the hoops. Nor is the carman
crushed beneath the wheels: on the contrary, he is represented as standing
upright and wringing his hands in despair at what he beholds. It is true
that this cut was not then completed, and might have undergone some
subsequent alteration. He likewise speaks of the rainbow in the cut of the
Last Judgment, as being at that time unfinished, which, however, is
introduced in this first edition.

[102] It would be of some importance if the date of Lutzenberger's death
could be ascertained.

[103] "An enquiry into the origin and early history of Engraving," 1816,
4to. vol. ii. p. 759.

[104] "An Enquiry," &c. ii. 762.

[105] The few engravings by or after Holbein that have his name or its
initials are to be found in his early frontispieces or vignettes to books
printed at Basle. In 1548, two delicate wood-cuts, with his name, occur in
Cranmer's Catechism. In the title-page to "a lytle treatise after the
maner of an Epystle wryten by the famous clerk, Doctor Urbanus Regius,
&c." Printed by Gwalter Lynne, 1548, 24mo, there is a cut in the same
style of art of Christ attended by his disciples, and pointing to a
fugitive monk, whose sheep are scattered, and some devoured by a wolf.
Above and below are the words "John x. Ezech. xxxiiii. Mich. v. I am the
good shepehearde. A good shepehearde geveth his lyfe for the shype. The
hyred servaunt flyeth, because he is an hered servaunt, and careth not for
the shepe." On the cut at bottom HANS HOLBEIN. There is a fourth cut of
this kind in the British Museum collection with Christ brought before
Pilate; and perhaps Holbein might have intended a series of small
engravings for the New Testament; but all these are in a simple outline
and very different from the cuts in the Dance of Death, or Lyons Bible. It
might be difficult to refer to any other engravings belonging to Holbein
after the above year.

[106] Brulliot dict. de monogrammes, &c. Munich, 1817, 4to. p. 418, where
the letter from De Mechel is given.

[107] Essai sur l'origine de la gravure, &c. tom. i. p. 260.

[108] Id. p. 261.

[109] Dict. de monogrammes, &c. tom. i. pp. 418, 499.

[110] Enciclop. metod. par ii. vol. vii. p. 16.

[111] Enciclop. metod. par. i. vol. x. p. 467.

[112] All the above prints are in the author's possession, except No. 7,
and his copy of No. 5 has not the tablets with the name, &c.

[113] Edit. Javigny, iv. 559.

[114] This edition is given on the authority of Peignot, p. 62, but has
not been seen by the author of this work. In the year 1547, there were
three editions, and it is not improbable that, by the transposition of the
two last figures, one of these might have been intended.

[115] Foppen's Biblioth. Belgica, i. 363.

[116] That of 1557 has a frontispiece with Death pointing to his
hour-glass when addressing a German soldier.

[117] Tom. i. p. 238, 525.

[118] Dict. de Monogrammes, col. 528.

[119] Biblioth. Belgica, i. 92.

[120] See p. 40.

[121] This is the same subject as that in the Augustan monastery described
in p. 48.

[122] See p. 34.

[123] It has been stated that they were in the Arundelian collection
whence they passed into the Netherlands, where forty-six of them became
the property of Jan Bockhorst the painter, commonly called Long John. See
Crozat's catalogue.

[124] On the same dedication are founded the opinions of Zani, De Murr,
Meintel, and some others.

[125] Zuinger methodus apodemica. Basil, 1557. 4to. p. 199.

[126] P. 427, edit. Lugd. apud Gryphium, and p. 445, edit. Basil.

[127] Nugae, lib. vi. carm. 12.

[128] Baldinucci notizie d'e professori del disegno, tom. iii. p. 317,
4to. edit. where the inscription on it is given.

[129] Norfolk MS. 97, now in the Brit. Museum.

[130] Harl. MS. 4718.

[131] Acad. Pictur. 239.

[132] Strype's Annals, I. 272, where the curious dialogue that ensued on
the occasion is preserved.

[133] Catal. de la bibliotheque du Roi. II. 153.

[134] These initial letters have already been mentioned in p. 101-102. The
elegant initials in Dr. Henderson's excellent work on modern wines, and
those in Dr. Nott's Bristol edition of Decker's Gull's horn-book, should
not pass unnoticed on this occasion.

[135] See before in p. 97.

[136] Zani saw this alphabet at Dresden, and ascribes it likewise to
Lutzenberger. See his Enciclop. Metodica, Par. I. vol. x. p. 467.

[137] See before, in p. 46.

[138] Biblioth. Franc. tom. x. p. 436.

[139] Sandrart Acad. Pict. p. 241.

[140] Obs. on Spenser, II. 117, 118, 119.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Superscripted characters are indicated by {superscript}.

Letters printed in reverse are indicated by =X=.

Various printers' monograms are included throughout the original text.
These are represented by [monogram] or [monogram: description] if a
description could be provided.

The original text includes Greek characters. For this text version these
letters have been replaced with transliterations.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dance of Death, by Francis Douce

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DANCE OF DEATH ***

***** This file should be named 38724.txt or 38724.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/7/2/38724/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive. Additional images courtesy of Google
Books.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
