The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 103,
October 18, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 103, October 18, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: February 13, 2012 [EBook #38864]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, VOL. IV ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Original spelling varieties have not been
standardized. Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts. A
list of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has been added at the
end.]




NOTES and QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--No. 103. SATURDAY, OCTOBER 18. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition, 4_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      The Caxton Memorial, by Beriah Botfield                    289

      Lord Strafford and Archbishop Ussher                       290

      Poetical Coincidences, by T. C. Smith                      291

      Folk Lore:--Medical Use of Pigeons--Michaelmas
      Goose; St. Martin's Cock--Surrey Folk Lore                 291

      The Caxton Coffer, by Bolton Corney                        292

      Minor Notes:--"They that touch pitch"--Pasquinade--Two
      Attempts to show the Sound of "ough" final                 292

      QUERIES:--

      Can Bishops vacate their Sees?                             293

      Sanderson and Taylor                                       293

      Minor Queries:--"Vox vere Anglorum"--"Sacro
      Sancta Regum Majestas"--Translator of Horrebow's
      "Iceland"--"Kings have their Conquests"--Dryden;
      Illustrations by T. Holt White--Pauper's
      Badge, Meaning of--The Landing of William Prince
      of Orange in Torbay, painted by J. Northcote, R.A.--The
      Lowy of Tunbridge--Bones of Birds--"Malvina,
      a Tragedy"--Rinuccini Gallery                              293

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--Meaning of Aneroid--Fox's
      Cunning                                                    295

      REPLIES:--

      Archbishop of Spalatro, by Rev. J. Sansom, &c.             295

      Anagrams                                                   297

      Discovering the Bodies of the Drowned, by Rev. A. Gatty,
      &c.                                                        297

      Marriage of Ecclesiastics                                  298

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Robert Douglas--The Leman
      Baronetcy--Cachecope Bell--"Dieu et mon Droit"--Defoe's
      House at Stoke Newington--Study of Geometry in
      Lancashire--Coke, how pronounced--Quistourne--Seneca's
      Medea--The Editor of Jewel's Works in
      Folio--Poetaster--Post Pascha--Linteamina and
      Surplices--Climate--Ancient Language of Egypt--Welwood's
      Memoirs                                                    299

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     302

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               303

      Notices to Correspondents                                  303

      Advertisements                                             303




Notes.


THE CAXTON MEMORIAL.

Few persons having a common object in view, and equally desirous of its
attainment, fail in carrying it into effect. The object of "The Caxton
Memorial" is obviously to do honour to the first English printer; and if
a man's best monument be his own works, it will be necessary to
ascertain of what they consist. It is well known that most of the works
printed by Caxton were translated from the French, many doubtless by
himself. The Prefaces were evidently his own, and the continuation of
the _Polychronicon_ was confessedly written by himself. The most
valuable contribution to "The Caxton Coffer" would be a list of the
works which it is proposed to publish as those of Caxton, with some
calculation of their probable extent and cost of production. The
originals being in many cases of extreme rarity, it would be necessary
to transcribe fairly each work, and to collate it with the original in
its progress through the press. The following enumeration of the
Translations alone will give some idea of the work to be undertaken:

_The Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye._ (1471.)

_The Game and playe of the Chesse._ 1474.

_Thymage, or Myrrour of the World._ (1481.)

_The Historye of Reynart the foxe._ 1481.

_The laste siege and conqueste of Jherusalem._ 1481.

_The Golden Legende._ 1483.

_The Book called Cathon._ 1483.

_The Book of the techynge of the Knyght of the Toure._ (1484.)

_The Fables of Esope, Avian, Alfonce, and Poge._ 1484.

_The Booke of the ordre of Chyvalry or knyghthode._ (1484.)

_The Lyf of Prince Charles the Grete._ 1485.

_The Ryal Book, or Book for a kyng._ 1485.

_Thystorye of the noble knyght Parys_. (1485.)

_The Doctrinal of Sapience._ 1489.

_The Book of fayttee of armes and of Chyvalrye._ 1489.

_A lityl treatise of the arte to knowe well to dye._ 1490.

_The Boke of Eneydos compyled by Vyrgyle._ 1490.

_The Curial of Maystre Alain Charretier._ n. d.

_The Lyf of the holy Vyrgyn Saynt Wenefryde._ n. d.; and, lastly,

_The Vitas Patrum_, which was translated by Caxton in 1486, but printed
by Wynkyn de Worde in 1495.

Such are some of the materials for the "Memorial" suggested by MR.
BOLTON CORNEY; and if the original subscribers to a Monument should
consent to such an appropriation of their funds, it will be necessary to
apportion the number of copies to be distributed to each subscriber,
according to the amount of the original contribution. It is to be
presumed that the work will be strictly limited to subscribers, and
that no copies will be printed for sale, the object being, to do honour
to Caxton, and produce a lasting Memorial of that industrious printer.
The form of the work is of importance, with reference to the cost of its
production: and if a new life of the first English printer should
perchance be found necessary, "The Caxton Coffer" will require to be
considerably replenished before the literary undertaking can be carried
into effect.

    BERIAH BOTFIELD.


LORD STRAFFORD AND ARCHBISHOP USSHER.

In Lord Campbell's account of the conduct of Archbishop Williams, and
the advice which that prelate gave to Charles I. with respect to the
attainder of Lord Strafford, is a sentence which seems to require a
"Note." Having observed that "Williams's conduct with respect to
Strafford cannot be defended," and having referred particularly to his
speech in parliament, he proceeds in these words:--

  "The Bill of Attainder being passed, although he professed to
  disapprove of it, he agreed to go with three other prelates to try
  to induce the king to assent to it, and thus he stated the
  question:--'Since his Majesty refers his own judgment to his
  judges, and they are to answer it, if an innocent person
  suffers,--why may he not satisfy his conscience in the present
  matter, since competent judges in the law have awarded that they
  find the Earl guilty of treason, by suffering the judgment to
  stand, though in his own mind he is satisfied that the party
  convicted was not criminous?' The other three bishops, trusting to
  his learning and experience, joined with him in sanctioning this
  distinction, in laying all the blame on the judges, and in saying
  that the king, with a good conscience, might agree to Strafford's
  death. Clarendon mainly imputes Strafford's death to Williams's
  conduct on this occasion, saying that 'he acted his part with
  prodigious boldness and impiety.' It is stated as matter of
  palliation by others, that Ussher, the celebrated Archbishop of
  Armagh, was one of this deputation, and that Strafford, although
  aware of the advice he had given, was attended by him on the
  scaffold, and received from him the last consolations of
  religion."--_Lives of the Chancellors_, vol. ii. p. 494., second
  edition.

The account which Lord Campbell has here given is the same in substance
as that given by Bishop Hackett in his _Life of Williams_ (Part II. p.
161.), and in several particulars is calculated to mislead the reader.
The whole story has been very carefully examined by the late Dr.
Elrington in his _Life of Archbishop Ussher_. Hackett's account is very
incorrect. There were five prelates consulted by the king, Ussher,
Williams, Juxon, Morton (Durham) and Potter (Carlisle). The bishops had
two interviews with the king, one in the morning, and the other in the
evening of the same day. At the morning meeting Ussher was not present.
It was Sunday, and he was engaged at the time preaching at Covent
Garden. In the evening, he was in attendance, but so far from giving the
advice suggested by Williams, much less approving his pernicious
distinction between a public and private conscience, Ussher plainly
advised the king, that if he was not satisfied of Strafford being guilty
of treason, he "ought not in conscience to assent to his condemnation."
Such is the account given by Dr. Parr, Ussher's chaplain, who declares,
that, when the primate was supposed to be dying, he asked his Grace--

  "Whether he had advised the king to pass the bill against the Earl
  of Strafford? To which the Primate answered: 'I know there is such
  a thing most wrongfully laid to my charge; for I neither gave nor
  approved of any such advice as that the king should assent to the
  bill against the Earl; but, on the contrary, told his Majesty,
  that if he was satisfied by what he heard at his trial, that the
  Earl was not guilty of treason, his Majesty ought not in
  conscience to consent to his condemnation. And this the king knows
  well enough, and can clear me if he pleases.' The hope of the
  Primate was fulfilled, for, when a report reached Oxford that the
  Primate was dead, the king expressed in very strong terms, to
  Colonel William Legg and Mr. Kirk, who were then in waiting, his
  regret at the event, speaking in high terms of his piety and
  learning. Some one present said, 'he believed he might be so, were
  it not for his persuading your Majesty to consent to the Earl of
  Strafford's execution;' to which the king in a great passion
  replied, 'that it was false, for after the bill was passed, the
  Archbishop came to me, saying with tears in his eyes, Oh Sir, what
  have you done? I fear that this act may prove a great trouble to
  your conscience, and pray God that your Majesty may never suffer
  by the signing of this bill.'"--Elrington's _Life of Ussher_, p.
  214.

This account Dr. Elrington has taken from the narrative given by Dr.
Parr, who adds, that he had received this account of the testimony borne
by the king from Colonel Legg and Mr. Kirk themselves:--

  "This is the substance of two certificates, taken divers times
  under the hands of these two gentlemen of unquestionable credit;
  both which, since they agree in substance, I thought fit to
  contract into one testimony, which I have inserted here, having
  the originals by me, to produce if occasion be."--Parr's _Life of
  Ussher_, p. 61.

Indeed, considering the great and uninterrupted friendship which
subsisted between Ussher and Strafford, considering that the primate was
his chosen friend during his trial and imprisonment, and attended him to
the scaffold, nothing could be more improbable than that he should have
advised the king to consent to his death. At all events, the story is
contradicted by those most competent to speak to its truth, by the
archbishop and by the king; and therefore, in a work so deservedly
popular as Lord Campbell's, one cannot but regret that any currency
should be given to a calumny so injurious to a prelate whose character
is as deserving of our esteem, as his learning is of our veneration.

    PEREGRINUS.


POETICAL COINCIDENCES.

_Sheridan._

In the account which Moore has given, in his _Life of Sheridan_, of the
writings left unfinished by that celebrated orator and dramatist, he
states:

  "There also remain among his papers three acts of a drama without
  a name, written evidently in haste, and with scarcely any
  correction."

From this production he gives the following verses, to which he has
appended the note I have placed immediately after them:--

      "Oh yield, fair lids, the treasures of my heart,
        Release those beams, that make this mansion bright;
      From her sweet sense, Slumber! tho' sweet thou art,
        Begone, and give the air she breathes in light.

      "Or while, oh Sleep, thou dost those glances hide,
        Let rosy slumber still around her play,
      Sweet as the cherub Innocence enjoy'd,
        When in thy lap, new-born, in smiles he lay.

      "And thou, oh Dream, that com'st her sleep to cheer,
        Oh take my shape, and play a lover's part;
      Kiss her from me, and whisper in her ear,
        Till her eyes shine, 'tis night within my heart."

  "I have taken the liberty here of supplying a few rhymes and words
  that are wanting in the original copy of the song. The last line
  of all runs thus in the manuscript:--

      'Til her eye shines, I live in darkest night,'

  which not rhyming as it ought, I have ventured to alter as above."

Now the following sonnet, which occurs in the third book of Sir Philip
Sidney's _Arcadia_, is evidently the source from whence Sheridan drew
his inspiration, the concluding line in both poems being the same. Had
Moore given Sheridan's without alteration, the resemblance would in all
probability be found much closer:--

      "Lock up, faire liddes, the treasure of my heart,
        Preserve those beames, this ages onely light:
      To her sweet sence, sweet sleepe some ease impart,
        Her sence too weake to beare her spirits might.

      "And while, O Sleepe, thou closest up her sight,
        (Her sight where Love did forge his fairest dart)
      O harbour all her parts in easefull plight:
        Let no strange dreame make her faire body start.

      "But yet, O dreame, if thou wilt not depart
        In this rare subject from thy common right:
        But wilt thy selfe in such a seate delight,

      "Then take my shape, and play a lover's part:
        Kisse her from me, and say unto her sprite,
        Till her eyes shine, I live in darkest night."

The edition I quote from is that "Printed by W. S. for Simon Waterson,
London, 1627." I may add, that I wrote to Moore as far back as 1824 to
point out this singular coincidence; but although the communication was
courteously acknowledged, I do not believe the circumstance has been
noticed in any subsequent edition of Sheridan's memoirs.

    T. C. SMITH.


FOLK LORE.

_Medical Use of Pigeons_ (Vol. iv., p. 228.).--In my copy of Mr.
Alford's very unsatisfactory edition of Donne, I find noted (in addition
to R. T.'s quotation from _The Life of Mrs. Godolphin_) references to
Pepys's _Diary_, October 19, 1663, and January 21, 1667-8, and the
following from Jer. Taylor, ed. Heber, vol. xii. p. 290.: "We cut living
pigeons in halves, and apply them to the feet of men in fevers."

    J. C. R.

_Michaelmas Goose--St. Martin's Cock._--In the county of Kilkenny, and
indeed all through the S.E. counties of Ireland, the "Michaelmas Goose"
is still had in honour. "St. Martin's Bird" (see p. 230. _ante_) is,
however, the cock, whose _blood is shed_ in honour of that saint at
Martinmas, Nov. 11. The same superstition does not apply, that I am
aware of, to the Michaelmas Goose, which is merely looked on as a dish
customary on that day, with such as can afford it, and always
accompanied by a _melange_ of vegetables (potatos, parsnips, cabbage,
and onions) mashed together, with butter, and forming a dish termed
_Kailcannon_. The idea is far different as to St. Martin's Cock, the
blood of which is always shed _sacrificially_ in honour of the Saint.
Query, 1. The territorial extent of the latter custom? And, 2. What
pagan deity has transferred his honours to St. Martin of Tours.

    JAMES GRAVES.

  Kilkenny.

_Surrey Folk Lore._--A "wise woman" has lately made her appearance not
far from Reigate in Surrey. One of the farmers' wives there, on being
scalded the other day, sent to the old dame, who sent back a curious
doggrel, which the good woman was to repeat at stated times. At the end
of a week the scald got well, and the good woman told us that she knew
there was no harm in the charm, for "she had heard say as how it was
some verse from the Bible."

When in a little shop the other day, in the same part of the country,
one village dame was speaking of the death of some neighbour, when
another said, that she hoped "they had been and told the bees."

In the same neighbourhood I was told a sovereign cure for the goitre was
to form the sign of the cross on the neck with the hand of a corpse.

    M. M. P.


THE CAXTON COFFER.

The devices of our early English printers are often void of significancy
early, or else mere quibbles. In that particular, Caxton set a
commendable example.

His device is "W.4.7C." The two figures, however, are interlaced, and
seem to admit of two interpretations. I must cite, on this question, the
famous triumvirate--Ames, Herbert, and Dibdin:

  "The following mark [above described] I find put at the end of
  many of his books, _perhaps_ for the date 1474, when he began
  printing in England, or his sign."--Joseph AMES, 1749.

  "The following mark [above described] I find put at the end of
  many of his books, _perhaps_ for the date 1474, when he began
  printing in England, or his sign."--William HERBERT, 1785.

  "The figures in the large device [above described] form the
  _reverse impression_ of 74; meaning, _as it has been stated_, that
  our printer commenced business in England, in the year 1474: but
  not much weight can be attached to this remark, as no copy of the
  _Chess book_, printed in 1474, has yet been discovered which
  presents us with this device."--T. F. DIBDIN, 1810.

In lieu of baseless conjectures, I have here to complain of timidity.
There is scarcely room for a doubt on the date. As dom de Vaines
observes, with regard to dates, "dans le bas age on supprimoit le
millieme et les centaines, commencant aux dixaines." There can be no
objection to the interpretation on that score. The main question
therefore is, in what order should we read the interlaced figures? Now,
the position of the _point_ proves that we should read 74--which is the
date of _The game and playe of the chesse_. The figures indicate 1474 as
clearly as the letters W. C. indicate William Caxton. What is the just
inference, must ever remain a matter of opinion.

In the woodcut of _Arsmetrique_, published in the _Myrrour of the
worlde_, A.D. 1481, I observe the figures 74 rather conspicuously
placed, and perhaps the device was then first adopted.

    BOLTON CORNEY.


Minor Notes.

"_They that touch pitch_," &c.--A few Sundays since the clergyman that I
"sit under," quoting in his discourse the words "they that touch pitch
will be defiled," ascribed them to "the wisest of men." A lady of his
congregation (who was, I fear, more critical than devout) pounced upon
her pastor's mistake, and asked me on the following Monday if I also had
noticed it. I denied that it was one; but she laughed at my ignorance,
produced a Shakspeare, and showed me the words in the mouth of Dogberry
(_Much Ado about Nothing_, Act III. Sc. 3.). However, by the help of a
"Cruden," I was able to find the same expression, not indeed in Solomon,
but in the son of Sirach (ch. xiii. v. 1.).

If Shakspeare's appropriation of this passage has not been noticed
before, may I request the insertion of this note? It may possibly
prevent other learned divines from falling into the common (?) mistake
of thus quoting Dogberry as "the wisest of men."

    E. J. G.

  Preston.

_Pasquinade._--In May last was placed on Pasquin's statue in Rome the
following triglot epigram, of which the original Latin was borrowed from
"NOTES AND QUERIES." As it is not probable that the Papal police allowed
it to remain long before the eyes of the lieges of his Holiness, allow
me to lay up in your pages this memorial of a visit to Rome during the
"Aggression" summer.

      "Cum Sapiente Pius nostras juravit in aras,
      Impius heu Sapiens, desipiensque Pius.

      "When a league 'gainst our Faith Pope with Cardinal tries,
      Neither _Wiseman_ is Pious, nor _Pius_ is Wise.

            "Quando Papa' o' Cardinale
            Chiesa' Inglese tratta male,
            Que Chiamo quella gente,
            Piu? No-no, ni Sapiente.

            ANGLUS."

The Italian version will of course be put down as _English_-Italian, and
therefore worse than mediocre; but I wished to perpetuate, along with
the sense of the Latin couplet, a little _jeu d'esprit_ which I saw half
obliterated on a wall at Rovigo, in the Lombardo-Venetian territory;
being a play on the family name and character of Pius IX.:

      "Piu?--No-no: ma stai Ferette;"

which may be read,

      "Pious?--Not at all: but _still_ Ferette."

    A. B. R.

_Two Attempts to show the Sound of "ough" final._--

      1.

      Though from rough cough, or hiccough free,
          That man has pain enough,
      Whose wound through plough, sunk in slough
          Or lough begins to slough.

      2.

      'Tis not an easy task to show
      How _o_, _u_, _g_, _h_ sound; since _though_
      An Irish _lough_ and English _slough_,
      And _cough_ and hic_cough_, all allow,
      Differ as much as _tough_, and _through_,
      There seems no reason why they do.

    W. J. T.




Queries.


CAN BISHOPS VACATE THEIR SEES?

In Lord Dover's note on one of Walpole's Letters to Sir H. Mann (1st
series, vol. iii. p 424.), I find it stated that Dr. Pearce, the
well-known Bishop of Rochester, was not allowed to vacate his see, when
in consequence of age and infirmity he wished to do so, on the plea that
a bishopric as being a peerage is _inalienable_. The Deanery of
Westminster, which he also held, he was allowed to resign, and did so.

Now my impression has always been, that a bishop, as far as his peerage
is concerned, is much on the same footing as a representative peer of
Scotland or Ireland; I mean that his peerage is resignable at will. Of
course the representative peers are peers of Scotland or Ireland
respectively; but by being elected representative peers they acquire a
_pro-tempore_ peerage of the realm coincident with the duration of the
parliament, and at a dissolution require re-election, when of course any
such peer need not be reappointed.

Now the clergy, says your correspondent CANONICUS EBORACENSIS (Vol. iv.,
p. 197.), are _represented_ by the bishops. Although, therefore, whilst
they are so representative, they are peers of the realm just as much as
the lay members of the Upper House, I can see no reason why any bishop,
who, like Dr. Pearce, feels old age and infirmity coming on, should not
resign this representation, _i.e._ his peerage, or the _temporal_
station which in England, owing to the existing connexion between church
and state, attaches to the _spiritual_ office of a bishop.

Of course, ecclesiastically speaking, there is no doubt at all that a
bishop may resign his spiritual functions, _i.e._ the overlooking of his
diocese, for any meet cause. Our colonial bishops, for instance, do so.
The late warden of St. Augustine's, Canterbury, Bishop Coleridge, had
been Bishop of Barbadoes. So that if Lord Dover's theory be correct, a
purely secular reason, arising from the peculiar position of the English
church, would prevent any conscientious bishop from resigning duties, to
the discharge of which, from old age, bodily infirmity, or impaired
mental organs, he felt himself unfit.

Perhaps some of your correspondents will give me some information on
this matter.

    K. S.


SANDERSON AND TAYLOR.

I shall be much obliged if any of your readers can explain the following
coincidence between Sanderson and Jeremy Taylor. Taylor, in the
beginning of the _Ductor Dubitantium_, says:

  "It was well said of St. Bernard, 'Conscientia candor est lucis
  aeternae, et speculum sine macula Dei majestatis, et imago bonitatis
  illius;' 'Conscience is the brightness and splendour of the
  eternal light, a spotless mirror of the Divine Majesty, and the
  image of the goodness of God.' It is higher which Tatianus said of
  conscience, [Greek: Monon einai syneidesin Theon], 'Conscience is
  God unto us,' which saying he had from Menander,

      [Greek: Brotois hapasin he syneidesis Theos].

  "God is in our hearts by his laws; he rules in us by his
  substitute, our conscience; God sits there and gives us laws; and
  as God said unto Moses, 'I have made thee a God to Pharaoh,' that
  is, to give him laws, and to minister in the execution of those
  laws, and to inflict angry sentences upon him, so hath God done to
  us."

In the beginning of Sanderson's second lecture, _De Obligatione
Conscientiae_, he says:

  "Hine illud ejusdem Menandri. [Greek: Brotois hapasin he
  syneidesis Theos]; _Mortalibus sum cuique Conscientia Deus est_,
  Quo nimirum sensu dixit Dominus se _constituisse Mosen Deum
  Pharaoni_; quod seis Pharaoni voluntatem Dei subinde _inculcaret_,
  ad cum faciendam Pharaonem _instigaret_, non obsequentem
  contentibus plagis insectaretur; eodem fere sensu dici potest,
  eundem quoque _constituisse in Deum unicuique hominum_ singularium
  propriam _Conscientiam_."

Sanderson's _Lectures_ were delivered at Oxford in 1647, but not
published till 1660. The Dedication to Robert Boyle is dated November,
1659. The _Ductor Dubitantium_ is dedicated to Charles II. after the
Restoration, but has a preface dated October, 1659. It is not likely,
therefore, that, Taylor borrowed from the printed work of Sanderson.
Perhaps the quotations and illustrations which they have in common were
borrowed from some older common source, where they occur _associated_ as
they do in these two writers. I should be glad to have any such source
pointed out.

    W. W.

  Cambridge.


Minor Queries.

220. "_Vox vere Anglorum._"--"_Sacro-Sancta Regum
Majestas._"--_Translator of Horrebow's "Iceland."_--Perhaps some of your
readers may be able to tell me the names of the writers of the two
following works, which were published anonymously.

1. _Vox vere Anglorum: or England's loud Cry for their King._ 4to. 1659.
Pp. 15. In this the place where it was published or printed is not
given.

2. _Sacro-Sancta Regum Majestas: or, the Sacred and Royall Prerogative
of Christian Kings._ 4to. Printed at Oxford, 1644. The Dedication is
signed "J. A."

I should also wish to find out, if possible, the name of the translator
of Horrebow's _Natural History of Iceland_, published in folio, in
London, in 1758.

    [Greek: Boreas.]

221. "_Kings have their Conquests._"--I have met with a passage
commencing thus:

      "Kings have their conquests, length of days their date,
      Triumph its tomb, felicity its fate;"

followed by two more lines expressive of the infinity of Divine power,
as compared with human, which I have forgotten. Where is the passage to
be found?

    JAMES F. ABSALON.

  Portsea.

222. _Dryden--Illustrations by T. Holt White._--The late T. Holt White,
Esq. (who edited and published in 1819 the _Areopagitica_ of Milton,
adding a very ably composed preface, erudite notes, and interesting
illustrations), had compiled in _many_ interleaved volumes of the works
of Dryden, such a mass of information, that Sir Walter Scott, when he
had turned over the leaves of a few volumes, closed them, and is
reported to have said, "_It would be unjust to meddle with such a
compilation; I see that I have not even straw to make my bricks with._"
Can any one of your correspondents inform me if that compilation has
been preserved, and where it is?

    AEGROTUS.

223. _Pauper's Badge, Meaning of._--In the Churchwarden's Accounts for
the parish of Eye for the year 1716, is the following entry:

  "22 July, 1716.

  "It is agreed that, forasmuch as Frances Gibbons _hath refused to
  weare the badge_, that she should not be allowed the collection
  [_i.e._ the weekly parish allowance] now due, nor for the future
  w'h shall be due."

Can any correspondent inform me what this _badge_ was, and also if it
was of general use in other places?

    J. B. COLMAN.

224. _The Landing of William Prince of Orange in Torbay. Painted by J.
Northcote, R. A._--Can any of the readers of "NOTES AND QUERIES" inform
me who is the owner of the above-named painting, which was in the
Exhibition of the Royal Academy at the end of the last century, and
afterwards engraved by J. Parker?

    A. H. W.

225. _The Lowy of Tunbridge._--Lambarde (_Perambulation of Kent_, 1596,
p. 425.) says, that round about the town of Tunbridge lieth a territory
commonly called the Lowy, but in the ancient records written Leucata or
Leuga, which was a French league of ground, and which was allotted at
first to one Gislebert, son of Godfrey (who was natural brother to
Richard, second Duke of Normandy of that name), in lieu of a town and
land called Bryonnie in Normandy, which belonged to him, and which
Robert, eldest son to King William the Conqueror, seized and bestowed on
Robert Earle Mellent. I should be glad to know if there is at present
any trace of such a territory remaining.

    E. N. W.

  Southwark, Sept. 28, 1851.

226. _Bones of Birds._--Some naturalists speak of the hollowness of the
bones of birds as giving them buoyancy, because they are filled with
air. It strikes me that this reason is inconclusive, for I should
suppose that in the atmosphere, hollow bones, _quite empty_, would be
more buoyant than if filled with air. Perhaps one of your correspondents
will kindly enlighten my ignorance, and explain whether the air with
which the bones are filled is not used by the bird in respiration in the
more rarefied altitudes, and the place supplied by a more gaseous
expiration of less specific gravity than the rarefied atmosphere?

Although of a different class from the queries you usually insert, I
hope you will not think this foreign to the purpose of your useful
miscellany.

    AN AERONAUT.

227. _"Malvina, a Tragedy."_--Can any of your readers afford any
information about (1.) _Malvina, a Tragedy_, Glasgow, printed by Andrew
Foules, 1786, 8vo., pp. 68? A MS. note on the copy in my library states
it to be written by Mr. John Riddel, surgeon, Glasgow. (2.) _Iphigenia,
a Tragedy_ in four acts. In Rege tamen Pater est.--Ovid. MDCCLXXXVII. My
copy has this MS. note: "By John Yorke, of Gouthwait, Esq., Yorkshire,"
in the handwriting of Francis, seventh Baron Napier. Neither of these
tragedies in noticed in the _Biographia Dramatica_.

    J. MT.

228. _Rinuccini Gallery._--I see by a late number of the _Athenaeum_
newspaper, that the splendid collection of pictures preserved in the
Rinuccini Palace at Florence will be brought to the hammer in the month
of May 1852. It has been stated, that amongst the works of art at one
period extant in the Rinuccini Palace, were a number of paintings made
by Italian artists for Cardinal Rinuccini, when on his Legatine mission
to Ireland in the middle of the seventeenth century, and representing
his triumphal entry into Kilkenny in November 1645. It has also been
asserted that these interesting historical paintings were wilfully
destroyed from a very discreditable motive. The importance of these
cartoons, as illustrating a period when Ireland became the final
battle-field of the contending parties which then divided the British
dominions, will at once be acknowledged; and at this period, when so
many foreigners are assembled in London, perhaps some reader of "NOTES
AND QUERIES" may be able to set the question of the existence or
destruction of these cartoons at rest. Or, at all events, some person
about to seek the genial air of Italy during the winter may bear this
"Query" in mind, and forward to your valuable paper a "Note" of the
contents of the Rinuccini Gallery. I need hardly say that the person so
doing will confer a favour on every student of Irish History.

    JAMES GRAVES.

  Kilkenny, Oct. 11.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Meaning of Aneroid._--What is the derivation of the word _aneroid_, as
applied to a new description of barometer lately introduced?

    AGRICOLA.

  [From a note in Mr. Dent's interesting pamphlet, _A Treatise on
  the Aneroid, a newly invented Portable Barometer; with a short
  Historical Notice of Barometers in general, their Construction and
  Use_, it appears that the word _aneroid_ has been the subject of
  some philological discussion. "It is said to be derived from three
  Greek words, [Greek: a], [Greek: neros], and [Greek: eidos], and
  to signify _a form without fluid_. If so, it does not appear very
  happily chosen, since it indicates merely what the instrument is
  _not_, without at all explaining what it is."]

_Fox's Cunning._--Can any of your correspondents or readers give any
authentic information as to the fact having been witnessed by any one,
of the old story of the fox relieving itself of fleas by taking a
feather in its mouth, and gradually, though slowly enough, retrograding
itself into the water, first by legs and tail, then body, shoulders, and
head to the nose, and thus compelling the fleas, to escape from the
drowning element, to pass over the nose on to the bridge of the feather,
which is then committed to the stream.

Has any one actually seen this? Has any one heard it related by one who
has seen the ejectment performed?

    J. D.

  Torquay, May 12.

  [Lord Brougham, in his _Dialogues on Instinct_ (ed. 1844, p.
  110.), does not allude to this proverbial instance, but says: "I
  know not if it (the Fox's cunning) was ever more remarkably
  displayed than in the Duke of Beaufort's country; where Reynard,
  being hard pressed, disappeared suddenly, and was, after strict
  search, found immersed in a water pool up to the very snout, by
  which he held a willow bough hanging over the pond."]




Replies.


ARCHBISHOP OF SPALATRO.

(Vol. iv., p. 257.)

_Audi alteram partem_ is too excellent and equitable a rule, not to find
ample scope given for its exercise in "NOTES AND QUERIES," especially
where the memory of a foreigner is concerned, who, after dwelling awhile
among us under the protection of our hospitality, and in the communion
of our Church, was content eventually to sacrifice his life, rather than
forsake the truth, or repudiate the Church of England.

I am led to this remark by observing the tone of depreciation in which
Chalmers speaks of Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalatro, in the
extract produced at p. 257. out of the _Biographical Dictionary_, for
the satisfaction of MR. W. FRAZER.

The words of Chalmers, which I conceive to be objectionable, alike
ungenerous and inaccurate--such as Fuller might rejoice in (conf.
_Church History_, book x.)--are:

  "He returned to Rome in 1622, _where he abjured his errors_; but
  on the discovery of a correspondence which he held with some
  Protestants, he was thrown into prison, where he died in 1625. He
  was a man of great abilities and learning, _although remarkable
  for a fickleness in religious matters_."

This reproach against the good archbishop, of having renounced the
English communion (for that is doubtless what is meant), is clearly an
unjust accusation, and appears to be based upon no better authority than
a spurious book, published in the Low Countries under Spalatro's name,
but without his knowledge or sanction, and bearing the following title:
_Marc. Ant. de Dominis sui reditus ex Anglia concilium exponit_, 4to.
Dilingae, 1623. This book at the time of its publication deceived Bishop
Hall, and gave occasion to the _Alter Ecebolius M. Ant. de Dominis,
pluribus dominis inservire doctus_: 4to. Lond. 1624.

It is only fair, certainly, to Spalatro's memory, that the calumnies
thus raised against him in his lifetime should not now be perpetuated by
the inadvertency of modern writers, for so far at least the means are at
hand to refute them. Now there is one writer especially who has done
much to vindicate the name of Ant. de Dominis from this charge of
"fickleness in religious matters." That writer is Bishop Cosin, whose
testimony herein is of the more value from the fact of his having been
present (as Bishop Overall's secretary) at the "Conference between
Spalato and Overall," which "Conference" the following particulars were
collected by Mr. Gutch, _e Schedis MSS. Cosini_, and are preserved in
the _Collectanea Curiosa_, vol. ii. p. 18.:

  "A. Spalato came into England in 1616, being desirous to live
  under the protection of King James, having before been recommended
  by Padre Paolo. By King James's bounty and care he was safely
  conveyed through Germany into England, and lodged in Lambeth
  Palace: Abbot thinking fit to retire to Croydon, till either
  Bishop Andrewes or Bishop Overall had conferred with him. The king
  sent Bishop Overall to him, who took in his company his secretary,
  and commanded him to be near him the same morning Spalato arrived,
  to hear what passed between them. After dinner, some other being
  present, the discourse began about the state of the Church of
  England; of which Overall having given a large account, Spalato
  received great satisfaction, and made his protestation that he
  came into England then to live with us in the union and profession
  of that Catholic religion which was so much obstructed in his own
  country, that he could not with safety and peace of conscience
  live there any longer. Then he added what satisfaction he had
  received from the monitory preface of King James [Vid. _Apol. for
  the Oath of Allegiance_, ed. 4to. Lond. 1609] to all the estates
  and churches of Christendom; wherein the true ancient faith and
  religion of the Catholic Church is set forth, and no heterodoxies
  or novelties maintained: to the defence of which faith, and
  service of which Church, as he had already a long time applied his
  studies, and wrote ten books, _De Republica Ecclesiastica_, so, by
  the favour of God, and King James, he was now come into England to
  review and publish them, together with the _History of the Council
  of Trent_, which he had brought with him from Padre Paolo of
  Venice, who delivered it into his hands; by whom he was chiefly
  persuaded and encouraged to have recourse to the king and the
  Church of England, being the best founded for the profession of
  true Catholic doctrine, and the freest from error and novelties,
  of any Church in all places besides. Then they descended to the
  particular points of doctrine," &c.

It is, however, _not_ with the _doctrinal_ question which would, of
course, be inadmissible in "NOTES AND QUERIES," but with the historical
_fact_, that we have to do; the question being, whether Antonius
Spalateasis was "fickle" in respect of the Church of England.

There is an interesting sketch of Spalatro's _after_ history in Cosin's
_Treatise against Transubstantiation_, chap. ii. [section] 7.; from Luke de
Beaulieu's translation of which (Cosin's _Collected Works_, vol. iv. p.
160., Oxford, 1851) I quote the following:

  "Antonio de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, (was) a man well
  versed in the Sacred Writings, and the records of antiquity; who,
  having left Italy (when he could no longer remain in it, either
  with quiet or safety) by the advice of his intimate friend, Paulus
  Venetus, took sanctuary under the protection of King James of
  blessed memory, in the bosom of the Church of England, which he
  did faithfully follow in all points and articles of religion. But,
  being daily vexed with many affronts and injuries, and wearied by
  the unjust persecutions of some sour and over-rigid men, who
  bitterly declaimed everywhere against his life and actions, he at
  last resolved to return into Italy with a safe conduct. Before he
  departed he was, by order from the king, questioned by some
  commissionated bishops, what he thought of the religion and church
  of England, which for so many years he had owned and obeyed, and
  what he would say of it in the Roman court. _To this query he gave
  in writing this memorable answer, 'I am resolved, even with the
  danger of my life, in profess before the Pope himself, that the
  Church of England is a true and orthodox Church of Christ.' This
  he not only promised, but faithfully performed_; for though, soon
  after his departure, there came a book out of the Low Countries,
  falsely bearing his name, by whose title many were deceived, even
  among the English, and thereby moved to tax him with apostacy, and
  of being another Ecebolius; yet, when he came to Rome (where he
  was most kindly entertained in the palace of Pope Gregory XV., who
  formerly had been his fellow-student), _he could never be
  persuaded_ by the Jesuits and others, who daily thronged upon him,
  neither to subscribe the new-devised tenets of the Council of
  Trent, or _to retract those orthodox books_ which he had printed
  in England and Germany, or _to renounce the communion of the
  Church of England, in whose defence he constantly persisted to the
  very last_. But, presently after the decease of Pope Gregory, he
  was imprisoned by the Jesuits and Inquisitors in Castle St.
  Angelo, where, by being barbarously used, and almost starved, he
  soon got a mortal sickness, and died in a few days, though not
  without suspicion of being poisoned. The day following, his corpse
  was by the sentence of the Inquisition tied to an infamous stake,
  and there burnt to ashes, _for no other reason but that he refused
  to make abjuration of the religion of the Church of England_, and
  subscribe some of the lately-made decrees of Trent, which were
  pressed upon him as canons of the Catholic faith. I have taken
  occasion (Cosin adds) to insert this narration, perhaps not known
  to many, to make it appear that this reverend prelate, who did
  great service to the Church of God, may justly (as I said before)
  be reckoned among the writers of the Church of England."

In the first collection of Lord Somers's _Tracts_, vol. iv. p. 575.,
there is a curious paper bearing the title: _A relation sent from Rome,
of the process, sentence, and execution done upon the body, pictures,
and books of Marcus Ant. de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, after his
death._ There are some notices of De Dominis, also, among the Birch and
other MSS. in the British Museum.

MR. FRAZER might possibly ascertain the other particular about which he
inquires, viz. whether Spalatro "_acted_ as a bishop in England," by
consulting some of the numerous tracts written at the time, both against
and in vindication of the archbishop; and, more particularly, a tract
entitled: _De pace religionis M. Ant. de Dominis Spalateus. Archiepisc.
Epist. ad venerabilem virum Jos. Hallum, Archipresbyterum Vigorn_, &c.:
edit. Ves. Sequan. 1666.

    J. SANSOM.

Perhaps it may be doubted whether it was the wish of Antonius de Dominis
to reunite the churches of Rome and England: however this may be, as
Dean of Windsor, he accused one of the canons, Richard Mountagu
(afterwards successively Bishop of Chichester and Norwich) of preaching
the Roman doctrine of the invocation of saints and angels. Mountagu
replied in a pamphlet, the title of which is, _Immediate Addresse unto
GOD Alone. First delivered in a Sermon before his Majestie at Windsore,
since reuised and inlarged to a just Treatise of Invocation of Saints.
Occasioned by a false imputation of M. Antonius de Dominis upon the
Authour, Richard Mountagu._ London, 1624.

Mountagu had evidently no high opinion of his accuser: for he writes in
his Epistle Dedicatory to John Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, and Visitor
of the collegiate church of Windsor: "There was present at my sermon
that infamous Ecebolius of these times, Religionis desultor, Archbishop
sometime of _Spalata_, then Deane of that church, Marcus Antonius de
Dominis;" and he goes on to abuse him in no measured terms. Collier
(_Ecc. Hist._, vol. ii. p. 726., ed. 1714) mentions that Antonius
assisted at the consecration of some English bishops in the chapel at
Lambeth Palace. He was afterwards reconciled to the Church of Rome, but
was soon imprisoned on suspicion of heresy. After he was dead, he passed
through the forms of the Inquisition, was pronounced a lapsed heretic,
and his corpse was publicly burnt.

    ROVERT.

  Withyham.


ANAGRAMS.

(Vol. iv., p. 226.)

I know not whether the art of composing anagrams was much practised in
the days of Swift; the description, however, of one of the employments
at the Academy of Lagado--the "project for improving speculative
knowledge by practical mechanical operations," which was carried into
operation by covering the superficies of a large frame with wooden
letters, which, by the turning of a handle, were constantly shifted into
new places--so aptly satirises this practice, that it seems likely that
it was to this he alluded, the more so as the one employment would be as
profitable as the other. MR. BREEN, however (Vol. iv., p. 226.) having
challenged the production of half a dozen good specimens of the art,
perhaps you will afford him an opportunity of amending his judgment. The
following twelve, whether new or not, will at least stand the test he
has propounded:--

Who will deny that _Old England_ is a _golden land_; or that _lawyers_
are _sly ware_?

There are many who deem _radical reform_ a _rare mad frolic_; and when
asked to _guess a fearful ruin_, would reply _universal suffrage_.

Every one will admit that _astronomers_ are _moon-starers_; and that a
_telegraph_ is a _great help_.

We have long been accustomed to consider that a _revolution_ is _to love
ruin_; and that _nine thumps_ constitute a _punishment_.

What answer more fitting in the _penitentiary_ than _Nay, I repent it_?

Is there a more _comical trade_ than the _democratical_? and what is
more likely to make _bakers fat_ than a good _breakfast_.

But, in conclusion, I am compelled to confess that I can see no affinity
between _potentates_ and _ten tea pots_.

    C. A.

That on _Daniel R._ may be otherwise rendered _Erin lad_.

    D. Q.

Your interesting correspondent MR. BREEN challenges the world to produce
"six good anagrams." It may help him in his search for them to be
referred to two curious papers on the subject in the _Bengal Moofussul
Miscellany_, reprinted in London in 1837. Or, as perhaps he may not have
the book within reach, he may not be displeased at my extracting a few
of the best of them. The first is a compliment paid to one of the
Ptolemies: [Greek: Ptolemaios], [Greek: apo melitos]. Lycophron, in a
similar vein, calls [Greek: Arsinoe], [Greek: ion Heras]. Out of
_William Noy_, Charles I.'s Ship-Money Attorney-General, we have, _I
moyl in law_. _Loraine_ produces _alerion_, which is assigned as the
reason for that house bearing eaglets in their arms. _Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey_ gives, _I fynd murder'd by rogues_. The tale about Lady Eleanor
Davies, lately referred to by one of your contributors, occurs in the
first of these papers; as does another of somewhat later date, which
really deserves to be preserved among your "Notes."

  "When young Stanislaus, afterwards king of Poland, returned home
  from his travels, all the illustrious family of Leczinki assembled
  at Lissa to congratulate him on his arrival. Festivals, shows, and
  rejoicings of every kind took place: but the most ingenious
  compliment that graced the occasion, was the one paid by the
  College of Lissa. There appeared on the stage thirteen dancers,
  dressed as youthful warriors; each held in his hand a shield, on
  which was engraved in characters of gold, one of the thirteen
  letters which compose the two words 'Domus Lescinia.' They then
  commenced their dance, and so arranged it, that at each turn their
  row of bucklers formed different anagrams. At the first pause they
  presented them in the natural order:

                        Domus Lescinia
      At the second     Ades Incolumis
      At the third      Omnis es lucida
      At the fourth     Mane Sidus Loci
      At the fifth      Sis Columna Dei
      At the last       I, scande Solium."

I fear I have already asked for too much of your space, yet must I beg
the least bit more for an anagram which, unless the sacredness of the
subject be accounted a drawback, may well claim a foremost place among
the "six." It is found in Pilate's question to our Lord, _Quid est
veritas?_ which contains its own best answer: _Est Vir qui adest._

    PHILIP HEDGELAND.


DISCOVERING THE BODIES OF THE DROWNED.

(Vol. iv., p. 251.)

The mode of doing this, as shown by S. W. to be practised by the North
American Indians, is very common amongst ourselves. About
five-and-twenty years ago, an Eton boy, named Dean, who had lately come
to the school, imprudently bathed in the river Thames where it flows
with great rapidity under the "playing fields," and he was soon carried
out of his depth, and disappeared. Efforts were made to save him or
recover the body, but to no purpose; until Mr. Evans, who was then, as
now, the accomplished drawing-master, threw a cricket bat into the
stream, which floated to a spot where it turned round in an eddy, and
from a deep hole underneath the body was quickly drawn. This statement
is entirely from memory, but I believe it to be substantially correct.

I heard the following anecdote from the son of an eminent Irish judge.
In a remote district of Ireland a poor man, whose occupation at certain
seasons of the year was to pluck feathers from live geese for beds,
arrived one night at a lonely farmhouse, where he expected to glean a
good stock of these "live feathers," and he arose early next morning to
look after the flock. The geese had crossed the river which flowed in
front of the house, and were sitting comfortably in the sunshine on the
opposite bank. Their pursuer immediately stripped off the few clothes he
had, deposited them on the shore, and swam across the river. He then
drove the birds into the water, and, boldly following them, he
maintained a long contest to keep then together on their homeward
voyage, until in the deep bed of the river his strength failed him, and
he sank. The farmer and his family became aware of the accident, the
cries of the drowning man, and the cackling of the geese, informed them,
in the swimmer's extremity, of his fate, and his clothes lay on the
shore in witness of his having last been in their company. They dragged
the river for the body, but in vain; and in apprehension of serious
consequences to themselves should they be unable to produce the corpse,
they applied to the parish priests, who undertook to relieve them, and
to "improve the occasion" by the _performance of a miracle_. He called
together the few neighbours, and having tied a strip of parchment,
inscribed with cabalistic characters, round a wisp of straw; he dropped
this packet where the man's head was described to have sunk, and it
glided into still water where the corpse was easily discovered.

    ALFRED GATTY.

The discovery of drowned bodies by loading a loaf with mercury, and
putting it afloat on a stream, or by casting into the river, as the
Indians do, "a chip of cedar wood, which will stop and turn round over
the exact spot," is referrible to natural and simple causes. As there
are in all running streams deep pools formed by eddies, in which drowned
bodies would be likely to be caught and retained, any light substance
thrown into the current would consequently be drawn to that part of the
surface over the centre of the eddy hole.

    J. S. C.


MARRIAGE OF ECCLESIASTICS.

(Vol. iv., pp. 57. 125. 193. 196.)

In the early ages, your correspondent H. WALTER assumes that the
primitive Christians knew "that their Scriptures said of marriage that
it was honourable in all" (Vol. iv., p. 193.). H. WALTER is under more
than one mistake with regard to the text of St. Paul (Heb. xiii. 4.) on
which he grounds his assertion. This whole chapter being full of
admonitions, the apostle, all through it, speaks mostly in the
imperative mood. He begins with, "Let brotherly love continue;" "Be not
forgetful," &c.; "Remember them that are in bonds," &c. Then he says:
[Greek: Timios ho gamos en pasi, kai he koite amiantos], that is: "Let
(the laws of) marriage be revered in all _things_, and the marriage bed
be undefiled;" and as a warning to those who might not heed such an
admonition, he adds, "whoremongers and adulterers God will judge." H.
WALTER mistakes the adjective feminine [Greek: en pasi] as meaning "all
men," whereas it signifies here, "in all things;" according to which
sense St. Paul uses the same form of speech in 2 Corinthians xi. 6. True
it is, the authorised version translates thus: "Marriage _is_ honourable
in all;" but the _is_ is an insertion of the translators, and therefore
printed in Italics. Parkhurst, however, in his _Lexicon_, at the word
[Greek: Gamos], says: "Wolfius has justly remarked, the imperatives
preceding and following show that we should rather understand [Greek:
esto] than [Greek: esti]. See also Hammond and Macknight; and observe
that the Alexandrian and two other MSS., for [Greek: de] in the
following sentence read [Greek: gar], and the Vulgate translates by
_enim_, "for."

I cannot but think that the makers of the authorized version advisedly
inserted _is_ instead of _let_, to forward their own new doctrines, as
this their rendering would seem to countenance the marriage of priests.
Curiously enough, when they had no interest in putting in the indicative
instead of the imperative mood, those same translators have of
themselves inserted, in the verse following, the latter, thus: "_Let_
your conversation _be_ without covetousness," &c. Moreover, in
translating [Greek: en pasi], in another passage of St. Paul, 2 Cor. xi.
6., they render it, "in all things;" in which same sense it is to be
understood in the above place, Heb. xi. 4.

    CEPHAS.

In lately reading that very curious book, Whiston's _Autobiography_, I
met with some remarks on this subject, which I made a note of, and which
are at the service of A. B. C. Whiston quotes the well-known Dr. Wall as
follows:--

  "The Greek Church still observe the rule of allowing their clergy
  to marry but once, and before the Council of Nice made a further
  rule that none after his orders should marry; and I believe it is
  hard to find in church history an instance of any one who married
  after he was in priest's orders for a thousand (in reality for
  above a thousand four hundred) years before Martin Luther."

The interpolation marked by a parenthesis is Whiston's, who proceeds:--

  "The Church of England allows their very bishops to be twice--nay
  thrice--nay even four times married without any impediment to
  their episcopal functions, whereas the Greek Patriarch of
  Constantinople would not admit the Emperor Leo, a layman, into the
  church, because he had married a fourth wife."

Whiston, though a "fanciful man," as Burnet calls him, was well read in
Christian antiquity, and his opinion is therefore of some weight. Wall's
authority no one would willingly undervalue.

I cannot call to mind any English bishop who was four times married; yet
Whiston would hardly have asserted the fact if he had not had some
example in view. I should be obliged to any one who would inform me on
the subject.[1]

  [Footnote 1: We have somewhere read of a Bishop Thomas giving his
  fourth wife a ring, with this posy:--

      "If I survive, I'll make it five."

  This may give a clue to our correspondent.]

When on the subject of Whiston, I should be glad to know if his edition
of our Common Prayer Book published in 1713, and his Primitive New
Testament published in 1745, still exist.[2]

  [Footnote 2: The two works mentioned by K. S., though scarce,
  occasionally occur for sale. The "Common Prayer Book" was
  republished by the Rev. Peter Hall in his _Fragmenta Liturgica_,
  vol. iii.]

The former he entitled _The Liturgy of the Church of England reduced
nearer to the Primitive Standard_. The latter contains, besides the
Canonical Books of the New Testament, the Apostolic Constitutions,
Epistles of Ignatius, the Epistle of Timothy to Diognetus, &c. &c., all
of which he considered as of equal authority with the Canonical Books.
The Apostolic Constitutions indeed he terms "the most sacred of the
Canonical Books of the New Testament."

    K. S.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Robert Douglas_ (Vol. iv., p. 23.).--There is no truth in the report
that this person was a grandson of Mary Queen of Scots. His diary during
the march of the Scots troops to England, 1644, is printed in a work
entitled _Historical Fragments relative to Scotish Affairs from 1635 to
1664_, Edin., 1833, 8vo., published by Stevenson of Edinburgh, and
edited by James Maidment, Esq., of that city, who has enriched the
volume with many notes and illustrations, and has given in addition a
pretty copious account of Douglas. His letters and papers fell into the
hands of Wodrow. (See _Analecta Scotica_, vol. i. p. 326.) Allow me to
correct an error. The Bannatyne Club did _not_ print Wodrow's
_Analecta_. This very amusing collection was a munificent present from
the late Earl of Glasgow to the members of the Maitland Club, of which
his lordship was president; it is in _four_ thick 4to. volumes, and full
of all sorts of out-of-the-way information. It seems very little known
at present south the Tweed. I question whether Mr. Macaulay has gone
through it, although he is no doubt familiar with Wodrow's one-sided
work on the Sufferings of the Scotish Presbyterian clergy.

    J. MT.

_The Leman Baronetcy_ (Vol. iv., pp. 58. 111.).--The attempt in
_Scotland_ to give a right to an _English_ title of honour is exposed
fully in Mr. Turnbull's _Anglo-Scotia Baronets_, Edin. 1846, P. XXXII.
iii. The "certified court proceedings" are worth nothing, and would not
be sustained in a court of law. The party called _Sir_ Edward Godfrey
Leman may or may not be the next heir of the Lord Mayor, but he must
prove his right in England by such evidence as may be required there,
and not by reference to what would not even be looked at in the Scotish
law courts.

    J. MT.

_Cachecope Bell_ (Vol. iii., p. 407.).--Is it possible that this word
may be a corruption of the low Latin "Catascopus" (Gr. [Greek:
kataskopos]), and that it was applied to a bell which a watchman tolled
to give an alarm of fire, &c.? I have seen a bell set apart for this
duty, in churches on the continent.

    C. P. PH***.

May not this have been a bell specially rung at funerals, and deriving
its name (as has been suggested to me) from _cache corps_, "cover the
body" (in the ground)? And why not, since we have got "curfew" out of
_couvre feu_, "cover the fire?"

    A. G.

  Ecclesfield.

  [E. V. has suggested a similar explanation of this term.]

"_Dieu et mon Droit_" (Vol. iii., p. 407.).--In Bishop Nicolson's
_English Historical Library_, part iii. chap. i., under the section
treating of _Charters_ appears the following paragraph:

  "The same king (Edward III.), as founder of the most noble order
  of Knights of the Garter, had his arms sometimes encircled with
  their motto of 'Honi soit,' &c., that of 'Dieu et mon Droit'
  having formerly been assumed by Richard the First, intimating that
  the Kings of England hold their empire from God alone. But
  _neither of those_ ever appeared on the Broad Seal, before the
  days of Henry the Eighth."

    FRANCISCUS.

_Defoe's House at Stoke Newington_ (Vol. iv., p. 256.).--This house is
the one which was occupied by the late William Frend, M.A., of the Rock
Life Office, and which now belongs to his widow. It is on the south side
of Church Street, a little to the east of Lordship Lane or Road, and has
about four acres of ground attached, bounded on the west by a narrow
footway, once (if not still) called Cutthroat Lane. Or it may be
identified thus: take the map of Stoke Newington in Robinson's history
of that place, London, 1820, 8vo., and look directly below the first "e"
in "Church Street." Among the papers by which the house is held is the
copy of the enrolment of a surrender to the lord of manor, dated
February 26, 1740, in which the house is described as "heretofore in the
tenure or occupation of Daniel Defoe." The history just mentioned stated
that he was living at Newington in 1709. There appears no reason to
suppose that he built the house. Dr. Price lived for some years in it,
as the domestic chaplain of a subsequent owner.

    M.

_Study of Geometry in Lancashire_ (Vol. ii., p. 57.).--Your
correspondent Mr. T. T. WILKINSON, in his interesting article on this
subject, attributes the first rise of the study of geometry in
Lancashire to the Oldham Mathematical Society. But he is not perhaps
aware, that half a century before a Mathematical Society existed at
Manchester. I have a thin 8vo., entitled--

  "Mathematical Lectures; being the first and second that were read
  to the Mathematical Society at Manchester. By the late ingenious
  Mathematician John Jackson. '_Who can number the Sands of the Sea,
  the Drops of Rain, and the Days of Eternity?_' Ecclus. i. 2. '_He
  that telleth the Number of the Stars, and calleth them all by
  their Names._' Psalm cxlvii. 4. Manchester, printed by Roger
  Adams, in the Parsonage, and sold by William Clayton, Bookseller,
  at the Conduit. 1719."

The book is dedicated to the "Virtuous and Religious Lady Bland." The
Preface states that

  "There having been lately set up in Manchester a Mathematical
  Society, which was encouraged by many (and some Honorable)
  subscribers, and the composing of the Lectures being undertaken by
  the late ingenious Mathematician Mr. John Jackson, and he having
  discharged himself well becoming his parts and character in the
  reading of several extraordinary ones in Geometry, we thought it
  would be great pity, as well as ingratitude, to let such worthy
  performances expire with him."

Then follow the two Lectures, which terminate at p. 41. The first was
read Aug. 12, 1718; the second, Aug. 19, 1718. The Manchester
Mathematical Society would be one of the earliest in the kingdom.
Perhaps the Oldham Society might be a branch of the Manchester.

    JAMES CROSSLEY.

_Coke, how pronounced_ (Vol. iv., pp. 24. 74. 93. 138. 244.).--I think
that the pronunciation of _Cook_ for _Coke_ is not a "modern
affectation," as in a MS. journal of the proceedings in parliament of
the session of 1621, now in my possession, there is, amongst other
amusing things, an account of a quarrel between Mr. Clement Coke, son of
Sir Edward, and Sir Charles Moryson, in which Mr. Coke's name is
frequently spelt _Cooke_. I should judge that the pronunciation was by
no means settled at that time; for, as the journal was evidently written
whilst the debates were going on, it appears to me that the
pronunciation of each speaker was followed, and the name is spelt
differently in speeches that succeed each other. I send you an exact
copy of one example of this:

  "M'r Whittbye.--That M'r _Coke_ will submitt and satisfy in
  acknow'g his wrong don, if S'r Char's will say he ment it not a
  disgrace.

  "S'r Ro. Phil'ps.--I would any way mitigate y'e censure: I should
  need no other induce't but to rememb'r he is y'e soun of such a
  father. But I must say, I thinke S'r Char's hath not given y'e
  least occas'n to M'r _Cooke_," &c. &c.

    C. DE D.

_Quistourne_ (Vol. iv., p. 116.).--Here is a word so very like the
Devonshire one which has puzzled a correspondent, that it may be the
same one in sense as well in sound. In one of the Low-Norman insular
dialects, it denotes a slap with the _back_ of the _hand_; in
French-British[3], KIS DOURN, _revers de main_.

  [Footnote 3: I was asked by a great and true scholar, now no more,
  What do you mean by _British_? My answer was, "The nation that you
  have nicknamed _Welsh_ or _Strangers_, which they are not. With me
  the English are still English, the Scotch Scots, the Britons in
  France the British there."]

    G. M.

_Seneca's Medea_ (Vol. i., p. 107.; Vol. iii., p. 464.).--I cannot feel
much doubt that the prophecy ascribed to Medea was a mere allusion to
events actually past. It was a compliment to Claudius upon the recent
reduction of Britannia under the Roman arms, with nothing future, unless
it were an encouragement to bring Caledonia, Ireland, and the small
islands, into similar subjection. The Oceanus was supposed to extend
indefinitely westward, beyond the world, into the regions of Night and
Chaos, and was not only dreaded for its stormy navigation, but from
feelings of religious awe. The expedition to Britain was peculiar from
being ultra-mundane, and an invasion of the ocean, so that

                        "Oceanus
      Vincula rerum laxet et ingens
      Pateat tellus."

For that reason only they called the Britons "penitus toto divisos
orbe." "Britain (said the pseudo-Hegesippus) lying out of the world, was
by the power of the Roman empire reduced into the world," cit. Camden.
And the same is implied in another place of Seneca himself--

      "Ille Britannos
      _Ultra noti_
      _Littora ponti_, etc.
      Dare Romuleis
      Colla catenis
      Jussit."

But the "Poemata Pithaeana," reprinted in Camden, form the most lively
commentary on the chorus of the Medea. They are likewise of the Claudian
age, they relate to the conquest of Britain, and they are nothing but an
expansion of that one idea, the trans-oceanic voyage and ultra-mundane
conquest--

  "Oceanus.... Qui finis mundo, non erit imperio. Oceanus medium
  venit imperium. At nunc Oceanus geminos interluit orbes, Pars est
  imperii, terminus ante fuit. Et jam Romano cingimur Oceano.
  Oceanus jam terga dedit, etc. Conjunctum est, quod _adhuc_ (i.e.
  _nunc_) orbis, et orbis erat," &c.

The Chorus of Seneca has no more of prophecy, or sagacious conjecture,
or other anticipation of the future, than Gray's "Bard," or the prophecy
of Medea in Pindar's "Pythians," both of them fulfilled before the
poet's time. Whatever may seem of a larger import, in Seneca's language,
than events had fully justified, belongs to the obscure and lofty strain
of remote vaticinations, or to the exaggerations of flattery.

    A. N.

_The Editor of Jewel's Works in Folio_ (Vol. iv., p. 225.).--Colet
speaks of the editions of Jewel published in 1609 and 1611 as "edited by
Fuller." On meeting with the statement elsewhere, I supposed it to be a
mistake, as Fuller was born in 1608; but when I found it apparently
countenanced by the notice of Jewel in Fuller's _Abel Redivivus_ (Camb.
1651, p. 313.), I was much puzzled, until, on turning to the
Introduction, [section] 11., I discovered that the writer of that notice, and
editor of the folios, was not _Fuller_, but _Featley_.

    J. C. R.

_Poetaster_ (Vol. iv., p. 59.).--In reply to A BORDERER, I do not think
_poetaster_ to be a genuine Latin word, though where first used I do not
know. The French equivalent is _poetereau_; the Italian _poeterio_; both
formed according to the analogies of the respective languages.
_Poetaster_ seems to me to be formed upon the model of _oleaster_,
_pinaster_, &c., as though to indicate that the person to whom the name
is applied is as unlike a true poet as the wild olive to the true olive,
or the wild pine to the true pine. What then is the derivation of
_aster_ as a termination? Some punster will say, respecting _oleaster_,
that it is _olea sterilis_. Is it not [Greek: agrios]? or is it rather a
form cognate to the Greek termination [Greek: -azo], which generally
means the performance of some energy, or the exhibiting of some state,
implied in the substantive; as though the wild olive affected the
characteristics and condition of the genuine olive? I am fully aware of
many difficulties in the admission of these derivations. I would suggest
another. Does _aster_ signify that which affects or approaches the
characteristics of the substantive to which it is added, as the
terminations _-estis_ or _-estris_, whereby adjectives are formed; as
_agrestis_, _sylvestris_, _campestris_, at the same time that the forms
are allied, _-aster_, _-estris_, _-estis_?

    THEOPHYLACT.

_Post Pascha_ (Vol. iv., p. 151.).--A parallel to the "hypertautology"
noticed by M. may be found in the determination of the University of
Orleans on the question of Henry VIII.'s divorce, which is dated "die
quinto mensis Aprilis, _ante pascha_," from which it has been argued,
that that document must have been drawn up in 1530, not (as stated in
the printed copies) in 1529, when Easter fell on March 28.

    J. C. R.

_Linteamina and Surplices_ (Vol. iv., p. 192.).--It seems probable that
the surplice became an ecclesiastical vestment at an early date, though
the exact period of its introduction into the Christian church it is
difficult to ascertain; it may not unlikely have been taken from the
white linen ephod of the Jewish priests. Wheatly (c. ii. [section] 4.) quotes a
passage from Jerome to the following effect: "What offence can it be to
God for a bishop or priest to proceed to communion in a white garment;"
and he considers it not improbable that it was in use in Cyprian's days.
Bingham (_French Churches' Apology_, book iii. chap. vii.) cites a
letter of Peter Martyr to Bishop Hooper on the vestment controversy, in
which he states that a distinction of habits may be proved by many
passages of Eusebius, Cyprian, Tertullian, and Chrysostom. By the
twelfth canon of the Council of Narbonne, A.D. 589, the clergy were
forbidden to take the _albe_ off until after mass was ended. In ancient
times, as Mr. Palmer observes (_Orig. Lit._ ii. 409.), the _surplice_
probably differed not from the _albe_; it differs now only in having
wider sleeves.

    N. E. R. (a Subscriber.)

_Climate_ (Vol. iv., p. 231.).--A _climate_ was a zone contained between
two parallels of latitude. The climates were made to contain various
arcs of _latitude_, in different systems. See Hutton's _Mathematical
Dictionary_ at _Climate_, or any work which efficiently explains old
astronomical terms. Thus a _climate_ originally meant a certain range of
latitude; and as we now speak of warm and cold latitudes, so it became
customary to speak of climates, until the last word became wholly
meteorological.

    M.

  "_Climate_ or _Clime_ in geography is a part of the surface of the
  earth, bounded by two circles parallel to the equator, and of such
  a breadth as that the longest day in the parallel nearer the pole
  exceeds the longest day in that next the equator by some certain
  spaces, viz. half an hour.

  "The ancients, who confined the climates to what they imagined the
  habitable parts of the earth, only allowed of seven. The first
  they made to pass through Meroe; the second, through Sienna; the
  third, through Alexandria; the fourth, through Rhodes; the fifth,
  through Rome; the sixth, through Pontus; and the seventh, through
  the mouth the Borysthenes."--_Encyclopaedia Britannica_, art.
  "CLIMATE."

    S. C. C.

  Corfe Castle.

_Ancient Language of Egypt_ (Vol. iv., pp. 152. 240.).--The only works
on the language of ancient Egypt preserved in the hieroglyphical
inscriptions that possess any authority are the _Grammaire Egyptienne_
of Champollion[4], and the appendix to the first volume of the Chevalier
Bunsen's _Egypt's Place in Universal History_. Much, however, is known
to individuals who have studied the language, which has not been
published, or perhaps digested into a system; and the works mentioned
are by no means to be depended on as to matters of detail, especially as
respects the verbs and pronouns, though the general principles of
interpretation may be considered as settled. There was another language
used by the ancient Egyptians, and expressed in what is called the
demotic or enchorial character. Brugsch of Berlin is the highest
authority as to this; his work, _De natura et indole linguae popularis
AEgyptiorum_, is, I believe, incomplete, but he has published others in
Latin and German.

  [Footnote 4: This contains the latest views of the author, whose
  most important discoveries were made near the close of his life.
  The _Precis_ contains much that Champollion afterwards rejected as
  erroneous. The _Dictionnaire_ is a compilation, made after his
  death from what he wrote at different periods of his life. It is
  inconsistent with itself, and abounds in errors, so as to be worse
  than useless to the student.]

The work on Egyptian chronology, from which most seems to be expected,
is that of Lepsius; but he has yet published only the first volume,
which consists of preliminary matter. Le Sueur's treatise, though
crowned by the French Academie, is a failure. Bunsen's less palpably
erroneous, but a great part of the second and third volumes, which were
published in German in 1844, would require to be re-written. Those who
wish to study the chronology, as systematised by the Egyptians
themselves, should consult the Turin _Book Of Kings_, of which an
accurate fac-simile, with explanatory text, has been lithographed, and
is about to be published by subscription, under the superintendence of a
committee, of which Sir Gardner Wilkinson is the most prominent member.

    E. H. D. D.

_Welwood's Memoirs_ (Vol. iv., p. 70.).--The edition referred to by MR.
ROSS I have not seen, but there is one in my library printed at London
in 1702, and which bears to be "the fourth edition," with the dedication
to the king, and an address "to the reader" commencing as follows:--

  "These sheets were writ some years ago, by the encouragement of
  _one_ whose memory will be ever sacred to posterity. It's needless
  to mention the occasion; and they had not been published now, if a
  surreptitious copy of a part of the manuscript had not crept
  abroad."

The volume, which is very well got up in 8vo., is printed for "Tim.
Goodwin, and sold by James Round at the Seneca's Head in Exchange
Alley."

It may be fairly inferred that this edition came out under the
superintendence of Welwood, and it would be interesting to ascertain
whether there are any alterations in the sixth edition. Welwood was a
Scotchman, and a letter from him to James Anderson, the eminent Scotish
antiquary, will be found amongst the Anderson Papers in the Library of
the Faculty of Advocates. It has been printed in the appendix to the
_Catalogues of Scotish Writers_, Edinburgh, 1833.

    J. MT.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

On Wednesday the curtain fell on the most gorgeous and successful
Pageant ever enacted--a Pageant in which all the nations of the earth
played a part, with the Crystal Palace for their "tyring house." Honour
then to all who had hand or heart in this Triumph of Peace! Honour to
our Queen for her most judicious patronage! Honour to Prince Albert for
the admirable tact with which he fulfilled the duties of his important
office! Honour to our countrymen for the manner in which they have
maintained the dignity of a free people! Honour to our foreign visitors
for the friendly spirit in which they responded to our invitation and
received our welcome! Honour to that efficient corps the Sappers and
Miners, (and happily we have only to mention the military to recognise
their services as civilians), and to our Police for their good-humoured
firmness! Honour to Paxton, for his design--to Fox and Henderson for
their execution of it! and, though last not least, honour to that band
of zealous and indefatigable spirits, the Digby Wyatts, Dilkes, Coles,
Scott Russells, &c., to whose prevision and supervision, at all times
and in all places, the success of the World's Fair and the comfort of
its visitors, owe so much! If ever there was a fitting time for
instituting an ORDER OF CIVIL MERIT, it is now; if ever there were men
who deserved to wear such an order, they who planned, and they who
carried out the GREAT EXHIBITION OF THE WORKS OF INDUSTRY OF ALL
NATIONS, they are the men.

We could not allow the Great Exhibition to close without making a Note
of it: we have therefore little room this week for Notes on Books. We
must, however, take notice of six additional volumes of the _National
Illustrated Library_, which we have received. Of three of these we may
well speak briefly, as they form the Second, Third, and Fourth Volumes
of _Boswell's Life of Johnson_, to which we formerly directed the
attention of our readers. _The Book of English Songs from the Sixteenth
to the Nineteenth Century_ is a very well selected volume. The Editor's
endeavour to present a fair view of this branch of our National
Literature has been attended with success, and the book will, we have
no doubt, be a popular one. _The Orbs of Heaven_, by Mr. Mitchel, the
director of the Cincinnati Observatory, is intended to furnish a popular
exposition of the great Discoveries and Theories of Modern Astronomy,
and to exhibit the structure of the universe so far as revealed by the
mind of man. The book is a reprint of a series of lectures delivered in
the hall of Cincinnati College, with such success as to have led to the
establishment of the Cincinnati Observatory--need we say more? The sixth
volume is a very interesting but painful one, _The Mormons, or
Latter-Day Saints, with Memoirs of the Life and Death of Joseph Smith,
the American Mahomet_. How startling is the contrast in the
subject-matter of these two books--the one rich in a display of the
infinite wisdom of the Creator, the other depicting most vividly the
foolishness of man.

The new volume of Bohn's _Standard Library_ is the second of Dr.
Neander's _History of the Planting and Training of the Christian Church
by the Apostles, with the Author's Final Additions; and his
Antignostikus, or Spirit of Tertullian_, which completes, we believe,
the series of translations from the writing of this learned German
divine. _The metamorphoses of Ovid, literally translated into English
Prose_, forms the new volume of Bohn's _Classical Library_, and the
Translator, Mr. Riley, has endeavoured to render the work more inviting
to the scholar, and more intelligible to those who are unversed in
classical literature, by numerous explanatory notes calculated to throw
considerable light upon the origin and meaning of some of the traditions
of heathen mythology.

It will be seen by our advertising columns that Messrs. Puttick and
Simpson exhibit a numerous List of important Sales of Books,
Manuscripts, Autographs, &c., which they have in preparation for the
ensuing season.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

JOURNAL OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF DUBLIN. Vol. I. Part I. (One or
more copies.)

THE ANTIQUARY. 8vo. Edinburgh, 1816. Vols. I. and II.

HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF TWICKENHAM, being the First Part of Parochial
Collections for the County of Middlesex, begun in 1780 by E. Ironside,
Esq., London, 1797. (This work forms 1 vol. of Miscell. Antiquities in
continuation of the Bib. Topographica, and is usually bound in the 10th
Volume.)

RITSON'S ROBIN HOOD. 12mo. London 1795. Vol II. (10_s._ will be given
for a clean copy in boards, or 7_s._ 6_d._ for a clean copy _bound_.)

DR. JOHNSON'S PRAYERS AND MEDITATIONS.

ANNUAL OBITUARY AND BIOGRAPHY. Vol. XXXI.

THEOPHILUS AND PHILODOXUS, or Several Conferences, &c., by Gilbert
Giles, D.D., Oxon, 1674; or the same work republished 1679, under the
title of a "Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist."

PECK'S COMPLETE CATALOGUE OF ALL THE DISCOURSES WRITTEN BOTH FOR AND
AGAINST PAPACY IN THE TIME OF KING JAMES II. 1735. 4to.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

_We are this week compelled to request the indulgence of our
correspondents for the omission of our usual acknowledgement of_ REPLIES
RECEIVED.

J. O. D. M. (Worthing). _Mr. Alison the author of_ THE NEW REFORMATION,
_is not Mr. Alison the author of_ THE HISTORY OF EUROPE.

F. D. _will find the_ "Sermon against Miracle Plays" _in the_ RELIQUAE
ANTIQUAE, vol. ii. p. 42. _There are no collective editions of the
dramatic compositions of Nash or Lyllie._

LLAW GYFFES _is referred to our Number of the 4th Oct., p. 206., where
he will find his Davies Queries duly inserted._

ALBION _in our next; also_ DR. HENRY'S "Notes on Virgil." _We owe an
apology to_ DR. HENRY _for having nodded, and so allowed the word_
impertinent _to pass unerased from a comment upon his Note on_ Servius.
_It is an epithet which certainly ought neither to have been applied to
him, nor admitted into our columns._

_Copies of our_ Prospectus, _according to the suggestion of T. E. H.,
will be forwarded to any correspondent willing to assist us by
circulating them._

VOLS. I., II., _and_ III., _with very copious Indices, may still be had,
price 9s. 6d. each, neatly bound in cloth._

_NOTES AND QUERIES is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers may receive it on Saturday. The subscription for the Stamped
Edition is 10s. 2d. for Six Months, which may be paid by Post-office
Order drawn in favour of our Publisher, MR. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet
Street; to whose care all communications for the Editor should be
addressed._




MESSRS. PUTTICK AND SIMPSON beg to announce that their season for SALES
of LITERARY PROPERTY will COMMENCE on NOVEMBER 1st, and would call
attention to the ensuing List of Sales in preparation by them. In
addressing Executors and others entrusted with the disposal of
Libraries, and collections (however limited or extensive) of
Manuscripts, Autographs, Prints, Picture, Music, Musical Instruments,
Objects of Art and Virtu, and Works connected with Literature, and the
Arts generally, would suggest a Sale by Auction as the readiest and
surest method of obtaining their full value; and conceive that the
central situation of their premises (near St. James Church), their
extensive connexion of more than half a century's standings, and their
prompt settlement of the sale accounts in cash, are advantages that will
not be unappreciated. Messrs. P. & S. will also receive small Parcels of
Books or other Literary Property, and insert them in occasional Sales
with property of a kindred description, thus giving the same advantages
to the possessor of a few Lots as the owner of a large Collection.

  [Star symbol] Libraries Catalogued, Arranged, and Valued for the
  Probate or Legacy Duty, or for Public or Private Sale.

  On Saturday, Nov. 1, a large Collection of VALUABLE BOOKS, removed
  from the Country, including many curious and rare Works, and a
  good selection of Modern Literature. Six days' sale.

  On Wednesday, Nov. 12, EFFECTS of the late STANESBY ALCHORNE,
  Esq., of the Tower, including his Numismatic Library, very
  important MSS. relating to Mint Affairs, Royal and other
  Autographs (30 of Sir Isaac Newton), the celebrated Hydrostatic
  Balance made for the adjustment of the Standard in 1758, a most
  important series of weights, including the original and unique
  Troy Pound, the Collection of Coins and Medals in gold and silver,
  in the first condition, many patterns and proofs, and a well-known
  and very important picture by Murillo.

  On Saturday, Nov. 15, a very extensive and important Collection of
  MANUSCRIPTS, CHARTERS, DEEDS, and other DOCUMENTS, chiefly
  relating to English Country and Family History.

  On Monday, Nov. 17, the LIBRARY of the late RICHARD JONES, Esq.,
  removed from his residence, Chapel Street, Belgrave Square,
  including an excellent Collection of Dramatic and General
  Literature. Four days' sale.

  A Selection of CURIOUS BOOKS AND MANUSCRIPTS of an eminent
  Collector, deceased. Two days' sale.

  A Collection of AUTOGRAPH LETTERS and Documents of considerable
  interest, the property of a well-known Collector relinquishing
  that part of his Collection.

  The concluding portion of the Collection of AUTOGRAPH LETTERS of
  Mons. A. DONNADIEU, comprising, mainly, the period of the first
  French Revolution. Three days' sale.

  The MUSICAL COLLECTIONS of a Gentleman recently deceased,
  including some engraved plates of Copyright Works, Musical
  Instruments, &c.

  The very important and extensive LIBRARY of the COUNT MONDIDIER,
  recently imported, especially rich in Foreign Literature, and
  comprising an extraordinary Collection of Books relating to
  America, Voyages, Travels, and Itineraries, including some of the
  rarest Works in the classes, and many which have been hitherto
  unknown to Bibliographers. Ten days' sale.

  [Star symbol] Catalogues of any of the before-named Collections
  will be sent on application to the Auctioneers, 191. Piccadilly.


Just published, in One Vol. post 8vo., price 7_s._ 6_d._

  MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS. By the REV. E. MANGIN, M.A.

  London: HOPE and CO., Publishers, 16. Great Marlborough Street; by
  whom Books, Pamphlets, Sermons, &c., are printed greatly under the
  usual charges; while in the Publishing Department every endeavour
  is made to promote an extensive sale.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY,

  3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

  Founded A.D. 1842.

  _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

  _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq. Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq. Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

  _Consulting Counsel._--Sir William P. Wood., M.P.,
  Solicitor-General.

  _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

  _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age   l.  _s._  _d._
      17    1   14    4
      22    1   18    8
      27    2    4    5
      32    2   10    8
      37    2   18    6
      42    3    8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


ALMANACKS FOR 1852.

  THE FAMILY ALMANACK AND EDUCATIONAL REGISTER will contain, in
  addition to the more than usual contents of an Almanack for Family
  Use, a list of the Universities of the United Kingdom, with the
  Heads of Houses, Professors, &c. A List of the various Colleges
  connected with the Church of England, Roman Catholics, and various
  Dissenting bodies. Together with a complete List of all the
  Foundation and Grammar Schools, with an Account of the
  Scholarships and Exhibitions attached to them; to which is added
  an Appendix, containing an Account of the Committee of Council on
  Education, and of the various Training Institutions for Teachers;
  mostly compiled from original sources.

  WHITAKER'S CLERGYMAN'S DIARY AND ECCLESIASTICAL CALENDAR, will
  contain a Diary, with Table of Lessons, Collects, &c., and full
  directions for Public Worship for every day in the year, with
  blank spaces for Memoranda: A List of all the Bishops and other
  Dignitaries of the Church, arranged under the order of their
  respective Dioceses; Bishops of the Scottish and American
  Churches; and particular: respecting the Roman Catholic and Greek
  Churches; together with Statistics of the various Religious Sects
  in England; Particulars of the Societies connected with the
  Church; of the Universities, &c. Members of both Houses of
  Convocation, of both Houses of Parliament, the Government, Courts
  of Law, &c. With Instructions to Candidates for Holy Orders; and a
  variety of information useful to all Clergymen. Forming a most
  complete and convenient Pocket-book for Clergymen.

  JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford and London.


LONDON LIBRARY, 12. St. James's Square.--Patron--His Royal Highness
Prince ALBERT.

  This Institution now offers to its members a collection of 60,000
  Volumes, to which additions are constantly making, both in English
  and foreign literature. A reading room is also open for the use of
  the members, supplied with the best English and foreign
  periodicals.

  Terms of admission--entrance fee, 6_l._; annual subscription,
  2_l._; or entrance fee and life subscription, 26_l._

  By order of the Committee.

      September, 1851.

  J. G. COCHRANE, Secretary and Librarian.


THE QUARTERLY REVIEW, No. CLXXVIII., is published THIS DAY.

  CONTENTS:

         I. WIDOW BURNING IN INDIA.
        II. LIFE OF BISHOP KEN.
       III. PURITANISM IN THE HIGHLANDS.
        IV. MIRABEAU AND COUNT DE LA MARCK.
         V. SIR THOMAS BROWNE--WILKIN'S EDITION.
        VI. THE LEXINGTON PAPERS.
       VII. LYELL ON LIFE AND ITS DEVELOPMENT.
      VIII. PAPAL PRETENSIONS.
        IX. REVOLUTIONARY LITERATURE--FRENCH and ENGLISH.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


MURRAY'S READING FOR THE RAIL: or Cheap Books in large readable Type, to
be published occasionally, and varying in Prices from One Shilling and
upwards.

  The aim and object of the publisher, in this Series, is to
  dissemble sound and entertaining information and innocent
  amusement, instead of the trivial, and often immoral, publications
  which are for the most part offered to the notice of Railway
  Readers. He designs to introduce a class of works at once cheap,
  valuable, and instructive, not merely to be read on the Railway,
  and thrown aside at the end of the journey, but such as shall
  deserve a permanent place on the shelves of the Library.

  It will thus form an appropriate sequel to the HOME AND COLONIAL
  LIBRARY.

  Already published.

  1. ESSAYS FROM "THE TIMES." Being a selection from the Literary
  Papers which have appeared in that Journal. Fcap. 8vo. 4s.

  2. THE CHACE. By NIMROD. Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. 1s.

  3. "THE FORTY-FIVE;" or, The Rebellion in Scotland. By LORD MAHON.
  Post 8vo. 3_s._

  To be followed by

  4. LAYARD'S POPULAR ACCOUNT OF NINEVEH. Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 30_s._

  5. THE ROAD. By NIMROD. Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. 1s.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


Just published, price 4_s._ 6_d._

  [Greek: AISCHYLOU HIKETIDES.] AEschyli Supplices. Recensuit F. A.
  PALEY. Editio emendatior.

  Apud J. DEIGHTON, Cantabrigiae. Et WHITTAKER et SOC.; et SIMPKIN et
  SOC., Londini.


This day is published, price 6_s._

  THE HISTORY OF THE JEWS IN SPAIN, from the Time of their
  Settlement in that Country till the Commencement of the present
  Century. Written and illustrated with divers extremely scarce
  Documents, by DON ADOLFO DE CASTRO: Cadiz, 1817. Translated by the
  Rev. EDWARD D. G. M. KIRWAN, M.A., Fellow of King's College,
  Cambridge.

  Cambridge: J. DEIGHTON. London: GEORGE BELL, Fleet Street.


ORIENTAL BOOKS CHEAP.--WESTERGAARD Radices Sanscritae, 4to., Bonnae, 1841,
sd. 14_s._--CASTELLI Lexicon Syriacium, ed. Michaelis, 2 vols. 4to.
Goett 1788, sewed 6_s._ 6_d._; or half bd. calf. 9_s._--WEIL'S
Geschichte der Khalifen, 3 vols. 8vo. (published at 3_l._ 3_s._)
1848-1851, 30_s._--FREYTAG, Lexicon Arabicum, 4to. Halis, 1837
(published at 2_l._ 2_s._) sewed 17_s._ 6_d._--UPHAM'S Sacred Books of
Ceylon and of Buddhism, 3 vols. 8vo. 1833, bds. 25_s._--RODRIGUEZ,
Grammaire Japonaise et Supplement, 8vo. Paris, 1825-1826. 12_s._--XII
PROPHETAE MINORES, Coptice et Latine, ed. Tattam, 8vo. Oxon. 1836, bds.
6_s._--Tattam's Egyptian Grammar, 8vo. 1830, bds. rare, 10_s._

  [Star symbol] New Catalogues of Cheap and Rare Books in all the
  Languages of the World, gratis on application.

  BERNARD QUARITCH, Second-hand Foreign Bookseller, 16. Castle
  Street, Leicester Square.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride in the City of London: and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, October 18. 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-IV]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 88  | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No. 89  | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No. 90  | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No. 91  | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 92  | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No. 93  | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No. 94  | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No. 95  | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No. 96  | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number
103, October 18, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, VOL. IV ***

***** This file should be named 38864.txt or 38864.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/8/6/38864/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
