The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seven Periods of English Architecture, by
Edmund Sharpe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Seven Periods of English Architecture
       Defined and Illustrated

Author: Edmund Sharpe

Illustrator: T. Austin

Release Date: February 14, 2012 [EBook #38879]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN PERIODS OF ENGLISH ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)











THE

SEVEN PERIODS

OF

ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE.




THE
SEVEN PERIODS
OF
ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE
DEFINED AND ILLUSTRATED.

BY
EDMUND SHARPE, M.A.,
ARCHITECT.

_TWENTY STEEL ENGRAVINGS AND WOODCUTS._

THIRD EDITION.

[Illustration]

E. & F. N. SPON, 125, STRAND, LONDON.
NEW YORK: 12, CORTLANDT STREET.
1888.




PREFACE.


"We have been so long accustomed to speak of our National Architecture
in the terms, and according to the classification bequeathed to us by
Mr. Rickman, and those terms and that classification are so well
understood and have been so universally adopted, that any proposal to
supersede the one, or to modify the other, requires somewhat more than
a mere apology. To disturb a Nomenclature of long standing, to set
aside terms in familiar use, and to set up others in their place which
are strange, and therefore at first unintelligible, involves an
interruption of that facility with which we are accustomed to
communicate with one another on any given subject, that is only to be
justified by reasons of a cogent and satisfactory nature.

"The sufficiency of Mr. Rickman's Nomenclature and Divisions, and their
suitableness at the time and for the purpose for which they were made,
are best evidenced by the fact that, although the attempts to supersede
them have been both numerous and persevering, they have remained for
nearly half a century the principal guide to the Architectural Student;
and Mr. Rickman's 'Attempt to discriminate the Styles of Architecture
in England,' is still the Text-book from which the greater part of the
popular works of the present day have been compiled.

"In referring, however, to these attempts to supersede Mr. Rickman's
system, it is proper to remark that one observation applies to the
whole of them;--although they propose to change the Nomenclature of his
different styles, or to subdivide them, his main division of English
Architecture into four great Periods or Styles, is adopted by all, and
still remains undisturbed. No point, therefore, has been hitherto
proposed to be gained by these alterations, beyond a change of name;
and this may be taken as a sufficient reason why none of these attempts
have been successful: men are not willing to unlearn a term with which
they are familiar, however inappropriate, in order to learn another,
which, after all, means the same thing.

"Although, however, Mr. Rickman's simple division of Church
Architecture into four Periods, or Styles, may perhaps have been the
one best suited to his time, and to the elementary state of the
knowledge of the subject possessed by the best informed Archaeologists
of his day, it may with propriety be questioned how far such a division
is suited to the exigencies of writers of the present day, or to the
present advanced tastes of knowledge on the subject.

"Simplicity was doubtless the object Mr. Rickman had in view in his
division of English Architecture into four Styles only. This is a
recommendation, however, which can hardly be said to hold good at the
present day: it behoves us to consider well, perhaps more especially at
the present moment, whether Mr. Rickman's system fulfils all the
conditions essential to one calculated for popular and universal use;
and whether we should therefore seek to confirm and to perpetuate it,
or whether the time has not arrived for the adoption of a more detailed
and accurate division of the long and noble series of buildings which
contain the History of our National Architecture from the Heptarchy to
the Reformation."[A]

No one can enter into an inquiry of this kind without eventually coming
to the conclusion that there are two large classes of Buildings
containing distinctive marks of peculiarity of character, which find no
place in Mr. Rickman's system, but which nevertheless, from the number
and importance of their examples, are pre-eminently entitled to
separate classification. These two classes are those to which the
buildings enumerated at pp. 24, and 31, 32 respectively belong, and
which cannot, without circumlocution, be described in any of the terms
prescribed by Mr. Rickman.

As regards the earlier of these two classes, the extent to which these
distinctive peculiarities of detail exist, will perhaps at first
scarcely be credited, and proofs of a much more extensive and
satisfactory character than are contained in the following pages, or
could be looked for in an elementary work of this nature, will probably
be required before its title to separate classification will be
universally conceded.

As regards the later of these classes, the same difficulty does not
exist. Mr. Rickman divided the whole of the buildings of Pointed
Architecture into three Styles or Classes, which he denominated "Early
English," "Decorated," "Perpendicular." The titles of the two last he
professed to derive from the character of their windows, conceiving, no
doubt justly, that no part of a Gothic building exhibits peculiarities
of Style in so prominent and characteristic a manner as its windows. In
strict accordance with this rule, which may be assumed to be a correct
and valuable one, it has already been shown,[B] that had Mr. Rickman
gone a step further and classed the whole of the buildings of Pointed
Architecture according to the forms of their Windows under _four_
heads, instead of _three_, he would have obtained a classification
equally simple, but more intelligible and convenient; he would have
obviated much that is confused and indefinite, and therefore perplexing
to the Architectural Student, in his description of buildings which
belong to the class to which we are now referring, and would have
enabled us to compare the buildings of our own Country with those of
corresponding character, and nearly contemporaneous date on the
Continent, in a manner that would have established an analogy between
them, which, according to the present classification, has no apparent
existence.

The inability to describe, or speak of any of the buildings belonging
to either of these two classes, including some of the finest in the
kingdom, otherwise than as examples of an intermediate and anomalous
character, exhibiting the peculiarities partly of one style and partly
of another, but belonging specifically to neither, must be admitted to
be a serious defect in all hitherto recognised systems of Architectural
Nomenclature; and there are probably few Architecturalists who have not
frequently felt the inconvenience arising from the want of more
explicit and definite terms than at present exist, by means of which
to describe the buildings of these two classes.

It is to remedy these defects, and to provide for this want, that the
following division of the History of our National Architecture into
Seven Periods instead of Four, is now formally proposed, under the
belief that some such Division as this, by whatever terms it may be
characterised, will sooner or later force itself into universal
adoption. With respect to the terms themselves it would be unreasonable
to expect the same unanimity; the following considerations, however,
would seem to bring their selection within narrow limits. It would
appear, in the first place, unadvisable to designate any of the later
Periods, except the last, by any of the terms hitherto in use, as
tending probably to confusion and misapprehension, from the difficulty
of limiting their signification to the extent proposed in the minds of
those who have been accustomed to use them in a more ample sense: and
to retain the last, if the others be abandoned, and a more appropriate
or analogous term can be found, appears to be still less desirable.

At the same time it is much to be desired that the terms we use should
be not altogether strange, and, if possible, self-explanatory. These
two conditions are such as to render it difficult to find terms such as
to be in all respects perfectly satisfactory; and perhaps no system of
Nomenclature could be found so perfect as to be entirely free from
objection.

The reasons which have caused the adoption of the terms made use of in
the following system, are fully given in their proper place, and it
only remains for the Author to notice that the terms "Curvilinear" and
"Rectilinear" were first proposed by a writer in the "British Critic,"
some years ago, as a substitute for Mr. Rickman's terms "Decorated" and
"Perpendicular;" and in a sense, therefore, as regards the former of
these terms, essentially different from that in which it is here
proposed to be applied. The rest must be more or less familiar to all
who have been of late engaged in the study.

The Author desires to take this opportunity of acknowledging his
obligations to Mr. T. Austin, by whom all the subjects, with one
exception, have been measured and drawn from the buildings themselves;
as well as to Mr. G. B. Smith, by whom the whole have been engraved on
steel, for the accuracy and appearance of the principal illustrations.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: The preceding paragraphs, distinguished by inverted
commas, formed part of the introduction to a Paper "On the Geometrical
Period of English Church Architecture," read by the Author at the
Lincoln meeting of the Archaeological Institute in July 1848.]

[Footnote B: "Treatise on the Rise and Progress of Window Tracery," by
E. Sharpe, M.A. Van Voorst, London.]




CONTENTS.


                         PAGE
  CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION               1


  CHAPTER II.

CLASSIFICATION             3


  CHAPTER III.

COMPARTMENTS              13


  CHAPTER IV.

SAXON PERIOD              15


  CHAPTER V.

NORMAN PERIOD             17


  CHAPTER VI.

TRANSITIONAL PERIOD       21


  CHAPTER VII.

LANCET PERIOD             25


  CHAPTER VIII.

GEOMETRICAL PERIOD        29


  CHAPTER IX.

CURVILINEAR PERIOD        33


  CHAPTER X.

RECTILINEAR PERIOD        37




LIST OF PLATES.


NORMAN PERIOD.

_Exterior_      ELY CATHEDRAL              Nave.

_Interior_       "      "                    "

_Exterior_      PETERBOROUGH CATHEDRAL     Choir.

_Interior_           "          "            "


TRANSITIONAL PERIOD.

_Exterior_      RIPON CATHEDRAL            Choir.

_Interior_        "       "                  "


LANCET PERIOD.

_Exterior_      ELY CATHEDRAL              Presbytery.

_Interior_       "      "                      "

_Exterior_      LINCOLN CATHEDRAL          Nave.

_Interior_         "        "                "

_Exterior_         "        "              Choir.

_Interior_         "        "                "


GEOMETRICAL PERIOD.

_Exterior_      LINCOLN CATHEDRAL          Presbytery.

_Interior_         "        "                   "

_Exterior_      LICHFIELD CATHEDRAL        Nave.

_Interior_          "         "              "


CURVILINEAR PERIOD.

_Exterior_      ELY CATHEDRAL              Choir.

_Interior_       "      "                    "


RECTILINEAR PERIOD.

_Exterior_      WINCHESTER CATHEDRAL       Nave.

_Interior_          "          "             "




THE SEVEN PERIODS
OF
ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE.




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION.


To present at a single glance a comprehensive view of the History of
English Church Architecture from the Heptarchy to the Reformation, and
to do this in a manner, which, without taxing too seriously the memory
of the student, may enable him to fix in his mind the limits, and the
general outline of the inquiry he is about to enter upon, is the object
of the present treatise.

Instead therefore of entering, as is usual in elementary works of this
nature, into a detailed account of all the parts of an Ecclesiastical
structure, a certain portion only of such a building has for this
purpose been selected, and so exhibited in the garb in which it
appeared at successive intervals of time, as to present to the reader a
means of comparison that will enable him readily to apprehend the
gradual change of form through which it passed from the Eleventh to the
Sixteenth Centuries, and at once to recognise the leading
characteristics of the several Periods into which it is here proposed
to divide the History of our National Architecture. Having thus fixed
these leading characteristics in his mind, he will then be in a
condition to follow us hereafter, if he pleases, into the detail of the
whole subject, and to become familiar with those niceties of
distinction, the detection of which--escaping, as they do, the eye of
the general observer--contributes so materially to the enjoyment of the
study, and a perfect acquaintance with which is so absolutely essential
to a correct understanding of the true History of the Art.

That this mode of approaching the study of this subject is a convenient
one, will probably be admitted by those who may remember the
difficulties they encountered, in their early attempts to acquire a
general conception of the scheme of the History of Church Architecture,
as given in most of the manuals now in use; and the complexity of
detail in which they found themselves immediately involved on the very
threshold of their inquiry.

It has been the practice in most elementary works on Church
Architecture to derive the illustrations of the subject, indifferently
from the smaller and the larger buildings of the Kingdom; and by
implication to assign an equal authority to both. It will be readily
admitted, however, that the History of an Art is to be gathered from
its principal Monuments, and not from those the design or execution of
which may have been entrusted to other than the ablest masters of the
Period: in the choice, therefore, of the examples which have been
selected to illustrate the series of changes which are described in the
following pages, reference has been made principally to the great
Cathedral, Abbey, and Collegiate Churches of the Kingdom, and
occasionally only to some of the larger Parish Churches whose size or
importance would seem to bring them under the above denomination.




CHAPTER II.

CLASSIFICATION.


Church Architecture in England, from its earliest existence down to the
Sixteenth Century, was in a state of constant progress, or transition,
and this progress appears to have been carried on, with certain
exceptions in different parts of the country, very nearly
simultaneously. It follows from this circumstance, first, That it is
impossible to divide our National Architecture correctly into any
number of distinct _Orders_ or _Styles_; and secondly, That any
Division of its History into a given number of _Periods_, must
necessarily be an arbitrary one. It is nevertheless absolutely
essential for the purpose of conveniently describing the long series of
noble monuments which remain to us, that we should adopt some system of
chronological arrangement, which may enable us to group, and to
classify them in a distinct and intelligible manner: and although no
broad lines of demarcation in this connected series are discernible--so
gradual was the change--yet so rapid and so complete was it also, that
a period of fifty years did not elapse without a material alteration in
the form and fashion of every detail of a building.

Now it will be readily conceived that, even in the midst of this
continual change, certain favourite forms would remain in use longer
than others; and that this circumstance may possibly afford us the
opportunity of which we are in search; and enable us in the adoption
of any such arbitrary Division so to define and to characterise the
Architecture of its different Periods, as to render this Historical
Survey and our future descriptions sufficiently intelligible.

One principal Division of Church Architecture has been recognised and
adopted by all who have studied and written on the subject; that,
namely, which separates Ecclesiastical Buildings into two classes, in
the first or earlier of which the _circular arch_ was exclusively
employed; and in the second or later, the _pointed arch_ alone was
used. To the former of these two Classes, the term ROMANESQUE has been
given, and to the latter, the term GOTHIC.

This division is so simple, and at the same time so strongly marked,
that without entering into a discussion as to the value or propriety of
the terms themselves, and contenting ourselves with the fact that they
are already in general use, we can have little hesitation in adopting
this primary division as the groundwork of our system.

At the same time, it is manifest, that, for purposes of description, it
is not sufficiently minute; and that a further subdivision is
necessary: it is also clear, that it excludes a large class of
buildings that were erected during the period which intervened between
the first appearance of the pointed arch, and the final disappearance
of the circular arch.

As regards the buildings of the Romanesque Period, no subdivision of
them can be more satisfactory than that which has already been for some
time in use, and which divides them into those which were built before
and after the Conquest, and designates them accordingly SAXON and
NORMAN.

As regards the buildings of that Intermediate Period just mentioned, to
none can the term TRANSITIONAL so aptly be applied as to those erected
under influences created by that remarkable contest between two great
antagonistic principles, which, after having been carried on for a
period of nearly fifty years, terminated in a complete revolution in
the style of building at the end of the Twelfth Century.

Lastly, as regards the Gothic Period, no subdivision of it appears to
be so natural and convenient, as that which is suggested by the four
principal changes of form through which the Window passed from the
Thirteenth to the Fifteenth Centuries.

These changes have been fully illustrated by the author in a former
work,[C] and will be therefore only briefly recapitulated here.

For half a century or more, after the disappearance of the circular
arch, the window appeared under a form, which from its general
resemblance to a _lancet_, in its length, breadth, and principal
proportions, rather than from any uniform acuteness in the shape of its
head, led to the universal application of that term to all the windows
of this Period. This observation applies equally to the window whether
used singly, or in groups of two, three, five, or seven; and equally
also to the later as to the earlier examples of this Period.

[Illustration: TEMPLE CHURCH.]

It is proposed therefore to denominate this the LANCET PERIOD of Gothic
Architecture.

Towards the close of this Period the practice of combining a plurality
of Lancets, under one arch, or hood-moulding--and of piercing the solid
spaces that intervened between the heads of these lancets and the
underside of this arch in various ornamental ways, became common; by
the adoption of which, a group of several lancets was converted into a
single window of several lights. Out of this practice arose a novel and
beautiful discovery; this was the invention of _Tracery_.

[Illustration: CROFT.]

For nearly three-quarters of a century after its introduction the
Tracery of windows contained forms in which that simplest of all
Geometrical figures, the _Circle_, was principally conspicuous: and
although, in the latter part of this Period, the Circle does not obtain
the same prominent place, in the centre of the window-head, and as the
principal feature of the design, that is generally allotted to it in
the earlier examples, yet the important part that it bears in the
construction of the design of even the whole of these later examples,
fully justifies the application of the term, already pretty generally
in use, to this class of windows; and entitles us to call this Period
after that figure, and "par excellence," the GEOMETRICAL PERIOD.

[Illustration: HOWDEN.]

At the close of this Period a feature began to make its way into the
subordinate parts of the tracery, which had already shown itself for
some time previously in the mouldings, and which eventually exercised a
most important influence on the Architecture of the next half-century.

This feature is the curve which mathematicians call the _curve of
contra-flexure_, and which is known amongst architecturalists as the
_Ogee_.

[Illustration: WILSFORD.]

The flowing nature of this curve imparted to the Tracery a grace and an
ease which the rigid outline of the Circle denied it: and affords us a
strong point of contrast whereby to distinguish the Architecture of the
two Periods. The sinuosity of form which characterises the tracery,
pervades also the mouldings, the carved work, and all the details of
this Period, and enables us to designate it appropriately as the
CURVILINEAR PERIOD.

[Illustration: WINCHESTER.]

In the latter part of this Period, a horizontal bar, or _transom_, as
it is called, was occasionally used in the lower part of the window.
Whether this bar was introduced for the purpose of strengthening the
mullions, or for the sake of proportion, it speedily grew into frequent
use. At the same time also vertical lines presented themselves
occasionally in the Tracery; a new principle, in fact, had made its
appearance, which rapidly overran not only the windows, but the
doorways, the arcades, and every part of the building. The straight
line, when once introduced, quickly superseded the curved line; square
panels covered the walls; angularity of form pervaded even the
mouldings and minor details, and to the round finish, the square edge
was preferred.

This, the last of the four Periods of Gothic Architecture which
extended over a term of nearly two Centuries, we propose accordingly to
call the RECTILINEAR PERIOD.

The History of our National Architecture will thus be divided into
Seven Periods, the order and duration of which are as follows:--

                      ROMANESQUE.

                                 A.D.    A.D.           YEARS.

  I. SAXON PERIOD           from ---- to 1066, prevailed  --

 II. NORMAN PERIOD            "  1066  " 1145,     "      79

III. TRANSITIONAL PERIOD      "  1145  " 1190,     "      45


                        GOTHIC.

 IV. LANCET PERIOD            "  1190  " 1245,     "      55

  V. GEOMETRICAL PERIOD       "  1245  " 1315,     "      70

 VI. CURVILINEAR PERIOD       "  1315  " 1360,     "      45

VII. RECTILINEAR PERIOD       "  1360  " 1550,     "     190


[Illustration: INTERIOR COMPARTMENT.]

CLERE-STORY.

27 Boss.
26 Vaulting Ribs (Transverse).
25    do.        (Longitudinal).
24 Vault.
23 Sill of C. Window.
22 Mullion of   do.
21 Tracery of   do.
20 Arch-mouldings of C. Arch.
19 Bases of Jamb of      do.
18 Capitals of           do.
17 Jamb-mouldings of     do.
16 Clere-story String.


BLIND-STORY.
(Triforium.)

15 Capitals of Vaulting Shaft.
14 Tracery of Triforium.
13 Triforium-Arch.
12 Bases of T. Piers.
11 Capitals of  do.
10 Pier of T. (Secondary).
 9    do.     (Primary).
 8 Triforium String.


GROUND-STORY.

7 Corbel.
6 Vaulting-Shaft.
5 Pier-Arch.
4  do. Band.
3  do. Base.
2  do. Capital.
1 Pier.


[Illustration: EXTERIOR COMPARTMENT.]

CLERE-STORY.

28 Parapet.
27 Cornice.
26 Clere-story Buttress.
25 Flying Buttress.
24 Tracery of C. Window.
23 Window Arch.
22 Mullions of C. Window.
21 Sill of          do.
20 Jambs of         do.
19 Weather Table.


AISLE COMPARTMENT.

18 Aisle Roof.
17 Capping to Buttress.
16 Parapet.
15 Cornice.
14 Gurgoyle.
13 Canopied Set-off.
12 Plain Set-off.
11 Tracery.
10 Window Arch.
 9 Mullion.
 8 Sill.
 7 Bases of Window Shafts.
 6 Capitals of   do.
 5 Jambs.
 4 Canopied Niche.
 3 String-Course.
 2 Buttress.
 1 Base-Course.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote C: "Treatise on the Rise and Progress of Window Tracery." Van
Voorst, London.]




CHAPTER III.

EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR COMPARTMENTS.


The most perfect type of a church built in England, during the best
ages of Church Architecture, may be said to contain the following
essentials:--

    1. The Ground Plan is after the form of the Latin Cross, and
    is divisible _longitudinally_ into three portions; namely,

        THE CHOIR,
        THE TRANSEPTS,
        THE NAVE.

    2. The Choir and the Nave, and occasionally the Transepts,
    are divided, by means of columns and arches, _transversely_
    into three portions, consisting of the

        CENTRE AISLE,
        NORTH AISLE,
        SOUTH AISLE.

    3. The MAIN WALL of each of the first-mentioned separate
    portions of the building is divisible, in the interior
    _vertically_ into three portions, or Stories, consisting of

        THE GROUND-STORY,
        THE TRIFORIUM OR BLIND-STORY,
        THE CLERE-STORY.

Now on viewing any of these Main Walls of a building, whether on the
inside, or the outside, it will be at once seen that they consist, in
their entire length, of a series of single and separate portions, or
_Compartments_, tied together, and connected by the horizontal lines,
or String courses, which traverse them from end to end; and that each
of these single Compartments embodies within itself the spirit of the
whole design, and may be said to represent, individually, the MAIN IDEA
of the Building.

It is this portion of such a building then--a single Compartment of the
Exterior and Interior of the Main Walls of the Choir or Nave, and its
adjacent Aisle--that we have selected for the purpose of instituting
that comparison which will enable us to fix and define the
characteristics of the Seven Periods of English Architecture.

Neglecting, therefore, for the present, the Gable Ends, the Towers and
Turrets, the Porches, the Doorways, the Chapels, the Cloisters, and all
the other adjuncts of an Ecclesiastical Building, and bestowing our
entire attention upon these Exterior and Interior Compartments, we will
proceed at once to a comparison of their several parts, and consider in
order the mode of treatment they received at the hands of the builders,
of each of these Seven Periods, commencing with the earliest and
descending to the latest.




CHAPTER IV.

THE SAXON PERIOD.

A.D. ---- TO A.D. 1066.


Inasmuch as there does not remain to us a single Exterior or Interior
Compartment in any Cathedral or Conventual Church of genuine Saxon
Architecture, the comparative illustration of this Period is rendered
impossible.

A few Piers and Arches exist indeed, in all probability, in the
Churches of BRIXWORTH in Northamptonshire, St. Michael's at ST. ALBANS,
and REPTON in Derbyshire; but they differ considerably in their
character from one another, and as widely probably in their date. We
have also a few Chancel and Tower arches left, which appear to belong
to this Period; as well as some singular and interesting Towers, a few
Doorways and Windows, and some considerable portions of masonry.
Altogether, however, these remains are not such as to enable us to
define, with any degree of certainty, the nature and character of the
_Main Walls_ of a Saxon Cathedral, and are, therefore, not available
for our present purpose.


BUILDINGS

OF

THE SAXON PERIOD.

BRIXWORTH        All Saints' Church          Nave, Tower.
REPTON           St. Wistan's Church         Crypt, Chancel.
BARNACK          St. John's Church           Tower.
BARTON           St. Peter's Church          Tower.
EARL'S BARTON    All Saints' Church          Tower.
WHITTINGHAM      St. Bartholomew's Church    Tower and Pier-arch.
CAMBRIDGE        St. Benet's Church          Tower.
SOMPTING         Parish Church               Tower.
DEERHURST        Holy Trinity Church         Tower.
CORHAMPTON       Parish Church               Nave.
STANTON LACY     St. Peter's Church          Nave.
ST. ALBANS       St. Michael's Church        Nave.
STOW             St. Mary's Church           Transepts.
WORTH            Parish Church               Nave, Chancel.
WING             All Saints' Church          Chancel.




CHAPTER V.

NORMAN PERIOD.


PRINCIPAL CHARACTERISTIC.

THE UNIVERSAL USE OF THE CIRCULAR ARCH IN EVERY PART OF A BUILDING
THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE PERIOD.


_Exterior Compartment._

The walls of a Norman building are usually strong and massive, and
built of small stones. They have a plain BASE-COURSE, of little
projection, and are generally finished above with a CORBEL-TABLE,
consisting sometimes of a series of small arches, on rude heads, and
sometimes of a projecting horizontal table resting on a series of
rudely sculptured blocks. Upon this Corbel-table is a plain PARAPET and
COPING where these are left, which is rarely the case.

The compartments are divided by a shallow BUTTRESS or PILASTER STRIP.

The WINDOWS are low and broad, and have usually a single shaft set in
an angular recess, carrying a cubical capital and a single roll.

The STRING-COURSES, when not plain, have frequently indented ornaments
of different kinds--such as the _billet_, the _saw-tooth_, the _star_,
and the _chevron_.

The CLERE-STORY WINDOWS, in the larger and richer buildings, are
usually placed in an arcade, consisting of three or more arches, of
which the centre one, filled by the window, is the largest.


_Interior Compartment._

The proportions of the interior are invariably heavy and massive.

The PIERS consist either of a stout cylindrical column, or of a
rectangular mass, having semicircular shafts attached to its different
faces. They are sometimes, when circular, scored and ornamented with
zig-zag, spiral, and other mouldings.

The CAPITALS are formed of a cubical block, rounded off on the lower
side from the square to the circle, and are ordinarily of a heavy
cumbrous character, and sometimes ornamented with rude sculpture of
leaves and animals, carved in slight relief on the surface of the
block.

The PIER-ARCHES, in early examples, are perfectly plain, and square
edged, without mouldings or ornament; but more frequently they carry
one or more heavy rolls on the angle of each order of the arch; and are
often ornamented richly with concentric rows of chevron, billet, and
other Norman ornaments.

The VAULTING or ROOF-SHAFT is usually a semicircular shaft rising from
the floor--on the face of every alternate Pier--to the springing of the
vault or roof.

In the earlier buildings the TRIFORIUM is generally occupied by one
large arch, of somewhat less span and height than the pier-arch: but in
the later examples, this arch is generally subdivided into two, and
later still, into four small arches, carried on single shafts; the
capitals, arch-mouldings, and other details, being all on a smaller
scale, but of similar character, to those of the Ground-story.

In most Norman buildings of large size, the Triforium forms a very
important part of the design of the Interior.

The CLERE-STORY in nearly all large buildings carries a gallery made in
the thickness of the wall, which passes between the Clere-story Window
and the inner face of the _Main Wall_. This inner face is accordingly
carried on one or more arches. In Norman buildings, this Clere-story
arcade usually consists of three arches, of which the middle one is the
largest, and corresponds with the window. In some examples, this middle
arch is stilted above the others, by being lifted on a second small
shaft on each side, standing on the lower one which carries the side
arches.

In almost all buildings of importance, an ARCADE is carried along the
walls of the Church below the side-aisle windows. In Norman buildings
this usually consists of a series of single or intersecting circular
arches, resting on small cushion capitals on single shafts.

The side-aisles are usually covered with a plain circular quadripartite
VAULT, having sometimes a diagonal rib, as well as a transverse band,
moulded with single roll mouldings.


PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS

OF

THE NORMAN PERIOD.

TOWER OF LONDON    White Chapel.
ST. ALBANS         Abbey Church        Transepts, Nave.
ROCHESTER          Cathedral Church    Nave.
WINCHESTER         Cathedral Church    Transepts.
HEREFORD           Cathedral Church    Nave.
ELY                Cathedral Church    Transepts.
LINCOLN            Cathedral Church    West End.
CARLISLE           Cathedral Church    Nave.
SELBY              Abbey Church        Transepts, Nave.
GLOUCESTER         Cathedral Church    Nave.
CHICHESTER         Cathedral Church    Nave.
WALTHAM            Abbey Church        Choir.
SOUTHWELL          Abbey Church        Transepts, Nave.
DURHAM             Cathedral Church    Choir.
CHRISTCHURCH       Priory Church       Transepts, Nave.
NORWICH            Cathedral Church    Choir.
TEWKESBURY         Abbey Church        Nave.
DURHAM             Cathedral Church    Nave.
LINDISFARNE        Abbey Church        Transepts, Nave.
ROMSEY             Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts.
WINCHESTER         Cathedral Church    Tower, Transepts.
ELY                Cathedral Church    Nave.
PETERBOROUGH       Cathedral Church    Choir.
NORWICH            Cathedral Church    Nave.
CASTLE ACRE        Priory Church       Nave.




CHAPTER VI.

TRANSITIONAL PERIOD.


PRINCIPAL CHARACTERISTIC.

THE CONTEMPORANEOUS USE, IN THE SAME BUILDING, OF CIRCULAR AND POINTED
ARCHES.


_Exterior Compartment._

On the outside the usual prevalence of the circular arch in the WINDOWS
and DOORWAYS, gives still a Norman character to the building; but the
BASE-COURSE and BUTTRESSES begin to show greater projection, and the
walls are lightened in proportion.

The invariable Billet moulding disappears from the STRING-COURSES.

The WINDOWS are more elongated in form, and have lighter shafts.

The circular CORBEL-TABLE gives place to a regularly moulded CORNICE,
carried on a series of blocks of uniform profile; and a sloped COPING
covers the PARAPET.

In some of the latest examples indeed, the BUTTRESSES have SET-OFFS,
and, rising above the parapet, have also a pyramidal Capping.

An increasing lightness of proportion is perceptible in all parts of
the buildings of this Period.


_Interior Compartment._

Except in the earliest examples of this Period, the heavy cylindrical
column disappears; and the PIER consists of a lighter mass of
semicircular shafts, and square edges; occasionally also, a shaft
having a pear-shaped section is substituted for the semicircular shaft.

The CAPITALS consist still of a square block, moulded down to the
circular form below; with this difference, however, that the lower part
of the capital is hollowed down to the circle, instead of being left as
in the Norman Period, full and round; the latter showing a _convex_,
and the former a _concave_ profile. Both the larger and the smaller
Capitals have also very frequently an ornament peculiar to the Period,
which consists of a small volute, forming the curled end of a plain
leaf, which enfolds the bell of the Capital. This volute may be looked
upon as one of the most characteristic features of the Period. The
abacus of the capital is invariably square in plan, and has its upper
edge (except in a few of the latest examples) also square in section.

In the later buildings of the Period, foliage, exhibiting considerable
freedom of design, is occasionally to be seen.

The _Pointed Arch_ first made its appearance in the Transitional
Period; in the earlier buildings it is used in the _Arches of
Construction_ only, or those constituting the framework of the
building, such as the Pier-arches and the Arches of the Vaulting, and
of the Crossing; whilst the Circular Arch is used in the _Arches of
Decoration_ only, or those which may be said to constitute the
panel-work, such as the windows, the arcades, the doorways, and such
like. In the later buildings of the Period, however, the Pointed Arch
is frequently found in some of the smaller arches also.

The PIER-ARCHES, therefore, are almost invariably pointed, in the
earlier examples obtusely, and in the later examples often acutely; the
mouldings, which have become much lighter, are few and plain; carrying
usually a roll, or a pear-shaped moulding, at the angle of each order
of the arch: they frequently have no HOOD-MOULDING. All the usual rich
ornaments of the Norman Style disappear, but the Chevron occurs
occasionally, and another ornamental moulding somewhat resembling it,
but peculiar to this Period, is frequently seen.

The STRING-COURSES do not usually carry any ornament, and have commonly
a simple section peculiar to the Period.

The VAULTING or ROOF-SHAFT has usually a pear-shaped section.

The TRIFORIUM-ARCADE has usually Circular Arches, but in the later
examples the two forms of arch are frequently intermixed. The Shafts
are of a much lighter character, and carry arches of simple mouldings.

The Pointed Arch, if found anywhere in the arches of Decoration, is
generally to be seen in the CLERE-STORY, the highest part of the
building, and consequently the latest in point of construction.

Plain pointed quadripartite VAULTING not unfrequently covers the
side-aisles, and sometimes the centre-aisle.

The contrast presented by the discriminate use of the two forms of arch
before mentioned, is sometimes strikingly exhibited in the side-aisles,
where it is by no means uncommon to find a large plain circular window
placed immediately under an acutely pointed wall rib, forming part of
the contemporaneous pointed VAULTING of the side-aisle.


PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS

OF

THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD.

MALMESBURY       Abbey Church        Nave.
NORTHAMPTON      St. Sepulchre's     Church Nave.
FOUNTAINS        Abbey Church        Transepts, Nave.
KIRKSTALL        Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts, Nave.
BUILDWAS         Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts, Nave.
KELSO            Abbey Church        West Transept.
ELY              Cathedral Church    West Transept.
PETERBOROUGH     Cathedral Church    West Transept.
ST. CROSS        Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts.
FURNESS          Abbey Church        Transepts, Nave.
LONDON           Temple Church       Nave.
RIPON            Cathedral Church    Choir, Transepts, Nave.
BRINKBURN        Cathedral Church    Choir, Transepts, Nave.
LLANTHONY        Abbey Church        Choir, Nave.
OXFORD           Cathedral Church    Choir, Transepts, Nave.
DURHAM           Cathedral Church    Galilee.
ROCHE            Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts, Nave.
NEW SHOREHAM     Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts.
SELBY            Abbey Church        Nave.
BYLAND           Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts, Nave.
JEDBURGH         Abbey Church        Nave.
HARTLEPOOL       Parish Church       Chancel, Nave.
GLASTONBURY      Abbey Church        Choir, Transepts, Nave.
GLASTONBURY      Abbey Church        St. Joseph's Chapel.
CANTERBURY       Cathedral Church    Choir.
CANTERBURY       Cathedral Church    Trinity Chapel, Becket's crown.
CHICHESTER       Cathedral Church    Choir, North Chapel.
WELLS            Cathedral Church    Transepts, Nave.




CHAPTER VII.

LANCET PERIOD.


PRINCIPAL CHARACTERISTIC.

THE LANCET WINDOW USED SINGLY, IN COUPLETS AND TRIPLETS, AND ARRANGED
IN GROUPS OF FOUR, FIVE, AND SEVEN.


_Exterior Compartment._

The BUTTRESSES have considerable projection, are divided into stages,
and have usually a plain pyramidal capping, and sometimes a plain
pinnacle.

The BASE-COURSE Has also more projection and importance, and its upper
members are frequently moulded.

FLYING-BUTTRESSES often span the roof of the side-aisle to support the
main vaulting.

The WINDOWS in the earliest examples stand alone as single windows;
they are also sometimes placed singly in a continuous arcade; later
still in triplets under one arch, the centre one being the tallest, and
in some instances two lancets are coupled under one arch,--the spandrel
between them being frequently pierced with a quatrefoil, or other
opening.

The PARAPET has occasionally sunk ornaments upon it, and is carried by
a cornice having a few deep mouldings, with a flower, or other ornament
at intervals, or by a trefoiled Corbel-table, or by a series of
blocks.


_Interior Compartment._

The PIERS consist most commonly of a cluster of shafts, disposed in a
circular form. These shafts sometimes stand entirely free, and surround
a large circular or octagonal column, and are banded in the middle.

The CAPITALS have sometimes one or two rows of stiff projecting leaves,
of a bulbous form, which appear to grow out of the neck of the capital,
and sometimes a single or double series of minute deeply cut mouldings;
the square form of capital, both in the plan and in the upper edge of
the abacus, entirely disappears.

The BASES consist almost invariably of a deep small hollow, set between
two rounds, standing on a square-edged plinth; and greatly resemble the
ordinary Attic base.

The PIER-ARCHES usually show three orders, of small deeply cut
mouldings of alternate rounds and hollows, the number and depth of
which give an exceedingly rich and characteristic appearance to all the
arches of this Period. The peculiar ornament called the _dog-tooth_,
which is formed by hollowing out the sides of a series of contiguous
pyramids notched out of an angular projection, occurs constantly in the
arch-mouldings, as well as in almost every other part of buildings
where an opportunity of carving it presents itself.

The HOOD-MOULDING, resting on small and elegant heads or bosses, is an
almost invariable accompaniment of arches of every description.

The VAULTING-SHAFT sometimes rises from the floor in front of the
principal Pier,--but more usually from a corbel-shaft, resting on a
large ornamental corbel, placed immediately over the pier; it consists
generally of a triple cluster of small elegant shafts, with hollows
between them.

The TRIFORIUM-ARCH generally covers two smaller arches; but
occasionally, a pair of principal Triforium-arches cover two pair of
subordinate arches, which are sometimes plain, and sometimes trefoiled;
the spandrel wall above them being ornamented with foliage, or a sunk
trefoil, and sometimes pierced through with a quatrefoil or other
opening. Sometimes, indeed, one large primary arch covers two secondary
arches, which again contain two small tertiary arches; thus fully
developing the principle of subordination in this part of the building.

The principal TRIFORIUM-PIERS generally exhibit a row of light shafts
on the face of a solid pier, carrying arch-mouldings of three orders,
and separated sometimes by a line of dog-tooth moulding, or stiff
foliage.

The _secondary piers_ are usually single, double, or triple detached
shafts, carrying the smaller arches.

Where the Triforium contains three orders of piers, the _tertiary pier_
consists of a single shaft only, carrying the third order of
arch-mouldings.

The VAULTING-SHAFT usually terminates in an elegant capital, just below
the Clerestory-string, the mouldings of which form in that case the
impost mouldings of the capital. The ARCADE generally corresponds with
the windows, and consists either of a row of continuous arches, of
equal height, or, as is commonly the case, of three tall arches carried
on a triple shaft, of which the centre one is the loftiest: the
mouldings and ornaments being similar to those of the rest of the
building.

The VAULTING is generally simple, and acute, and usually of the
quadripartite or sexpartite form.

The AISLE-ARCADE consists generally of a series of plain, or
trefoil-headed arches on single shafts, carrying the usual mouldings
and ornaments.


PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS

OF

THE LANCET PERIOD.

LINCOLN         Cathedral Church     Choir.
WORCESTER       Cathedral Church     Choir.
WINCHESTER      Cathedral Church     Lady Chapel.
FOUNTAINS       Abbey Church         Choir, East Transept.
WHITBY          Abbey Church         Choir.
YORK            Cathedral Church     N. and S. Transepts.
BOLTON          Abbey Church         Nave.
BEVERLEY        Minster              Choir, Transepts.
LINCOLN         Cathedral Church     Nave.
LICHFIELD       Cathedral Church     Chapter House.
WELLS           Cathedral Church     West Front.
PETERBOROUGH    Cathedral Church     West Front.
SOUTHWELL       Collegiate Church    Choir.
OXFORD          Cathedral Church     Chapter House.
HEREFORD        Cathedral Church     Lady Chapel.
LANERCOST       Abbey Church         Nave.
DURHAM          Cathedral Church     East Transept.
RIEVAULX        Abbey Church         Choir.
LONDON          Temple Church        Choir.
SALISBURY       Cathedral Church     Choir.
WORCESTER       Cathedral Church     Presbytery.
WHITBY          Abbey Church         N. Transept.
ELY             Cathedral Church     Presbytery.




CHAPTER VIII.

GEOMETRICAL PERIOD.


PRINCIPAL CHARACTERISTIC.

SIMPLE GEOMETRICAL TRACERY IN THE HEADS OF THE WINDOWS, IN PANELS AND
IN ARCADES.


_Exterior Compartment._

The BUTTRESSES have frequently set-offs, and canopies attached to their
faces, carrying often a series of CROCKETS: these in the earlier
examples are plain, stiff, and curled; but the later ones are formed by
a gracefully disposed leaf. Towards the end of the Period, the
buttresses became very bulky and massive, and carried little or no
ornaments.

The PINNACLES have often the same ornament, and are crowned with
finials composed of a bunch of foliage.

The CORNICE often carries a large ornamental leaf in its hollow, and
the projecting Corbel-table is no longer seen.

The earlier WINDOWS exhibit tracery which consists almost exclusively
of plain foliated circles; but in the later examples other simple
geometrical forms were employed. The heads of the window lights,
occasionally plain, were more frequently, even in the earlier examples,
and invariably in the later ones, cusped or foliated.

The CLERE-STORY usually contains a single window, or at most a pair,
containing tracery similar to that of the side-aisle windows, and the
Clere-story arcade altogether disappears.

The CORNICE is usually similar to that of the side-aisles.


_Interior Compartment._

The PIERS have occasionally, in the earlier examples, detached shafts;
but they more usually consist of a solid mass of engaged shafts,
separated by hollow mouldings, and disposed on the plan of a spherical
triangle.

The BASES consist generally of a triple roll, standing on the usual
plinth; and the CAPITALS carry foliage disposed much more freely and
gracefully than in the preceding Period, and frequently of exquisite
design.

The PIER-ARCHES have usually mouldings in three orders of very elegant
profile, not so deeply cut, however, as in the Lancet Period: the
favourite dog-tooth is nowhere seen, but late in the period a
substitute for it was found in the ornament called the _Ball-flower_.

All BOSSES, FIGURES, and SCULPTURES of every kind are carved in the
very best manner; and all STRING-COURSES and HOOD-MOULDINGS are moulded
with the greatest care and elegance; indeed the art of carving in stone
may be said to have attained its greatest perfection during this
Period.

The TRIFORIUM in the earlier examples commonly contains a pair of
double arches, carrying circular tracery in their heads: in the later
examples, it becomes greatly reduced in size and prominence, and is
made entirely subordinate to the Clere-story; and consists often of a
low foliated arcade, or a band of plain tracery.

The inner arcade of the CLERE-STORY altogether disappears, and in its
place is sometimes found a plane of Geometrical Tracery, corresponding
with that of the window; but more commonly a single arch spans the
entire compartment; and sometimes the gallery is dispensed with
altogether.

The AISLE-ARCADE is often very elegant; the arches are usually
foliated, and covered with a straight-sided canopy. Occasionally this
arcade consists of a series of beautiful panels containing geometrical
tracery, with mouldings of a very minute and elegant character.

Both the centre and side-aisles are generally covered with VAULTING of
simple form, having characteristic bosses and rib-mouldings.


PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS

OF

THE GEOMETRICAL PERIOD.

WESTMINSTER         Abbey Church         Choir, Transepts.
WESTMINSTER         Abbey Church         Chapter House.
SALISBURY           Cathedral Church     Chapter House.
HOWDEN              Collegiate Church    Transepts.
ELY                 Cathedral Church     South Transept, Chapel.
HEREFORD            Cathedral Church     North Transept.
LINCOLN             Cathedral Church     Presbytery.
GRANTHAM            Parish Church        North Aisle.
CHICHESTER          Cathedral Church     Nave, North Aisle.
ST. ALBANS          Abbey Church         Choir.
TINTERN             Abbey Church         Choir, Transepts.
LICHFIELD           Cathedral Church     Nave.
NEWSTEAD            Abbey Church         West End.
YORK, ST. MARY'S    Abbey Church         Nave.
EXETER              Cathedral Church     Lady Chapel.
RIPON               Cathedral Church     East End.
CHICHESTER          Cathedral Church     Lady Chapel.
EXETER              Cathedral Church     Choir.
MERTON COLLEGE      Chapel               Choir.
YORK                Cathedral Church     Chapter House.
SOUTHWELL           Collegiate Church    Chapter House.
TEMPLE BALSALL      Collegiate Church    Chancel.
HOWDEN              Collegiate Church    Nave.
GUISBOROUGH         Priory Church        Choir.
YORK                Cathedral Church     Nave.
WELLS               Cathedral Church     Chapter House.
ST. AUGUSTINE'S     Abbey                Gateway.




CHAPTER IX.

CURVILINEAR PERIOD.


PRINCIPAL CHARACTERISTIC.

FLOWING TRACERY IN THE WINDOWS, AND THE PREVALENCE OF THE OGEE CURVE IN
ALL THE DETAILS.


_Exterior Compartment._

As the Circle characterises the previous Period, so the Ogee marks the
present Period. It is found not only in the principal outline of the
tracery, but also in its smaller subdivisions; not only in the profiles
of the mouldings, but also in the contour of the foliage and carved
work.

The WINDOWS are the most important features in the Churches of this
Period. In the more important buildings they are frequently of great
size and elaborate design, and in the smaller buildings, the rest of
the work seems often to have been impoverished for the sake of the
Windows.

The infinite variety of design that is contained in the Tracery of this
Period is very remarkable, and distinguishes its Architecture, in a
manner not to be mistaken, from that of other nations during the same
Period.

The BASE-COURSE carries a series of mouldings in which the Ogee profile
is almost invariably found. The STRING-COURSES, HOOD-MOULDINGS, and
SET-OFFS exhibit it also.

The BUTTRESSES are usually divided into a greater number of equal
stages; their canopies, and those of their pinnacles, are invariably
richly crocketed, and have usually the Ogee form instead of the
straight pedimental finish.

The CORNICE carries usually a row of large square pateras of foliage,
in a shallow hollow, and is often surmounted with a battlement, or a
parapet pierced or panelled with a flowing trefoil or a quatrefoil.

The BALL-FLOWER which appeared at the end of the previous Period,
became a favourite ornament for a short time in the commencement of
this Period.


_Interior Compartment._

The PIERS are usually disposed in plan in the form of a diamond; and
consist generally of four shafts with intervening hollows. The BASES
and CAPITALS are not unfrequently octagonal in form; and the foliage of
the latter consists of crumpled leaves, not growing out of the neck of
the capital, as in the earlier Periods, but apparently attached to it,
or bound round it.

The mouldings of the PIER-ARCHES are fewer in number; they are
shallower than those of the preceding Period, and often contain the
double Ogee; the walls being thinner, the arches frequently carry, in
this Period, as well as in the following one, only two orders of
mouldings instead of three. The small square patera, consisting of four
leaves, is a common ornament of the Period, and all the foliage is
formed of peculiar crumpled leaves, which are easily distinguished from
those of the preceding Period.

It is not uncommon in this Period to find the arch mouldings continued,
without the intervention of impost or capital, down to the ground; or,
inversely, the mouldings of the piers carried uninterruptedly upwards
through the arch. This is the case as well in the arches of the
Ground-story, as in the windows and doorways.

The TRIFORIUM rarely occurs in its full proportions, and in such cases
exhibits the usual window tracery of the Period: it oftener consists of
a panel enclosed within the prolonged jambs of the Clere-story window,
and is sometimes reduced to a row of quatrefoils.

The CLERE-STORY has its inner arch sometimes foliated, but oftener the
window is flush with the face of the inner wall, and the gallery is
omitted.

The VAULTING exhibits much more intricacy; and a variety of ribs
generally intersect the surface of the different cells.

The AISLE-ARCADE is not often seen.


PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS

OF

THE CURVILINEAR PERIOD.

HOWDEN               Collegiate Church       Choir.
ELY                  Cathedral Church        Lantern.
ELY                  Cathedral Church        Choir.
ELY                  Cathedral Church        Crauden's Chapel.
ELY                  Cathedral Church        Trinity Chapel.
HINGHAM              St. Andrew's Church     Nave.
HECKINGTON           St. Andrew's Church     Chancel, Transepts, Nave.
HAWTON               All Saints' Church      Chancel.
EWERBY               St. Andrew's Church     Chancel, Nave.
SLEAFORD             St. Giles' Church       Nave.
CHESTER              Cathedral Church        South Transept.
COVENTRY             St. John's Hospital     Chapel.
CARLISLE             Cathedral Church        Choir (part).
NEWARK               St. Mary's Church       South Aisle.
BEVERLEY             St. Mary's Church       North Aisle of Choir.
SELBY                Abbey Church            Choir (part).
WALSINGHAM           Abbey Church            Choir.
CHESTER              Cathedral Church        South Transept.
NANTWICH             St. Mary's Church       Chancel.
MELROSE              Abbey Church            Nave, Transept.
BOLTON               Abbey Church            Choir.
BOSTON               St. Botolph's Church    Nave.
LICHFIELD            Cathedral Church        Choir.
WELLS                Cathedral Church        Choir, Lady Chapel.
BURY ST. EDMUND'S    Abbey                   Gateway.
HULL                 Holy Trinity Church     Chancel.




CHAPTER X.

RECTILINEAR PERIOD.


PRINCIPAL CHARACTERISTIC.

THE PREVALENCE OF STRAIGHT LINES, BOTH HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL, IN THE
TRACERY OF WINDOWS, IN PANELS AND ARCADES.


_Exterior Compartment._

The WALLS and BUTTRESSES of this Period present great contrasts, being
generally perfectly plain, but occasionally, in the richer buildings,
completely covered with rectangular panelling.

The BASE-COURSE is often deep, rises in several stages, and contains a
few large bold mouldings.

The mullions of the WINDOWS almost invariably rise vertically through
the Tracery, and are often crossed at right angles by other straight
lines, as well in the lower part of the Window as in the Tracery
itself.

These _Transoms_ in some of the larger East and West Windows, occurring
at equal intervals, divide the entire design into a series of
rectangular compartments, and give to the whole the appearance of a
huge gridiron. They are sometimes ornamented with a small battlemented
moulding.

The CLERE-STORY WINDOWS, as well as the side windows, where the aisle
walls are low, are often square-headed.

The CORNICE generally carries a large shallow hollow, filled at
intervals with a square flat leaf, and grotesque sculptures.
_Gurgoyles_, formed usually of the head and shoulders of some monster,
and projecting from the cornice, for the purpose of carrying the water
from the gutters clear of the walls, which occur in the former Period,
are now universal.

The PARAPETS are frequently ornamented richly, with rectangular
foliated panelling, and covered with a BATTLEMENT. Both are sometimes
pierced instead of being panelled.


_Interior Compartment._

The PIERS are usually tall and light, and consist generally, as in the
preceding Period, of four shafts with intervening hollows, which latter
are continued uninterruptedly round the Pier-arch.

Frequently the entire Pier is moulded without shafts, and the whole of
the mouldings are carried round the Pier-arch.

The Pier is frequently so disposed that its transverse section is
greater than its longitudinal section, or, in other words, it is
thicker from North to South than it is from East to West.

The CAPITALS are usually octagonal, but sometimes circular. Foliage is
much more rarely seen in their hollows, and they contain plain
mouldings of a more angular character generally than in the preceding
Period. They are also taller, in comparison, to their diameter. They
have sometimes a battlement moulding on their upper edge, which is in
other cases often square.

The BASES are generally tall, narrow, and polygonal, and often of
several stages.

In the PIER-ARCHES occasionally a form occurs for the first time, which
is seen in no other Period. This is the _four-centered_ arch, so called
from the circumstance of its being drawn from four different centres:
its use, however, in _arches of construction_, except in the Vaulting,
is by no means so common as in _arches of decoration_, where it
continually appears. It is often enclosed in doorways, under a square
head. The mouldings of Pier-arches, Window-arches, and all others are
usually plain, broad, and shallow; the double Ogee occurs continually,
as well as a large shallow hollow, drawn from three centres, between a
few small filleted members. Few Arches carry more than two orders.

In the STRING-COURSES, CORNICES, and other hollow mouldings, flat
square leaves at intervals, continuous training foliage, and the
vine-leaf and grapes, frequently occur; but the relief is usually not
considerable, and the amount of undercutting in foliage exhibited in
the two previous Periods is never seen. The Tudor Rose and the Tudor
Flower are frequent ornaments of this Period.

The TRIFORIUM is rarely seen, and in its place the Clere-story Window
is often carried down in blank panelling to the passage or
String-course over the Pier-arches. It is sometimes, however,
represented by a band of panelling or pierced work.

The CLERE-STORY attains considerable height and importance in this
Period; the effect of which, in large buildings, is increased by the
suppression of the Triforium, and the substitution in its place of the
apparent continuation downwards of the Clere-story. In many buildings
the Clere-story windows are in pairs, and so numerous that all blank
wall entirely disappears; and the effect of the mass of light thus
poured down into the Church is very striking and characteristic.

The VAULTING becomes much more complicated and enriched in this Period.
Diverging ribs having bosses and shields at their points of
intersection, cover the surface of the Vault: the plans of these
vaultings are very various: some are called _Fan-tracery_ vaults, and
others _Stellar_ vaults, terms which explain themselves.

Open wooden roofs of elaborate construction, and large span, become
common in this Period. They spring frequently from Corbel shafts,
resting on figures in the Clere-story wall; and have rich cornices of
mouldings and carved work, traceried spandrels, figures of angels, and
richly moulded beams. The AISLE-ARCADE is not often found, but its
place is sometimes supplied by the rectangular surface panelling, so
characteristic of the Period, which in some of the richer buildings
literally covers the whole of the walls, leaving no blank or unoccupied
space.


PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS

OF

THE RECTILINEAR PERIOD.

YORK                 Cathedral Church         Choir.
WINCHESTER           Cathedral Church         Nave.
CANTERBURY           Cathedral Church         Transepts.
CANTERBURY           Cathedral Church         Nave.
YORK                 Cathedral Church         West Towers.
WELLS                Cathedral Church         Central Tower.
BEVERLEY             Minster                  West Front.
BRIDLINGTON          Priory Church            West Front.
HOWDEN               Collegiate Church        Chapter House.
CAMBRIDGE            St. Mary's Church        Nave.
LONG MELFORD         Holy Trinity Church      Chancel, Nave.
SAFFRON WALDEN       St. Mary's Church        Chancel, Nave.
LAVENHAM             St. Peter and
                         St. Paul's Church    Nave.
DONCASTER            St. George's Church      Chancel, Nave.
BURY ST. EDMUND'S    St. James' Church        Chancel, Nave.
ROTHERHAM            All Saints' Church       Nave, Transepts.
HULL                 Holy Trinity Church      Nave.
WINDSOR              St. George's Chapel      Chancel, Nave.
MANCHESTER           Cathedral Church         Choir, Nave.
TAUNTON              St. Mary's Church        Nave, Tower.
GLOUCESTER           Cathedral Church         Choir.
CAMBRIDGE            King's College           Chapel.
WARWICK              St. Mary's Church        Beauchamp Chapel.
WESTMINSTER          Cathedral Church         Henry Seventh's Chapel.
BATH                 Abbey Church             Choir, Transepts, Nave.




THE SEVEN PERIODS

OF

ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE.


                      ROMANESQUE.

                                 A.D.    A.D.           YEARS.

  I. SAXON PERIOD           from ---- to 1066, prevailed  --

 II. NORMAN PERIOD            "  1066  " 1145,     "      79

III. TRANSITIONAL PERIOD      "  1145  " 1190,     "      45


                        GOTHIC.

 IV. LANCET PERIOD            "  1190  " 1245,     "      55

  V. GEOMETRICAL PERIOD       "  1245  " 1315,     "      70

 VI. CURVILINEAR PERIOD       "  1315  " 1360,     "      45

VII. RECTILINEAR PERIOD       "  1360  " 1550,     "     190


LONDON:

PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.

[Illustration: NORMAN

Exterior ELY CATHEDRAL. Nave]

[Illustration: NORMAN

Interior ELY CATHEDRAL. Nave]

[Illustration: NORMAN

Exterior PETERBOROUGH CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: NORMAN

Interior PETERBOROUGH CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: TRANSITIONAL

Exterior RIPON CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: TRANSITIONAL

Interior RIPON CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: LANCET

Exterior ELY CATHEDRAL. Presbytery]

[Illustration: LANCET.

Interior ELY CATHEDRAL. Presbytery]

[Illustration: LANCET

Exterior LINCOLN CATHEDRAL. Nave]

[Illustration: LANCET

Interior LINCOLN CATHEDRAL. Nave]

[Illustration: LANCET

Exterior LINCOLN CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: LANCET

Interior LINCOLN CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: GEOMETRICAL

Exterior LINCOLN CATHEDRAL. Presbytery]

[Illustration: GEOMETRICAL

Interior LINCOLN CATHEDRAL. Presbytery]

[Illustration: GEOMETRICAL

Exterior LICHFIELD CATHEDRAL. Nave]

[Illustration: GEOMETRICAL

Interior LICHFIELD CATHEDRAL. Nave]

[Illustration: CURVILINEAR

Exterior ELY CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: CURVILINEAR

Interior ELY CATHEDRAL. Choir]

[Illustration: RECTILINEAR

Exterior WINCHESTER CATHEDRAL. Nave]

[Illustration: RECTILINEAR

Interior WINCHESTER CATHEDRAL. Nave]




A SELECTION

FROM

E. & F. N. SPON'S CATALOGUE OF BOOKS.


_A HANDBOOK OF FORMULAE, TABLES, AND MEMORANDA_,

For Architectural Surveyors and others engaged in Building. By J. T.
HURST, C.E. Fourteenth Edition. Royal 32mo, roan, 5_s._

CONTAINING:

     Formulae and Tables for the Strength of Materials, Roofs,
     Water Supply, Drainage, Gas, and other matters useful to
     Architects and Builders.

     Information connected with Sanitary Engineering.

     Memoranda on the several trades used in Building, including
     a description of Materials and Analyses of Prices for
     Builders' work.

     The Practice of Builders' Measurement.

     Mensuration and the Division of Land.

     Tables of the Weights of Iron and other Building Materials.

     Constants of Labour.

     Valuation of Property.

     Summary of the Practice in Dilapidations.

     Scale of Professional Charges for Architects and Surveyors.

     Tables of English and French Weights and Measures.


_TOWN AND COUNTRY MANSIONS AND SUBURBAN HOUSES_,

With Notes on the Sanitary and Artistic Construction of Houses.
_Illustrated by 30 plates_, containing Plans, Elevations, Perspectives,
and Interior Views of Executed Works in the Queen Anne, Classic, Old
English, Adam's, Jacobean, Louis XVI., and other Styles. By WILLIAM
YOUNG, Architect, Author, of 'Picturesque Architectural Studies,'
'Spons' Architects' and Builders' Pocket-Book,' Architect of the
Glasgow Municipal Buildings, &c. Imperial 4to, handsomely bound in
cloth, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._


_ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF CARPENTRY._

By THOMAS TREDGOLD. Revised from the original edition, and partly
rewritten, by JOHN THOMAS HURST. Contained in 517 pages of letterpress,
and _illustrated with 48 plates and 150 wood engravings_. Fifth
Edition. Crown 8vo, handsomely bound in cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_DOMESTIC ELECTRICITY FOR AMATEURS_:

Translated from the French of E. HOSPITALIER, Editor of
'l'Electricien,' with additions, by C. J. WHARTON, Assoc. Soc. Tel.
Engineers. _Numerous illustrations._ Demy 8vo, cloth, 9_s._

CONTENTS:

     1. Production of the Electric Current--2. Electric Bells--3.
     Automatic Alarms--4. Domestic Telephones--5. Electric
     Clocks--6. Electric Lighters--7. Domestic Electric
     Lighting--8. Domestic Application of the Electric Light--9.
     Electric Motors--10. Electrical Locomotion--11. Electrotyping,
     Plating, and Gilding--12. Electric Recreations--13. Various
     Applications--Workshop of the Electrician.


_SPONS' HOUSEHOLD MANUAL_:

A Treasury of Domestic Receipts and Guide for Home Management. Demy
8vo, cloth, containing 900 pages and 150 _illustrations_, 7_s._ 6_d._

PRINCIPAL CONTENTS:

     _The Dwelling_--Site, Construction, Arrangement, Water
     Supply, Sanitation, Ventilation, Warming, Lighting,
     Furnishing, Decorating, Bells, Thieves, Fire. _The
     Larder_--Storing and Preserving. _The Dairy_--Milk, Butter,
     Cheese. _The Cellar_--Aerated drinks, Beer, Bitters,
     Cordials, Liqueurs, Wines, &c. _The Pantry_--Ovens, Bread,
     Cakes, &c. _The Kitchen_--Ranges, Processes of Cookery,
     Recipes for Soups, Fish, Meat, Game, Poultry, Puddings,
     Vegetables, Salads, Eggs, Cheese, Ices, Confectionery, and
     Foreign Dishes. _The Housewife's Room_--Testing Food,
     Cleaning, Marketing. _The Dining Room_--Laying and Waiting
     at Table, Bills of Fare. _The Drawing Room_--Etiquette,
     Dancing, Theatricals, Games, Puzzles, &c. _The Bedroom. The
     Dressing Room. The Nursery. The Sickroom_--Nurses and
     Nursing, Home Remedies, Common Complaints, Accidents,
     Poisons, &c. _The Bathroom. The Laundry. The Schoolroom. The
     Playground. The Workroom. The Library. The Workshop. The
     Farmyard_--Horse, Cow, Pig, Poultry. _The Garden. Household
     Law._


Crown 8vo, cloth, with Illustrations, Price 5s.

_WORKSHOP RECEIPTS_,

FOR THE USE OF

MANUFACTURERS, MECHANICS, AND SCIENTIFIC AMATEURS.

BY ERNEST SPON.

CONTENTS:

     Bookbinding--Bronzes--Candles--Cement--Cleaning--Concretes--
     Dyeing--Electro-Metallurgy--Enamels--Engraving--Etching--Firework
     Making--Freezing--Fulminates--Furniture Creams, Oils, Polishes,
     Lacquers, and Pastes--Gilding--Glass Cutting--Glass Making--
     Graining--Gums--Horn Working--India-rubber--Ink--Japans
     --Lacquers--Marble Working--Matches--Mortars--Paper Hanging--
     Painting in Oils--Photography--Polishes--Pottery--Silvering--
     Soap--Solders--Taxidermy--Treating Horn, Mother-o'-Pearl, and
     like substances--Varnishes--Veneering--Whitewashing, &c., &c.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s.

_WORKSHOP RECEIPTS_

(Second Series).

BY ROBERT HALDANE.

Devoted mainly to subjects connected with Chemical Manufactures. An
entirely New Volume. Uniform in Size, Style, and Type with the Original
'Workshop Receipts.'

CONTENTS:

     Acidimetry and Alkalimetry--Albumen--Alcohol--Alkaloids--Baking
     Powders--Bitters--Bleaching--Boiler Incrustations--Cements and
     Lutes--Cleansing--Confectionery--Copying--Disinfectants--Dyeing--
     Staining and Colouring--Essences--Extracts--Fireproofing--Gelatine
     --Glue and Size--Glycerine--Gut--Hydrogen Peroxide--Inks--Iodine
     --Iodoform--Isinglass--Ivory Substitutes--Leather--Luminous
     Bodies--Magnesia--Matches--Paper--Parchment--Perchloric Acid--
     Pigments--Paint and Painting--Potassium--Oxalate--Preserving.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s.

_WORKSHOP RECEIPTS_

(Third Series).

BY C. G. WARNFORD LOCK, F.L.S.

Devoted mainly to Electrical and Metallurgical subjects.

CONTENTS:

     Alloys--Aluminium--Antimony--Barium--Beryllium--Bismuth--
     Cadmium--Caesium--Calcium--Cerrium--Chromium--Cobalt--Copper--
     Didymium--Electrics (including alarms, batteries, bells,
     carbons, coils [induction, intensity, and resistance],
     dynamo-electric machines, fire risks, measuring, microphones,
     motors, phonographs, photophones, storing, telephones)--Enamels
     and Glazes--Erbium--Gallium--Glass--Gold--Indium--Iridium--
     Iron--Lacquers--Lanthanum--Lead--Lithium--Lubricants--Magnesium--
     Manganese--Mercury--Mica--Molybdenum--Nickel--Nisbium--Osmium--
     Palladium--Platinum--Potassium--Rhodium--Rubidium--Ruthenium--
     Silenium--Silver--Slag--Sodium--Strontium--Tantalum--Terbium--
     Thallium--Thorium--Tin--Titanium--Tungsten--Uranium--Vanadium--
     Yttrium--Zinc--Zirconium.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 5s.

_WORKSHOP RECEIPTS_

(Fourth Series).

BY C. G. WARNFORD LOCK, F.L.S.

Devoted mainly to Handicrafts and Mechanical subjects.

_250 Illustrations, with complete Index and a general Index to the
Four Series._

CONTENTS:

     _Waterproofing_: rubber goods, cuprammonium processes,
     miscellaneous preparations--_Packing and Storing_ articles
     of delicate odour or colour, of a deliquescent character,
     liable to ignition, apt to suffer from insects or damp, or
     easily broken--_Embalming and Preserving_ anatomical
     specimens--_Leather Polishes_--_Cooling Air and Water_,
     producing low temperatures, making ice, cooling syrups and
     solutions, and separating salts from liquors by refrigeration
     --_Pumps and Syphons_, embracing every useful contrivance for
     raising and supplying water on a moderate scale, and moving
     corrosive, tenacious, and other liquids--_Desiccating_:
     air-and water-ovens, and other appliances for drying natural
     and artificial products--_Distilling_: water, tinctures,
     extracts, pharmaceutical preparations, essences, perfumes, and
     alcoholic liquids--_Emulsifying_ as required by pharmacists
     and photographers--_Evaporating_: saline and other solutions,
     and liquids demanding special precautions--_Filtering_: water,
     and solutions of various kinds--_Percolating and Macerating_--
     _Electrotyping_--_Stereotyping_ by both plaster and paper
     processes--_Bookbinding_ in all its details--_Straw Plaiting_
     and the fabrication of baskets, matting, &c.--_Musical
     Instruments_: the preservation, tuning, and repair of pianos,
     harmoniums, musical instruments, &c.--_Clock and Watch Mending_:
     adapted for intelligent amateurs--_Photography_: recent
     development in rapid processes, handy apparatus, numerous recipes
     for sensitizing and developing solutions, and applications to
     modern illustrative purposes.


E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand, London.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seven Periods of English
Architecture, by Edmund Sharpe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN PERIODS OF ENGLISH ***

***** This file should be named 38879.txt or 38879.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/8/7/38879/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
