Project Gutenberg's My Mother's Gold Ring Founded on Fact, by Lucius Sargent

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: My Mother's Gold Ring Founded on Fact
       Eighth Edition

Author: Lucius Sargent

Release Date: March 8, 2012 [EBook #39080]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY MOTHER'S GOLD RING ***




Produced by David Edwards, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






    Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.
    Bold text has been marked with =equals signs=.



[Illustration: cover]

  Number One.

  MY MOTHER'S GOLD RING.

  FOUNDED ON FACT.

  Eighth Edition.

  Boston:
  PUBLISHED BY FORD AND DAMRELL.
  1833.

  Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1833, by
  FORD AND DAMRELL,
  In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of Massachusetts.




TO THE READER.


This is the first of a series of stories, of which it possibly may be
the beginning and the end. The incident, which is the foundation of the
following tale, was communicated to the writer, by a valued friend, as a
fact, with the name of the principal character. Another friend, to whom
the manuscript was given, perceiving some advantage in its publication,
has thought proper to give it to the world, as Number One; from which I
infer, that I am expected to write a Number Two. The hint may be worth
taking, at some leisure moment. In the mean time, pray read Number One:
it can do you no harm: there is nothing "_sectarian_" about it. When you
have read it, if, among all your connexions and friends, you can think
of none, whom its perusal may possibly benefit--and it will be strange
if you cannot--do me the favor to present it to the first little boy
that you meet. He will, no doubt, take it home to his mother or his
father. If you will not do this, throw it in the street, as near to some
dram-seller's door, as you ever venture to go: let it take the course of
the flying seed, which God is pleased to entrust to the keeping of the
winds: it may yet spring up and bear fruit, if such be the will of Him,
who giveth the increase.




THE GOLD RING.


I have one of the kindest husbands: he is a carpenter by trade, and our
flock of little children has one of the kindest fathers in the county. I
was thought the luckiest girl in the parish, when G---- T---- made me
his wife: I thought so myself. Our wedding-day--and it was a happy
one--was but an indifferent sample of those days of rational happiness
and uninterrupted harmony, which we were permitted to enjoy together,
for the space of six years. And although, for the last three years of
our lives, we have been as happy as we were at the beginning, it makes
my heart sick to think of those long dark days and sad nights, that came
between; for, two years of our union were years of misery. I well
recollect the first glass of ardent spirit that my husband ever drank.
He had been at the grocery to purchase a little tea and sugar for the
family; there were three cents coming to him in change; and, unluckily,
the Deacon, who keeps the shop, had nothing but silver in the till; and,
as it was a sharp, frosty morning, he persuaded my good man to take his
money's worth of rum, for it was just the price of a glass. He came home
in wonderful spirits, and told me he meant to have me and the children
better dressed, and, as neighbor Barton talked of selling his horse and
chaise, he thought of buying them both; and, when I said to him,
"George, we are dressed as well as we can afford, and I hope you will
not think of a horse and chaise, till we have paid off the Squire's
mortgage," he gave me a harsh look and a bitter word. I never shall
forget that day, for they were the first he ever gave me in his life.
When he saw me shedding tears, and holding my apron to my face, he said
he was sorry, and came to kiss me, and I discovered that he had been
drinking, and it grieved me to the heart. In a short time after, while I
was washing up the breakfast things, I heard our little Robert, who was
only five years old, crying bitterly; and, going to learn the cause, I
met him running towards me with his face covered with blood.

He said his father had taken him on his knee, and was playing with him,
but had given him a blow in the face, only because he had said, when he
kissed him, "dear papa, you smell like old Isaac, the drunken fiddler."
My husband was very cross to us all through the whole of that day; but
the next morning, though he said little, he was evidently ashamed and
humbled; and he went about his work very industriously, and was
particularly kind to little Robert. I prayed constantly for my good man,
and that God would be pleased to guide his heart aright; and, more than
a week having gone by, without any similar occurrence, I flattered
myself, that he would never do so again. But, in a very little time,
either the Deacon was short of change, as before, or some tempting
occasion presented itself which my husband could not resist, and he
returned home once more under the influence of liquor. I never shall
forget the expression of his countenance, when he came in, that night.
We had waited supper a full hour, for his return: the tea-pot was
standing at the fire, and the bannocks were untouched upon the hearth;
and the smaller children were beginning to murmur for their supper.
There was an indescribable expression of defiance on his countenance, as
though he were conscious of having done wrong, and resolved to brave it
out. We sat down silently to supper, and he scarcely raised his eyes
upon any of us, during this unhappy repast. He soon went to bed and fell
asleep; and, after I had laid our little ones to rest, I knelt at the
foot of the bed, on which my poor misguided husband was sleeping, and
poured out my very soul to God, while my eyes were scalded with the
bitterest tears I had ever shed. For I then foresaw, that, unless some
remedy could be employed, my best earthly friend, the father of my
little children, would become a drunkard. The next morning, after
breakfast, I ventured to speak with him upon the subject, in a mild way;
and, though I could not restrain my tears, neither my words nor my
weeping appeared to have any effect, and I saw that he was becoming
hardened, and careless of us all. How many winter nights have I waited,
weeping alone, at my once happy fireside, listening for the lifting
latch, and wishing, yet dreading, to hear his steps at the door!

After this state of things had continued, or rather grown worse, for
nearly three months, I put on my bonnet one morning, after my husband
had gone to his work, and went to the Deacon's store; and, finding him
alone, I stated my husband's case, and begged him earnestly to sell him
no more. He told me it would do no good, for, if he did not sell it,
some other person would sell it; and he doubted if my husband took more
than was good for him. He quoted Scripture to show, that it was a
wife's duty to keep at home, and submit herself to her husband, and not
meddle with things, which did not belong to her province. At this time,
two or three customers called for rum, and the Deacon civilly advised me
to go home, and look after my children.

I went out with a heavy heart. It seemed as if the tide of evil was
setting against me. As I was passing farmer Johnson's, on my way home,
they called me in. I sat down and rested myself for a few minutes, in
their neat cottage. Farmer Johnson was just returning from the field;
and when I saw the little ones running to meet him at the stile, and the
kind looks, that passed between the good man and his wife; and when I
remembered that we were married on the very same day, and compared my
own fortune with theirs, my poor heart burst forth in a flood of tears.
They all knew what I was weeping for, and farmer Johnson, in a kind
manner, bade me cheer up, and put my trust in God's mercy, and remember
that it was often darkest before daylight. The farmer and his wife were
members of the temperance society, and had signed the pledge; and I had
often heard him say, that he believed it had saved him from destruction.
He had, before his marriage, and for a year after, been in the habit of
taking a little spirit every day. He was an industrious, thriving man;
but, shortly after his marriage, he became bound for a neighbor, who ran
off, and he was obliged to pay the debt. I have heard him declare, that,
when the sheriff took away all his property, and stripped his little
cottage, and scarcely left him those trifles, which are secured to the
poor man by law; and when he considered how ill his poor wife was, at
the time, in consequence of the loss of their child, that died only a
month before, he was restrained from resorting to the bottle, in his
moments of despair, by nothing but a recollection of the pledge he had
signed. Farmer Johnson's minister was in favor of pledges, and had often
told him, that affliction might weaken his judgment and his moral
sense, and that the pledge might save him at last, as a plank saves the
life of a mariner, who is tost upon the waves.

Our good Clergyman was unfortunately of a different opinion. He had
often disapproved of pledges: the Deacon was of the same opinion: he
thought very illy of pledges.

Month after month passed away, and our happiness was utterly destroyed.
My husband neglected his business, and poverty began to stare us in the
face. Notwithstanding my best exertions, it was hard work to keep my
little ones decently clothed and sufficiently fed. If my husband earned
a shilling, the dram-seller was as sure of it as if it were already in
his till. I sometimes thought I had lost all my affection for one, who
had proved so entirely regardless of those, whom it was his duty to
protect and sustain; but, when I looked in the faces of our little
children, the recollection of our early marriage days, and all his kind
words and deeds soon taught me the strength of the principle, that had
brought us together. I shall never cease to remember the anguish I
felt, when the constable took him to jail, upon the dram-seller's
execution. Till that moment, I did not believe, that my affection could
have survived, under the pressure of that misery, which he had brought
upon us all. I put up such things, of the little that remained to us, as
I thought might be of use, and turned my back upon a spot, where I had
been very happy and very wretched. Our five little children followed,
weeping bitterly. The jail was situated in the next town. "Oh George,"
said I, "if you had only signed the pledge, it would not have come to
this." He sighed, and said nothing; and we walked nearly a mile, in
perfect silence. As we were leaving the village, we encountered our
Clergyman, going forth upon his morning ride. When I reflected, that a
few words from him would have induced my poor husband to sign the
pledge, and that, if he had done so, he might have been the kind father,
and the affectionate husband that he once was, I own, it cost me some
considerable effort to suppress my emotions. "Whither are you all
going?" said the holy man. My husband, who had always appeared extremely
humble, in presence of the minister, and replied to all his inquiries in
a subdued tone of voice, answered, with unusual firmness, "to jail,
reverend sir." "To jail!" said he, "ah, I see how it is; you have wasted
your substance in riotous living, and are going to pay for your
improvidence and folly. You have had the advantage of my precept and
example, and you have turned a deaf ear to the one, and neglected the
other." "Reverend sir," my husband replied, galled by this reproof,
which appeared to him, at that particular moment, an unnecessary
aggravation of his misery, "reverend sir, your precept and your example
have been my ruin; I have followed them both. You, who had no experience
of the temptations to which your weaker brethren are liable, who are
already addicted to the temperate and daily use of ardent spirits,
advised me never to sign a pledge. I have followed your advice to the
letter. You admitted, that extraordinary occasions might justify the
use of ardent spirit, and that, on such occasions, you might use it
yourself. I followed your example; but it has been my misfortune never
to drink spirituous liquors, without finding that my _occasions_ were
more _extraordinary_ than ever. Had I followed the precept and example
of my neighbor Johnson, I should not have made a good wife miserable,
nor my children beggars." While he uttered these last words, my poor
husband looked upon his little ones, and burst into tears; and the
minister rode slowly away, without uttering a word. I rejoiced, even in
the midst of our misery, to see that the heart of my poor George was
tenderly affected; for it is not more needful, that the hardness of wax
should be subdued by fire, than that the heart of man should be softened
by affliction, before a deep and lasting impression can be made. "Dear
husband," said I, "we are young; it is not too late; let us trust in
God, and all may yet be well." He made no reply, but continued to walk
on, and weep in silence. Shortly after, the Deacon appeared, at some
distance, coming towards us on the road; but, as soon as he discovered
who we were, he turned away into a private path. Even the constable
seemed somewhat touched with compassion, at our situation, and urged us
to keep up a good heart, for he thought some one might help us, when we
least expected it. My husband, whose vein of humor would often display
itself, even in hours of sadness, instantly replied, that the good
Samaritan could not be far off, for the priest and the Levite had
already passed by on the other side. But he little thought--poor
man--that even the conclusion of this beautiful parable was so likely to
be verified. A one-horse wagon, at this moment, appeared to be coming
down the hill behind us, at an unusually rapid rate, and the constable
advised us, as the road was narrow, to stand aside, and let it pass. It
was soon up with us; and, when the dust had cleared away, it turned out,
as little Robert had said, when it first appeared on the top of the
hill, to be farmer Johnson's gray mare and yellow wagon. The
kind-hearted farmer was out in an instant, and, without saying a word,
was putting the children into it, one after another. A word from farmer
Johnson was enough for any constable in the village. It was all the work
of a moment. He shook my husband by the hand, and when he began,
"Neighbor Johnson, you are the same kind friend"--"Get in," said he,
"let's have no words about it; I must be home in a trice, for," turning
to me, "your old school-mate, Susan, my wife, will sit a crying at the
window, till she sees you all safe home again." Saying this, he whipped
up the gray mare, who, regardless of the additional load, went up the
hill faster than she came down, as though she entered into the spirit of
the whole transaction.

It was not long before we reached the door of our cottage. Farmer
Johnson took out the children; and, while I was trying to find words to
thank him for all his kindness, he was up in his wagon and off, before
I could utter a syllable. Robert screamed after him, to tell little Tim
Johnson to come over, and that he should have all his pinks and
marigolds. When we entered the cottage, there were bread, and meat, and
milk, upon the table, which Susan, the farmer's wife, had brought over,
for the children. I could not help sobbing aloud, for my heart was full.
"Dear George," said I, turning to my husband, "you used to pray, let us
thank God for this great deliverance from evil." "Dear Jenny," said he,
"I fear God will scarcely listen to my poor prayers, after all my
offences; but I will try." We closed the cottage door, and he prayed
with so much humility of heart, and so much earnestness of feeling, that
I felt almost sure, that God's grace would be lighted up in the bosom of
this unhappy man, if sighs, and tears, and prayers, could win their way
to heaven. He was very grave, and said little or nothing that night. The
next morning, when I woke up, I was surprised, as the sun had not risen,
to find that he had already gone down. At first, I felt alarmed, as
such a thing had become unusual with him, of late years; but my anxious
feelings were agreeably relieved, when the children told me their father
had been hoeing for an hour, in the potato field, and was mending the
garden fence. With our scanty materials, I got ready the best breakfast
I could, and he sat down to it, with a good appetite, but said little;
and, now and then, I saw the tears starting into his eyes. I had many
fears, that he would fall back into his former habits, whenever he
should meet his old companions, or stop in again at the Deacon's store.
I was about urging him to move into another village. After breakfast, he
took me aside, and asked me if I had not a gold ring. "George," said I,
"that ring was my mother's: she took it from her finger, and gave it to
me, the day that she died. I would not part with that ring, unless it
were to save life. Besides, if we are industrious and honest, we shall
not be forsaken." "Dear Jenny," said he, "I know how you prize that gold
ring: I never loved you more than when you wept over it, while you
first told me the story of your mother's death: it was just a month
before we were married, the last sabbath evening in May, Jenny, and we
were walking by the river. I wish you would bring me that ring." Memory
hurried me back, in an instant, to the scene, the bank upon the river's
side, where we sat together, and agreed upon our wedding-day. I brought
down the ring, and he asked me, with such an earnestness of manner, to
put it on his little finger, that I did so; not, however, without a
trembling hand and a misgiving heart. "And now, Jenny," said he, as he
rose to go out, "pray that God will support me." My mind was not in a
happy state, for I felt some doubt of his intentions. From a little
hill, at the back of our cottage, we had a fair view of the Deacon's
store. I went up to the top of it; and, while I watched my husband's
steps, no one can tell how fervently I prayed God to guide them aright.
I saw two of his old companions, standing at the store door, with
glasses in their hands; and, as my husband came in front of the shop, I
saw them beckon him in. It was a sad moment for me. "Oh George," said I,
though I knew he could not hear me, "go on; remember your poor wife and
your starving children!" My heart sunk within me, when I saw him stop
and turn towards the door. He shook hands with his old associates: they
appeared to offer him their glasses: I saw him shake his head and pass
on. "Thank God," said I, and ran down the hill, with a light step, and
seizing my baby, at the cottage door, I literally covered it with
kisses, and bathed it in tears of joy. About ten o'clock, Richard Lane,
the Squire's office-boy, brought in a piece of meat and some meal,
saying my husband sent word, that he could not be home, till night, as
he was at work, on the Squire's barn; Richard added, that the Squire had
engaged him for two months. He came home early, and the children ran
down the hill to meet him. He was grave, but cheerful. "I have prayed
for you, dear husband," said I. "And a merciful God has supported me,
Jenny," said he. It is not easy to measure the degrees of happiness;
but, take it altogether, this, I think, was the happiest evening of my
life. If there is great joy in heaven, over a sinner that repenteth,
there is no less joy in the heart of a faithful wife, over a husband,
that was lost, and is found. In this manner the two months went away. In
addition to his common labor, he found time to cultivate the garden, and
make and mend a variety of useful articles about the house. It was soon
understood, that my husband had reformed, and it was more generally
believed, because he was a subject for the gibes and sneers of a large
number of the Deacon's customers. My husband used to say, let those
laugh that are wise and win. He was an excellent workman, and business
came in from all quarters. He was soon able to repay neighbor Johnson,
and our families lived in the closest friendship with each other. One
evening, farmer Johnson said to my husband, that he thought it would be
well for him to sign the temperance pledge; that he did not advise it,
when he first began to leave off spirit, for he feared his strength
might fail him. "But now," said he, "you have continued five months
without touching a drop, and it would be well for the cause, that you
should sign the pledge." "Friend Johnson," said my husband, "when a year
has gone safely by, I will sign the pledge. For five months, instead of
the pledge, I have in every trial and temptation--and a drinking man
knows well the force and meaning of those words--I have relied upon this
gold ring, to renew my strength, and remind me of my duty to God, to my
wife, to my children, and to society. Whenever the struggle of appetite
has commenced, I have looked upon this ring: I have remembered that it
was given, with the last words and dying counsels of an excellent
mother, to my wife, who placed it there; and, under the blessing of
Almighty God, it has proved, thus far, the life-boat of a drowning man."

The year soon passed away; and on the very day twelvemonth, on which I
had put the ring upon my husband's finger, farmer Johnson brought over
the Temperance book. We all sat down to the tea-table together. After
supper was done, little Robert climbed up and kissed his father, and,
turning to farmer Johnson, "Father," said he, "has not smelt like old
Isaac, the drunken fiddler, once, since we rode home in your yellow
wagon." The farmer opened the book: my husband signed the pledge of the
society, and, with tears in his eyes, gave me back--ten thousand times
more precious than ever--MY MOTHER'S GOLD RING.




MY MOTHER'S GOLD RING.

=Sold by the publishers, Ford and Damrell=, at their Office, in Wilson's
lane, near the U.S. Branch Bank, Boston, at 6 cents single, 50 cents per
dozen, $3 per hundred, $25 per thousand. Individuals or societies
supplied with any number of copies at short notice.

N. B. Number Two may be expected soon.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of My Mother's Gold Ring Founded on Fact, by 
Lucius Sargent

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY MOTHER'S GOLD RING ***

***** This file should be named 39080.txt or 39080.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/0/8/39080/

Produced by David Edwards, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
