The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iron Boys in the Mines, by James R. Mears

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Iron Boys in the Mines
       or, Starting at the Bottom of the Shaft

Author: James R. Mears

Release Date: March 9, 2012 [EBook #39083]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRON BOYS IN THE MINES ***




Produced by Dianna Adair, Stephen Hutcheson, Rod Crawford,
Dave Morgan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net








Illustration: Steve Gazed With Wonder Upon the Busy Scene.

_Frontispiece._




    The Iron Boys in the Mines

            OR

Starting at the Bottom of the Shaft

By

JAMES R. MEARS

Author of The Iron Boys As Foremen, The Iron Boys
on the Ore Boats, etc.


Illustrated


PHILADELPHIA

HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY


COPYRIGHT, 1912, BY
HOWARD E. ALTEMUS




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                     PAGE

      I.  SECURING A JOB UNDER DIFFICULTIES      7

     II.  HANDLING THE RED ORE                  18

    III.  TWO THOUSAND FEET UNDER GROUND        32

     IV.  STEVE SHOOTS THE CHUTES               42

      V.  THE "MISSED HOLE"                     49

     VI.  IN THE POWDER-WRECKED DRIFT           61

    VII.  "IS ANYONE ALIVE IN THERE?"           70

   VIII.  BOB MAKES GOOD HIS WORD               79

     IX.  YOUNG GLADIATORS MEET                 89

      X.  IN A NEW JOB                          97

     XI.  RUSH MAKES A DISCOVERY               106

    XII.  THE BOYS EXPOSE A PLOT               115

   XIII.  STRAIGHTENING THE CROOKED ONES       126

    XIV.  LAYING THE TRAP                      137

     XV.  BORNE SKYWARD ON A SKIP              147

    XVI.  WHAT WAS FOUND IN THE SHAFT          158

   XVII.  THEIR FIRST PROMOTION                171

  XVIII.  THE VISIT OF THE OFFICIALS           182

    XIX.  FACING A GREAT PERIL                 193

     XX.  INTO A BLACK GULF                    202

    XXI.  THE SEARCH FOR THE MISSING BOY       209

   XXII.  WHEN THE WATERS CLOSED OVER HIM      215

  XXIII.  A THOUSAND FEET OF LADDERS           226

   XXIV.  CONCLUSION                           242




The Iron Boys in the Mines




CHAPTER I

SECURING A JOB UNDER DIFFICULTIES


"Is Mr. Carrhart in?"

"Maybe he is, and maybe he isn't," answered the office boy, grinning
sardonically. "Who are you?"

"My name is Stephen Rush and I wish to see Mr. Carrhart, the president
of the mining company," answered the first speaker, a lad of some
sixteen years, dark-haired, dark-eyed and slight of build.

"What do you want to see him about?"

"That is what I have come to tell him," replied young Rush, directing a
level gaze at the boy, who was half a head taller and much more stocky
of build than was Steve. "May I speak with the president?"

"No; you may not speak with Mr. Carrhart."

"Why not, please? It is quite important."

"Because I won't let you."

"You won't let me?"

"No."

"Will you not take my name in--tell him I shall not detain him?"

"_No!_"

For a moment Steve Rush stood looking at the office boy, undecided and
disappointed. He had not thought there would be any difficulty in
getting a few words with the man he had come to see.

"Go on--skip!"

The office boy, without giving the caller an opportunity to obey his
command, sprang forward, and, pressing both hands against Steve's chest,
began shoving the lad out into the corridor. Steve was stepping
backwards so fast that he was unable to free himself from the
belligerent office boy.

All at once young Rush took advantage of a momentary pause of his
antagonist, and sprang lightly to one side. The next instant his fingers
closed over the wrists of the office boy, shutting down with a grip that
made the other writhe.

"Leggo my hands!"

The office boy shook himself free, then swung a vicious blow at Steve's
head. To the former's surprise his blow landed on thin air, but ere he
could square himself for another swing the grip of young Rush had once
more fastened on his wrists. And this time there was no breaking away.
Tighter and tighter grew the pressure on the office boy's wrists.

"Leggo! O-u-c-h! Leggo, I tell you!" cried the latter, raising his voice
so high that office doors were quickly opened along the corridor, heads
popping out, their owners demanding to know what the uproar was about.

"Will you take my name in to Mr. Carrhart?" demanded Steve in a low,
firm tone.

"No, I won't. I'll trim you for this. I'll----"

Steve, with a strength that would not have been believed of him, calmly
began leading his prisoner back into the office.

"Young man, I think I shall take you to Mr. Carrhart. We shall see what
he has to say about you. I do not believe he will be pleased when I tell
him how you have acted. I----"

Just then a door opened and a young man stepped out.

"Here, here, here, what does this mean?" demanded the newcomer sharply.

"He's hurting me; he's----"

Steve quickly released the hands of the office boy, and removing his
hat, stepped forward respectfully.

"Are you Mr. Carrhart, sir?"

"No; I'm his secretary. What is the meaning of this disturbance?"

"I was trying to see Mr. Carrhart----"

"You have a most peculiar way of going about it, I must say," was the
sharp reply. "What did you wish to see him about?"

"I want to get a job."

"At what?"

"Anything--preferably in the mines."

The secretary laughed.

"I am sorry, young man, but the president is a very busy man. And
besides, this is not the place to come for a situation in the mines. You
will have to apply to one of the superintendents at the mines. However,
I believe you are too young and----"

"But I am quite strong, sir. I am sure I shall be able to do a day's
work. I am anxious----"

"You will have to apply as I have just suggested. You cannot see the
president," announced the secretary shortly, turning on his heel and
reentering his own office.

"Yah, yah!" jeered the office boy. "Now, Mr. Smarty, will you get out or
shall I put you out?"

"Neither."

"What's that?"

"You will not put me out, and I propose to remain here until I get a
chance to see your employer," announced Steve in a low, firm tone. He
calmly seated himself on a bench just outside the door of the office
reception room.

The office boy's eyes narrowed angrily. He took a step toward Rush,
then, apparently thinking better of it, strode back to his little square
desk and threw himself into a chair, where he sat glowering at the
calm-eyed boy out in the corridor.

Steve sat gazing steadily at the door of a room on which was written the
word "President." Now and then he caught sight of a shadow within,
through the ground-glass partition, and now and again the sound of
voices reached him.

"Are you going to move?" demanded a voice at his side.

Steve glanced up, finding the office boy standing close to him, a
threatening scowl on his face.

"I told you I was waiting to see the president."

"You are, eh?"

"Yes."

"How are you going to see him?"

"I am going to wait here until he comes out."

"If you don't get put out before that."

"Then I shall wait out in the lobby by the elevator. You can't put me
out, for I am not in your office."

With a grunt the office boy returned to his desk. At about that time
Rush caught sight of the figure of a man behind the glass of the door
leading into the president's room. The lad was all attention at once.

After a moment the door swung open and a man stepped out into the
corridor and started for the elevator.

"I beg pardon, sir, are you Mr. Carrhart?" questioned Steve.

"Mr. Carrhart?"

"Yes, sir."

"Why, no, my lad; what made you think I was?"

"I beg your pardon, sir. I saw you come out of the president's office
and I wanted to see him very much," stammered the lad.

"Then why don't you go to see him?"

"I'm going to," answered Steve in a resolute tone. "Thank you, sir."

With that the lad turned, walking rapidly back. He did not stop when he
had reached the bench just outside the reception room. Instead, he
stepped firmly up to the door of the president's office. His hand was
upon the door knob.

"Here, you, where you going?" cried the office boy, bounding after him.

Steve made no reply, whereupon the office boy started for him again. But
the latter was not quick enough. Rush opened the door to the private
office and stepped within. The office boy prevented his closing the
door, and a second later had bolted in after the visitor. Then things
began to happen with surprising quickness. Rush went down in a heap, the
office boy landing on his back. Over and over the two lads rolled,
clasped in a tight embrace.

"Here, here! What does this mean?" demanded the president, gazing with
amazement at the rough-and-tumble battle going on at his very feet.

Neither lad appeared to have heard him, for the rolling and floundering
continued a few seconds longer. All at once Steve got a firm grip on the
wrist of his antagonist. The office boy uttered a yell as the wrist was
bent backwards. Rush swung him over on his face and sat down on him
somewhat out of breath.

"Is this--is this Mr. Carrhart, sir?" stammered Steve.

"It is. But may I inquire what this remarkable performance means?"

"I came to see you, sir."

"You go about it in a very peculiar manner. Get up!"

"I can't, sir; the boy will want to fight me again."

"I will attend to the boy. Get up at once!"

Rush rose to his feet. As he had predicted, the office boy made another
dash for him, but this Steve avoided by stepping to one side.

"Oscar, that will do!" said Mr. Carrhart sternly. "You have done your
duty as you saw it. You may leave the room."

The office boy obeyed, casting an angry glance at the unruffled
countenance of Steve Rush as he closed the door behind him.

"Now, what is it you want, young man?" questioned the president. "State
your business briefly, for I have no time to waste."

"I am looking for a position, sir."

Mr. Carrhart was about to make a sharp reply, when, chancing to glance
into the face of the lad before him, he saw something there that
arrested the words he was about to utter. The boy's face showed an
earnestness of purpose, a stubborn determination that led the mining
president to modify his tone.

"You wish a position?" he asked not unkindly.

"Yes, sir."

"What position are you looking for?"

"I wish to go into the iron mines; I wish to learn the business, sir. I
am stronger than I look----"

"Yes, I have just had evidence of that fact. But why do you come to me?"

"Because you are the head of the mines. Should I not go to the head when
I am looking for a position?"

"Perhaps you are right at that, my lad. What is your name?"

Steve gave his name and his age, also adding that he had completed half
his course at the high school in Duluth.

"Why did you not continue with your school? You should be in school at
your age, rather than going to work."

"I should like to be, sir, but circumstances have arisen that make it
necessary for me to go to work."

"What are those circumstances?"

"My father died four weeks ago, and I must work to help support my
mother," answered the lad, a slight flush suffusing his cheeks.

"Does your mother work?"

"She is not able to take a position, sir. She does some sewing, and,
with what I shall be able to earn in a little while, we shall get along
very nicely."

"Hm-m-m!" mused the president. "You are very confident."

"Yes, sir. Because I am willing to work."

"Have you tried to get a position in town? I should think that would be
better for a lad of your age than to work in the mines."

"No, sir; I have always wanted to be a miner. I want to start at the
bottom and learn the business."

"I am afraid you could not stand it, my lad," answered Mr. Carrhart
after brief reflection. "And, besides, as you understand, all the hiring
is done by the officials at the mines."

"Yes, sir. But you need have no fear that I shall not be able to do a
man's work. I was one of the best athletes in the high school. I was
quite frail when I began going to school, but by systematic exercise I
have built myself up. I can stand a much greater strain than you would
imagine to look at me. If I do not make good they will not keep me.
Won't you please give me a chance to try, sir?"

"How would you like to come in the office here?"

"I should like it, of course, sir; but, as I have already said, I prefer
to begin at the bottom and work up."

"My lad, you are of the right stuff. You will get on in the world. Not
much of anything matters in the face of such determination as yours. The
work in the mines is very hard. You will find rough men there and you
will meet with more or less temptation, but I believe you are strong
enough to keep yourself above it."

"Yes, sir. I am sure of that, sir."

By this time Mr. Carrhart was busily writing. Steve watched him, not
quite certain whether or not the interview was at an end.

"You--you will give me a chance, sir?" asked the lad after a moment's
silence.

"Yes; here is a letter to the general superintendent of the Cousin Jack
Mine. I have asked him to give you employment at the earliest possible
moment. I shall hope to hear good reports from you, Rush. Remember what
I have said to you. I shall keep an eye on you."

"Oh, thank you, sir; thank you! I cannot tell you how I appreciate your
kindness."

"Purely a matter of business, my lad. I see in you the making of an
excellent man for the company. We are looking for young men with your
determination and grit."

As Steve passed out through the reception room the office boy stepped in
front of him.

"I'll lick you the first time I catch you outside," announced the
guardian of the door.

"Please don't," answered Steve. "Somebody might get hurt. Besides, I am
not a fighter. Good afternoon."

Rush hurried out to carry the good news to his mother.

"That boy has the making of a great man," mused Carrhart, as he stood
with hands clasped behind his back, gazing down into the street. "Yes,
he will be heard from some of these days, unless I am greatly in
error."




CHAPTER II

HANDLING THE RED ORE


"Why, boy, you couldn't stand up for an hour down below ground."

Ike Penton, general superintendent of the Cousin Jack Mine, smiled
indulgently into the eager face of Steve Rush.

"It's a man's work, not a boy's work. Mr. Carrhart's letter gives you a
fine endorsement. He seems to think you have the making of a miner in
you, and acting on his judgment, I shall of course give you a chance."

"Thank you, sir. You will try to place me down in one of the mines, will
you not?"

"No; I shall not take the responsibility of doing so just at the present
moment. I shall use you above ground for a few days, until I see what
you are best fitted to do, and then--but mind you, I am not making any
promises--I will see what can be done for you."

The superintendent smiled indulgently. He was a man of kindly impulses
and he had boys of his own. Then, too, he remembered the day, many years
before, when he, also, had sought employment in the iron mines. By sheer
pluck he had worked his way up from the ranks, until now he was the
head of an army of more than five thousand men, distributed among the
various mines.

"Yes, I will see what can be done for you," repeated the superintendent.

"Thank you, sir; but I wish you might find a place for me down in the
mines."

"Why are you so anxious to get below ground, my lad?"

"So that I may begin my apprenticeship at once."

"When will you be ready to go to work?"

"I am ready now," answered Steve promptly.

"The day is well along. Report here at seven o'clock to-morrow morning,
and I will place you at something. Your pay, to begin, will be a dollar
a day. Here is the address of a boarding house that I should advise you
to put up at, unless you already have made arrangements."

"No, sir."

"Very well. Report to the boarding house boss some time to-day and he
will see that you are taken care of. There are very good boys there, and
you will learn considerable about the business of mining from them. Let
me advise you, however, not to mix in too much with the foreign element.
Let them alone and you will find they will do the same with you. Pay
strict attention to duty, be punctual and work, and you will get along.
Our discipline is strict, but we have the interests of our men at heart.
In so far as they will let us, we make their well-being our first care.
Here is a copy of the rules governing the conduct of men in all
departments. Study it well to-day and come back here to-morrow morning
at the hour named."

Briefly thanking the superintendent, Steve left the mine office at Iron
Mountain and proceeded to the boarding house. There he was assigned to a
room in which were cots for two men. The place was neat and clean,
though extremely plain. There were no evidences of luxury in the
furnishings, and when he sat down to his first meal there he found the
food plain but wholesome; the miners mostly silent and in a great hurry
to have done with their meal. Considering how they bolted their food,
Steve did not understand how any of them managed to keep out of the
hospital.

"It's a wonder they don't all have chronic indigestion," he thought.

No one paid any attention to the quiet youth, after the first careless
glance at him, as the men took their places at the table. The lad did
not care particularly. He was rather glad that they did leave him wholly
to himself until he should become better acquainted with his
surroundings.

What Steve was curious about, however, was who his roommate was to be.
When he asked the boarding house boss about this the boy was told to
wait until night, when he would see for himself. After that Steve asked
no more questions.

After dinner young Rush went out to wander about and get acquainted with
his surroundings. Iron Mountain, the town in which was located the mine
where he was to work, was a village of about seventeen hundred
inhabitants, nestling between two high ranges of mountains. The timber
had been cut off, and wherever the eye chanced to rest it was met by a
forest of black stumps, with here and there the shaft of an iron mine
rising dark and gloomy.

It was the most cheerless scene that Steve Rush had ever gazed upon. The
buildings in the village proper were mostly mere shacks, the public
school being the only building worthy of a name in the entire community.

The streets of the town were deserted, but beneath them, far down in the
earth, men toiled and burrowed by day and by night, penetrating deeper
and deeper into the earth in their quest for Nature's riches.

The lad was lonely. He would have been homesick had he not been
possessed of the grit to keep his emotions in check. But as he strolled
over toward the towering, gloomy mine shafts he began to realize that
he was at the very fountain head of the greatest steel industry in the
world. From the quiet of the little mining village he had come upon a
scene of work the like of which he had never seen before.

As he gazed, the great ore cars shot up from the mines with a roar.
Leaping to the top of the high shaft, they hurled their cargoes of red
ore into waiting dump cars, then dropped back below ground with a speed
almost too great for the human eye to follow. Men red with the metal
they were handling were laboring on the surface, their faces streaked
with perspiration, their rolled-up sleeves and open-necked shirts
displaying the brawn and muscle without which the great steel company
would quickly lose its greatness.

Shrieking railroad engines were dashing into the yards, dragging from
them loads of ore that would be rushed to waiting ore boats on the Great
Lakes, to be conveyed thence to the great steel mills in the east. The
cars were being loaded by machinery and with such speed as to cause the
watcher to gasp with amazement.

"This is wonderful," Steve cried, carried away by his enthusiasm. "This
is the life for me! I never dreamed it was so splendid."

It was, indeed, a world pulsating with opportunities for him who
possessed the pluck to fight his way to the front. In a vague sort of
way, Steve Rush seemed to realize this.

"Some day I shall be at the head of one of these great industries!" he
breathed. "I, too, will be a captain of industry! I'll never give up
until I am--until I have learned all that can be learned about this
wonderful industry."

The afternoon drew to a close all too soon for Steve, and not until the
whistle blew at six o'clock and the miners in their oilskins came
streaming up from their underground haunts, did the lad make up his mind
to leave. With a sigh, he turned away, starting thoughtfully for the
boarding house.

Just before sitting down to supper he was introduced to a Cornishman,
who, he was told, was to be his roommate. When Steve had taken his place
at the table he found himself sitting opposite a boy whom he judged to
be about his own age. This boy, however, was taller and much more rugged
looking than was Steve.

The latter saw the lad eyeing him inquiringly.

"What's your name, boy?" finally demanded the larger of the two,
pointing a spoon at Steve.

"Stephen Rush."

"Rush?"

"Yes."

"That's a funny name. Do you hear that, fellows?"

"I do not see anything so very funny about it," replied Steve, his face
flushing ever so little. "What is your name?"

"Mine? I'm Bob Jarvis. But, judging from your name, you must be one of
those fellows who is always in a hurry. Does your mamma know you're
here?"

"She does," answered Steve gravely.

"Is she a Rusher, too?"

"Her name is Rush, if that is what you mean."

"Well, what do you think of that? His mother's Rush and she's a Rusher,
too. That must be a pretty lively family," scoffed Jarvis. "Why, I'll
bet----"

"You will please leave my mother's name out of your talk," commanded
Steve quietly, directing a level gaze at Jarvis.

"Touchy, eh? Do you hear that, fellows?"

If the miners did hear they were much too busy with their suppers to
give the matter much attention.

"Little Miss Hurry-up is going to get in a huff. But never mind, Rusher,
I guess you're right at that. I had a mother once myself, but that don't
stop me from saying whatever I want to you."

"Say what you wish to, so long as you confine your talk to myself,"
replied Steve. "What you say about me doesn't matter much, anyway. For
that matter, I do not think your remarks are of very great consequence,
whatever subject you may be discussing."

"What's that?"

"I think you heard what I said."

"What do you mean, young fellow?"

"If you don't understand, I shall try to make it plainer. I mean to say
that you act like a rowdy. I shouldn't be surprised if you are one."

Bob Jarvis half rose from his chair. The smile had left his face, giving
place to an angry scowl.

"So, you--you are looking for fight, eh?" he demanded, thrusting his
chin forward belligerently.

"No, sir; I am not." Steve did not even look up as he made the reply,
but calmly proceeded with his supper.

"Well, you've got to fight, whether you are looking for it or not. I'll
show you that you can't hand out a line of talk like that to Bob
Jarvis," growled the larger boy, starting for the head of the table,
around which he would have to go to reach Steve.

"Stow your scrapping and give us a chance to eat our suppers," growled
one of the miners.

"Yes, we'll throw both of you out first thing you know," added another.
"If you want to fight, why don't you have it out before you come to the
table?"

Jarvis gave no heed to the warnings. He was bent on punishing the boy on
the other side of the table who had defied him. Just as he was passing
the head of the table, a heavy hand gripped his collar, sending Bob
spinning back toward his seat.

"Sit down!" bellowed a voice.

The boarding boss straightened up threateningly. It was he who had
checked the pugnacious Bob Jarvis, and just in time to prevent a lively
fight in the miners' boarding house. Bob fell rather than sat down in
his chair.

"If you want to fight, go out doors. But if you do fight, I'll report
you both to the superintendent," warned the boss, resuming his seat.

Bob sulked in his chair, while Steve Rush, appearing to take not the
least bit of interest in the disturbance, went on with his supper
unmoved.

"I'll make you take that back when I catch you outside, one of these
fine days, Miss Hurry-up," threatened Bob in a low tone, leaning over
the table with one eye on the boarding house boss.

"Yes?"

"Yes, I will. I dare you to meet me over by the dry house after supper.
I promise you I will take it out of your hide."

"No, thank you," replied Steve dryly, with a slight shrug of the
shoulders.

"You won't?"

"No, I will not."

"Afraid, eh?"

"Yes; afraid I might lose some sleep. I am going to bed after supper. I
have work on hand to-morrow and I don't care to spoil my chances by
getting into a row to-night. Besides, I am not a fighter. I am here for
business."

"Fellows, I told you he was a missie. I see I've got to take you in
hand, Rush. You'll never make a miner until you've been properly
trimmed, and I'm the boy who's taken the contract to do the job. I----"

"Jarvis, that will be about enough for the present," warned the boarding
house boss from the head of the table.

"Can't a fellow have a little fun without being called down?" demanded
Bob in a tone of disgust.

"Yes; have all the fun you want, but don't pick on a boy who isn't your
size. You, boy down there, what did you say your name is?"

"Stephen Rush."

"Well, Steve, don't be afraid of Jarvis. His bark is much worse than his
bite."

"I am not afraid of him, sir."

"If he bothers you here, let me know. If you have any trouble outside,
report it to the superintendent or to your foreman. Where are you going
to work?"

"I don't know, sir. I have not been assigned. I thank you, but I think I
shall be able to take care of myself without reporting to anyone," added
Rush, flashing a significant glance at Bob Jarvis. The latter started to
make some reply, but checked himself sharply.

From that time on the meal proceeded without further disturbance. Just
as they were leaving the table, however, Jarvis edged over to where
Steve was standing, waiting for those ahead of him to pass through the
narrow door.

"I hope you get in my shift," he whispered in Steve's ear.

"Why?"

"Because I'll have a chance to teach you a few things."

"Then I hope I do," answered the lad in his soft voice. "I want to learn
all I can, you know."

Bob's face wrinkled into a scowl. He was not certain whether Steve
really meant what he said or whether he was poking fun at him.

Early on the following morning Steve reported to the office of the
superintendent. To his disappointment he was assigned to the ore dump.
This is a great pile of ore dumped on the surface by a tram car as the
ore is brought up from the mine in a skip, or ore elevator. Steve's
particular duty was to stand at the outer end of the track and shovel
the ore away from the track after each carload had been dumped.

It was not a comfortable place to stand, for a misstep would precipitate
him down the sloping end of the ore dump to the ground some forty feet
below.

On this dump the ore car was pushed by hand, whereas on others it was
operated by electricity. Steve had received his instructions from the
dump boss, so, with a shovel in his hands, he stood awaiting the first
carload of ore.

At last it came on with a bump and a crunch, groaning and threatening to
jump the rails with each revolution of its wheels.

Steve sprang to one side as he saw the car approaching, believing for
the minute that the tram was going to run him down and plunge over the
end of the dump. Should such be the case, the tram would surely carry
him down with it, so he had lost no time in getting out of the way.

"Hi, there! Look out where you are going! You'll run off the track!"
shouted the lad in a warning tone.

But the tram did not run off. It came to a slow stop; then, instead of
discharging its cargo over the end of the pile, the end of the car's box
suddenly swung around toward Steve. There followed a quick, sharp,
metallic clang. Steve Rush went down with the contents of the car
falling all about him in a red, suffocating shower, burying him nearly
to his neck. Some of the ore rolled down the side of the dump, and the
lad would have followed had he not been held fast by the dirt about him.
His body was bruised in spots where unbroken chunks had bombarded him;
his hair, mouth, eyes and nose were full of the stuff, and he found
himself scarcely able to breathe.

For a moment the boy was at a loss to understand what had happened. By
industrious blinking and rubbing of his eyes he managed presently to
take account of his surroundings.

Steve struggled with all his might to free himself. He was unable to do
so.

"He--help!" he shouted. "I--I'm bu--buried up to my chin and I'm getting
in deeper all the time. Help me to get out of this!"

"Hello, there! What's the matter?" questioned a jeering voice. "Why,
upon my word, if it isn't Little Miss Rush."

Steve recognized the voice as belonging to Bob Jarvis.

"It's you, is it, Jarvis? Well, help me out of this and I will talk with
you. I shall have a few things to say to you, too, when we get a chance
to talk----"

"Why, sure, I'll help you out. How did you happen to get in the way of
that dump?"

"Never mind how. I believe you did that on purpose, Bob Jarvis, and you
will have to answer to me for it," declared Steve Rush in a resolute
tone.




CHAPTER III

TWO THOUSAND FEET UNDER GROUND


Jarvis sprang forward and with shovel in hand began throwing the dirt in
all directions.

"If you don't mind, please don't pile any more of this red stuff on my
head than you can help. I have plenty as it is," said Steve.

"That's so; I was throwing it your way, wasn't I?" chuckled Bob,
laughing good-naturedly.

Steve found time to study the other boy while the latter was digging him
out. In spite of Jarvis' meanness to him, Rush felt certain that the lad
possessed a good heart, and it was a strong, resourceful face that Steve
found himself studying as the digging progressed.

"Bob," he said finally, "have you ever been thrashed?"

"Thrashed? Licked, you mean?"

"Yes."

"Well, not since my dad gave me a walloping last," laughed the boy.

"Don't you think a good, sound thrashing would do you a whole lot of
good?"

Bob grinned broadly. By this time he had dug down around Rush until the
latter was able to clamber from the pile of ore.

"Well, I don't know about that."

"I do, and I know you've got to have one before very long," announced
young Rush with strong emphasis.

"I will, eh?"

"You will," affirmed Steve, brushing the dirt from his clothes.

"And who's going to give me this licking, Little Miss Hurry-up?"
demanded Jarvis threateningly.

"I am," replied Steve in a quiet tone.

Jarvis began to take off his coat.

"Not now, Bob," spoke up the other quickly. "This is the company's time.
We should both be discharged if we were to be caught fighting here and
now. We will settle our difficulty some other time."

"So you were only bluffing, eh? I knew you didn't have the spunk to
fight anything."

Steve pointed off to the mine shaft.

"There comes the skip with a load of ore. You had better get your car
back there or you will have trouble enough without a fight."

Jarvis, with an exclamation, began pushing the tram car back over the
top of the dump, Steve picking up his shovel and beginning his work of
clearing the end of the tracks.

All day long the lad toiled industriously. It was hard work and his back
ached, yet he kept to his task. When night came Steve had the
satisfaction of being told that he had done a man's work that day.

A truce had been declared between the two boys, so far as fighting was
concerned, though Jarvis continued his nagging at every opportunity.
Steve took the other's scoffing good-naturedly, turning Bob's jibes with
soft answers. For a full week both lads had labored far up on the ore
dump. They had been too busy to think of their personal grievances for
any great length of time. Saturday night had arrived, and when Steve
left the dump to start for his boarding house he was told that the
general superintendent wished to see him.

"I guess he is going to discharge me," thought the boy. "Well, I have
done the best I could."

His surprise was great, therefore, when the superintendent said, as the
lad came to a halt in front of the official's desk:

"You have done very well, Rush."

"Thank you, sir."

"Do you still think you would like to work below ground?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then you may begin on Monday."

"On what shift?"

"The day shift, going down at seven o'clock. The best I have for you now
is a contract job run by a man named Spooner. You will find it pretty
hard work. You see, these contracts are given out for so much per ton
and the men who take the contracts propose to get as much out of their
workmen as possible. You will be worked to your full capacity."

"I can stand it, sir."

"If you do, you should be able to endure anything we have to offer in
this business. I have arranged for Spooner to take you on as a miner's
helper. Your wages will be a dollar and a quarter a day. Be very careful
and guard yourself from accident. Carelessness may cost you your life,
for there is danger everywhere below ground."

"I will be very careful, sir."

Steve hurried away full of anticipation. He was to be a real miner; he
was to start his career as a miner on a level two thousand feet below
the surface. The lad had never been below ground before and he was full
of anticipation of what awaited him on the following Monday morning.

Acting on the suggestion of the boarding-house boss, the lad had
purchased a suit of yellow oilcloth, rubber boots, oilcloth hat and
candle holder. This latter, as used by the ore miners, is a piece of
steel, one end coming to a sharp point, the other having an opening for
the candle itself. The whole fastens securely to the hat. When necessary
the candle holder may be carried in the hand, or driven into a crevice
of rock or ore.

This, with pick and shovel, comprises the miner's outfit and was the
outfit of Steve Rush when he presented himself at the mouth of the shaft
on the following Monday morning. There were about five hundred men to go
down in the cage, the car that carries the miners and other passengers
down to the various levels, and Steve found himself pushed aside, so
that he was among the last to get aboard the steel cage.

"Will you tell me where the Spooner contract is located?" he asked of
the cage-tender before getting aboard.

"Seventeenth level."

"Does the car stop there?"

"If it doesn't, you're a goner."

Rush leaped aboard, grasping the rod that he saw above his head to
steady himself. The protecting bars in front of the cage fell in place
with a noisy clang.

"All clear," announced a voice.

The support beneath the lad seemed to drop from under him. With a rush
and a roar, a grinding and crunching the steel cage dropped from sight.
Instantly everything was plunged in inky darkness.

"Do--do they always go like this?" asked the young miner of a man
standing beside him.

"This isn't going much. He has slow speed on this morning because the
cage has a bigger load than usual. Afraid, are you?"

"No, I am not afraid. I was wondering what would happen if the man
forgot to shut off his power when we reached the bottom."

The miner laughed.

"We'd punch a hole in the bottom of the shaft," he said.

"How deep is the shaft, sir?"

"Two thousand feet to the bottom--fifty feet less than that to the last
working level. The bottom level is used to drain off the water from the
other levels. From there big steam pumps pump the water to the surface."

The two could scarcely hear for noise.

"The Spooner contract is on the seventeenth level, is it not?"

"Yes, on the sub-level above the seventeenth. Is that where you are
going to work?"

"Yes, sir; for Mr. Spooner."

"Then I feel sorry for you."

"Why so, sir?"

"Because he is a slave driver. Every man in the mines knows him and none
of them wants to work for him. I guess he hasn't a white man on the
contract."

"I didn't know there were any colored men employed here."

"There are not. We call a white man one who is not a foreigner," laughed
the miner.

"Oh!"

Now and then the car would halt with a jolt; two or three men would leap
off and disappear in the darkness, after which the cage would drop down
another level or so.

"Here is your level," announced the miner. "Jump off, or you will be
carried by."

Steve jumped off.

"Thank you," he called, but the miner did not hear him, for the car had
dropped quickly out of sight.

Water that had dripped down through the shaft from the surface and the
upper levels was, by this time, running from the oilskins of the young
miner in tiny rivulets. Dampness was everywhere. A blast of hot, damp
air smote him in the face as he turned to look about him.

"I wonder where I am to go?" muttered Steve.

A heavy fog hung over everything, electric lights glowing dimly through
the haze, so that one was able to see but a few feet ahead.

"Where is the Spooner contract?" called Steve to a passing miner.

The man jerked a hand over his shoulder, whereupon the lad made his way
cautiously down the level or tunnel, which is the main avenue, and from
which other tunnels, called drifts, run off into the ore beds.

By this time the mine was in full operation. Strange sounds smote the
ears of the young miner. The roar of the electric tram cars as they
dashed by him, now and then narrowly missing running him down, the
thunder of the skips, huge black objects hurling themselves surfaceward
loaded with iron ore, the bang, bang of the drills and the detonations
of many dynamite explosions, filled the heart of Steve Rush with awe and
wonder.

The lad was confused. He did not know which way to turn, nor what second
he might step into an opening and plunge downward. Had he but known it
there was little danger of such an accident so long as he kept to the
main level. There were many dangerous holes--ore chutes--but these
ordinarily were protected so that there was little chance of one's
falling through them. Such accidents, however, had been known to occur.

At last Steve saw a man who looked as if he might be a person in
authority, and to this one he appealed to direct him to the Spooner
contract.

"Who are you?" demanded the man sharply.

"My name is Rush. May I ask who you are?"

"I am the mine captain. Do you work with Spooner?"

"I am going to do so if I can find the way to his place."

"Come this way. I will show you how to get there. You are late."

"Yes, sir; I was not able to find my way and I guess I was among the
last ones to come down in the cage."

"This is your first experience below ground?"

"It is, sir."

"Then let me give you some advice; never get careless. There is danger
everywhere about here."

"So I have already discovered, sir."

"There is no excuse for men getting hurt, however, if they do not get
careless. That is why so many get hurt, and why some lose their lives.
We do everything we can to look out for the safety of our people, but we
cannot guard against everything."

"I shall try to follow your advice, sir."

The captain strode along rapidly through dark drifts, turning here and
there with perfect confidence. Steve felt sure that he never should be
able to find his way about in that labyrinth without getting lost, and
he asked the captain how he should do so.

"Follow the crowd," was the brief answer. "There, do you see that
ladder?"

"Yes, sir."

"Climb it. It is a forty-foot ladder. The top of it is the sub-level,
where the Spooner contract is located."

"Thank you, sir," answered Rush, beginning his long, dark climb up the
slender ladder to the unknown regions above him.




CHAPTER IV

STEVE SHOOTS THE CHUTES


Reaching the sub-level, as he supposed, Steve found it enshrouded in
inky blackness. He was in a side drift, but he did not know it.

"I guess I am as badly off as I was before. I haven't the least idea
where I am, so I guess there is not much danger of getting lost."

Removing the candle from his hat, the lad held it before him, lighting
the shadows sufficiently to enable him to see where he was stepping.
After a time he came out into a larger tunnel, which, he decided, must
be one of the main levels, for there was a narrow track extending along
it. Steve decided to follow this track and trust to luck. He had gone
along for perhaps fifteen minutes when he made a discovery.

"I've lost the track!" he exclaimed. "I wonder where it could have gone
to?"

The lad retraced his steps, but search as he might he was unable to find
the steel rails again. For what seemed hours to him the youthful miner
wandered here and there. The fact that he had neither seen nor heard
anyone led him to  where the work was
going on.

Steve was beginning to get disheartened. He was thankful that he had his
dinner pail with him, in case he failed to find his way out before the
day's work was done.

At last, however, he reached a drift or level, he did not know which,
where he could not stand upright. The rocks overhead had been shored up
with heavy timbers. It was a dangerous spot. Steve understood that
without being told, so he crawled quickly through. At the far end of the
low drift he encountered another ladder.

Deciding that it must lead to an upper level, the lad began climbing. He
had gotten a little more than half way up when all at once his candle
slipped from his hand, falling clear to the bottom, where it went out,
leaving Steve in darkness.

"Oh, that's too bad. I must get it again before I dare go on any
further."

Steve hurried down and began searching about on the ground for the lost
candle. After a little he found it, but the candle was useless. In
tramping about he had crushed it under his heavy boots, flattening the
candle out hopelessly.

"Only a grease spot," muttered Steve. "Well, I can't be much worse off
than I have been, so I am going back up the ladder. I surely must find
someone if I keep on hunting about. There are more than five hundred men
in this mine right now, and unless they are all hiding from me I am
bound to run across some of them. I am afraid I am not much of a success
as a miner. At least my first day below ground has been a sad failure so
far."

Steve was on his way up the ladder once more. It was a long climb, much
longer, it seemed to him, than the other ladder had been. He began to
climb faster, when all at once he received a shock that wrenched his
hands loose from the rungs of the ladder. Before the lad could regain
his balance he toppled over backwards and plunged downward.

Steve's head had come in contact with the rocks above, that left but a
small space for a man to crawl through to reach the upper level. He had
bumped his head with such force as to cause him to let go.

Grasping frantically for something to stay his flight, the lad went
tumbling down. He landed on the ground at the bottom, flat on his back,
bruised and breathless.

For a moment Steve lay where he had fallen. But shortly he got up,
rubbing his bruises gingerly and trying to collect his thoughts.

"Tumble number one," muttered Rush. "I'll try it again."

This time he met with better success, for he managed to get through the
manhole above without striking his head against the rocks. But once on
the upper level the question arose as to what to do next. There was the
same dense blackness over all, the same deep silence that the lad had
found below.

After considering a moment, he decided to feel his way along as best he
could. An investigation had told him that his dinner was still safe,
though the tin pail had been battered all out of shape.

"I'll bet there is some scrambled egg in the bottom of the pail," said
Steve, with a short laugh.

Once more he took up his journey through the dark tunnels, feeling
cautiously with feet and hands before he took a step forward. He had
gone along in this way for some time when he halted abruptly, leaning
forward in a listening attitude.

"What's that?" he muttered. "I know! I know what it is; it's a drill. I
would recognize that 'bang, bang, bang' anywhere. That means I am close
to some operations. The next thing is to find where the sound comes
from. It must be ahead of me somewhere, for I can just hear it, whereas
a few moments ago I could not."

Again he began cautiously working forward. After a while the sounds came
to him more clearly. Steve had swerved to the right and entered a new
drift, though he was not aware of the fact and whereas he had been
proceeding directly east, he was now headed south.

The bang, bang of the compressed air drill was getting louder and louder
as the moments passed. After a time the boy halted again. The sounds
seemed to come from directly beneath him.

"I believe that is on the level below this," he decided. "How am I to
find the way down to it? If I go back I shall be lost. I'll call and see
if I can attract attention from any of them."

The lad shouted at the top of his voice, but only his own echoes came
back to him in hollow tones.

Suddenly a twinkling light appeared far down the level. The lad
recognized it at once as being a candle on a miner's hat.

"Hello, there!" he called.

"What do you want?" came the answer.

"I am lost."

"Go find yourself, then. Don't bother me."

Steve did not propose to let it go at that. He ran forward to where the
miner was about to descend a ladder to the lower level.

"Won't you please help me, sir. I am in a fix."

"Well, what do you want?" demanded the miner in a surly tone, pausing a
few rungs down the ladder.

"I am looking for the Spooner contract. Will you please direct me to
it?"

"Follow this level around to the left until you come to three drifts.
Take the middle one to the end, and then go down the ladder you will
find there."

"Thank you. Can you spare me a candle?"

"No; I can't."

The man grasped the side pieces of the ladder, letting himself down in a
rapid slide. Steve Rush found himself once more left in darkness. At
least he had his directions now, and he thought he could find his way to
the contract for which he was looking.

So the lad pressed on with more confidence than before. After proceeding
some distance he found by groping about that he had reached the place
indicated. He took the middle drift, as directed, and hurried along
this. He had no idea what time it was, but Steve imagined that it must
be near noon. It seemed as though a long time must have passed since he
entered the mine with the day shift, whereas, in truth, not quite two
hours had elapsed.

The lad was thinking over his misfortunes, smiling grimly to
himself--for Steve Rush was not a boy to whine, no matter how great his
adversity--when all at once the ground seemed to drop from under his
feet.

On all levels there are "rises," small chutes which extend from one
level to another. These are in addition to the regular ore chutes and
considerably smaller. They are used for filling cars below, when
necessary, as ore is always dumped downward into a lower level, from
which it is hoisted to the surface, thus saving the labor of loading. It
was one of these rises into which Steve had stepped. To do so he had
swerved from the tunnel through which he was passing, stepping into an
open pocket in the rocks, believing that he was following the wall, on
which he had kept one hand constantly.

The lad uttered no cry, but he threw out both arms with quick instinct,
hoping thereby to catch and hold himself. The force was too great,
however, and Steve Rush shot down through the narrow opening, bound for
the lower level. He did not know this; he did not know where he was
going to land, but he fully expected that this last disaster would be
the end of him and he shut his teeth tightly together, bracing himself
to meet the shock that he knew must come within the next few seconds.




CHAPTER V

THE "MISSED HOLE"


On the seventeenth sub-level of the Cousin Jack Mine the Spooner
contract gang was working at high pressure. Two diamond drills were
banging away like a battery of Gatling guns; men were rushing here and
there, some were pushing small cars of red ore out through the drift to
the level, where the electric trams would pick up the cars and rush them
to the ore chutes. The pick men were breaking off the loosened pieces of
ore dislodged by the last blast, while others were shoveling the ore
into cars as if their very existence depended upon keeping up the pace.

Spooner himself, clad in a suit of oilskins, was shouting at his men,
nagging, urging, threatening and directing in a perfect volley of
explosive words.

A car had just been pushed out from the end of the drift where the
drillers were working. It had reached a point directly underneath the
rise and there it stuck, held fast by a piece of rock that had dropped
to the track.

Spooner leaped forward with an angry roar.

"Out with it! I'll fire you both, you lazy, good for nothings!" he
bellowed. "You ain't fit even to be swampers behind a pair of lazy
mules. Push, I tell you! Push! Something will be doing here in a jiffy
if you don't get that car out of the way!"

His words were prophetic in a measure, for something did happen a few
seconds later, though Spooner was not the author of it. Rather was he
the victim.

With a crash the trap door at the bottom of the rise burst open with a
sound like a dynamite explosion in a new drift. A dark object was hurled
out into the level, landing squirming on the soft ore in the car.

"What--what----"

Spooner did not finish what he was about to say. The dark object bounded
from the ore car, landing with great force against the angry contractor.
Spooner toppled over backwards, the breath pretty well knocked out of
him, collapsing in the gutter at the side of the track.

Steve Rush had found the Spooner contract at last. The lad was not much
the worse for his exciting slide, though he had been somewhat bruised
when he burst through the wooden trap door at the lower end of the rise.

Steve was up in a twinkling. He looked about him and in a half laughing
voice demanded:

"Where am I?"

"I reckon you're on seventeen," answered one of the miners.

"Where's the boss?"

"He's down there under you somewhere. I guess you knocked the daylight
out of him. I hope you did. If it wasn't for my wife and family I'd a
done it long time ago."

"Yes; I'd give a year's wages for the privilege of turning the diamond
drill on him," added the head driller.

"Did I hit a man?" asked Steve anxiously.

"No; you hit an apology for a man," was the quick reply.

By this time young Rush was bending over, looking down into the shadows
that hung over the gutter along the side of the track. He made out the
figure of a man lying there.

"Help me get him up, men," he cried. "Don't you see that he is hurt?"

"Serve him right if he is," growled the trammer, the workman who pushed
the cars of ore out into the main level.

"I tell you he is hurt. Lend a hand here!" commanded the boy sternly.

Something in his tone led the others to obey his order promptly. They
gathered up Contractor Spooner and carried him over to where the light
from the candles could be thrown on his face.

"Douse him with a pail of water," suggested the drill-man.

Someone quickly adopted the suggestion, with the result that Spooner sat
up almost at once, choking, roaring and threatening between his gasps
for breath.

"Who--who did it? Who did it?" snarled the contractor, struggling to his
feet. "Who hit me?"

The man's hat had fallen from his head, and for the moment Steve did not
answer. He was too fully absorbed in gazing at the harsh face of the man
before him.

Balanced on Spooner's tall, angular body was a round, bullet-like head,
with a rim of reddish-gray hair. His lips were protruding, sagging at
each corner, while the lids over his prominent eyes blinked as though
trying to run a race with each other.

"Who did it, I say?" roared the contractor, fixing his angry eyes upon
the face of Steve Rush.

"I am afraid I am the guilty one, sir. But it was an accident. I will
tell you how it occurred. I----"

Spooner gave the lad no opportunity to explain. Instead, the contractor,
with an angry imprecation, started for Rush.

Steve's mind worked quickly. He was not afraid; he was considering
whether it were best to run or to stand his ground, and he decided upon
the latter.

"Stand back! Don't you touch me! I tell you it was an accident!" shouted
the boy.

The contractor was too enraged to listen to reason, and as he sprang for
Rush he thrust forth his long arms to grab the boy.

Spooner got a blow on the nose that sent him staggering backward, but
Steve did not follow up the advantage he had gained. He could not expect
to prove a match for the powerful miner, and perhaps he would not have
been able to hit the latter as he did had the other been looking for
anything of the sort. Spooner was more surprised than hurt.

"If you will wait, sir, I will explain. I am sorry I fell on you and
sorry I had to hit you, but you mustn't lay your hands on me. You
must----"

All work in drift seventeen had been suspended for the moment, and even
the diamond drills had ceased their bang, bang, bang. Every man in the
drift, save Spooner himself, had uttered a yell of delight when he saw
the young miner's sturdy punch.

"Look out, lad; he's coming for you again. Spooner, remember he's a boy;
don't do anything you'll be sorry for. You'll be----"

The contractor had started for young Rush again.

"Get out of here!" roared the man. "Out of here before I wring your
miserable neck!"

Steve snatched up an iron bar that the trammers used to fasten the
catches on the cars. He raised the bar over his shoulder.

"If you try to touch me I'll hit you, sir," said the lad in a tone so
polite and pleasant that Spooner paused in amazement, then uttered a
hoarse guffaw. Nevertheless he halted where he was, for he saw an
expression in the eyes of the boy before him which spelled trouble.
Furthermore, Spooner knew how strict the rules of the mine were, and now
that he had had an opportunity to get control of himself he decided not
to throw the young man out bodily.

"Get out of here before I help you, then. I can't stand everything. Go
to work, you lazy louts! What do you mean by standing around on my time?
I'll dock every man of you an hour's pay. Start those drills. Trammers,
off with you. Are you going, boy?"

"No, sir."

"You're not going?"

"No, sir; I am going to work here."

"Oh, you are, eh? Well, I think I shall have something to say about
that. You're not going to work here, and I should like to know what you
are doing down in this mine, anyway. I'll have the mine captain put you
out. It's my opinion that you are not here for any good, and you're
lucky if he doesn't turn you over to the mine police."

"I have been assigned to work in this drift. The superintendent ordered
me to report to you, sir. I am ready to go to work."

The contractor gazed at the boy with a puzzled expression on his face.

"You, a boy like you, work here? Pooh! What do you think this is, a
kindergarten?"

"I am able to do a day's work; besides, it is the superintendent's
orders, sir."

Spooner knew the boy had the best of him there. The superintendent's
orders were to be obeyed, no matter if Spooner was mining on a contract
agreement.

"Very well; if you want to work you shall have all the work you can do.
I'll see the superintendent about your case when I go up to-day noon."

"What shall I do?"

"Do? Don't you see anything to do?"

"I see some things I should like to do," answered Steve Rush in a
significant tone, eyeing the contractor steadily.

"Get hold of that shovel. I can't break your head as I ought to do, but
the shovel will break your back before you get through with this day's
work."

Steve grasped the shovel and began throwing the ore into the waiting
car.

Spooner eyed the lad narrowly for a few moments. He was obliged to admit
that Rush handled the shovel as well as any man he had ever had in his
gang.

"You ought to be in the bull gang," jeered the contractor. "Yes, sir,
you are wasting your talents working in an ore drift."

"What is a bull gang?" questioned the lad between shovels.

"That is the gang that shifts the timber down into the mine," answered
the man shoveling by Steve's side. "The timber-men below take the stuff
and build the supports and the lagging to keep the levels from caving
in, you know."

"Where's your candle?" demanded Spooner. "You're a nice sort of a miner
to come to work without a candle in your stick!"

"I lost it. You see, I lost my way and had a time getting here,"
explained Steve.

"Get one when you go up to-day noon. And remember you get only two
hours' pay for the forenoon. If you're ever late like this again you are
through right then and there."

Steve did not answer. He shoveled with all his might.

"Ready for the powder," called the head drill-man.

All the men save Steve and the powder-man laid down their tools and
moved off. The boy continued at his work, his shovel making a steady
scrape, scrape as he threw the ore up into the car.

In the meantime the powder-man was adjusting a charge of dynamite in
each of the holes in the ore made by the drills.

"Well, boy?" called Mr. Spooner.

"Yes, sir."

"Are you going to stay there and have your fool head blown off?"

"Why----"

"Don't you see, they're going to fire a charge of dynamite. Get out of
that!"

"Stand c-l-e-a-r!" called the powder-man in a sing-song tone.

All hands ran back so as to be well out of the way, and now that Steve
understood what was being done, he shouldered his shovel and moved
leisurely off in the direction taken by the others.

"That's the worst of a fool kid," grumbled the contractor. "They don't
know enough to come in out of the wet----"

"The fuse is fired! Look out!" warned the powder-man, starting away from
the scene on a run.

Steve watched the sputtering, squirming fuse far down the drift as the
flame neared the charge of dynamite, six pounds all told. It seemed to
him that all of them were in a dangerous position, but not being
familiar with blasting, he supposed the miners knew their own business
best.

It is always an anxious moment in the mines when, gathered in an
expectant group, the workers underground stand waiting for the charge of
dynamite to explode. It is seldom that anyone speaks during this brief
period of suspense until the flash comes, followed by a puff of white
smoke, a heavy report and a rain of rock and ore.

In this instance the wait seemed unusually long. The flash did not come.

"Missed hole," announced Spooner in a tone of disgust. "Five minutes of
valuable time lost. That's the way the money goes in this gang. Get in
there and attach a new fuse, powder-man. Don't be all day about it,
either. If I wasn't around here to watch things we wouldn't get half a
dozen tons a day out of this drift. First thing you know we'll all be
out of a job. Come, are you going to get in there?"

"It ain't safe," answered the powder-man, shaking his head, sending a
shower of grease from his candle into the face of Steve Rush.

"I see I've got to do it myself," exclaimed Spooner, grabbing a handful
of fuses from the shoulders of the man who handled the dynamite.

The powder-man reached for his fuses, but the contractor already had
them in his hand and was striding toward the drift.

The powder-man hesitated, then started after him on a trot.

"It's again' the rules, sir, to go in until ten minutes after firing the
fuse when there's a missed hole," he warned.

"Rules!" jeered the contractor. "I'm the rules. I guess I'm running this
drift."

By this time both men had reached the dome-like space where the drift
ended, which included a very rich vein of iron ore.

Steve Rush shaded his eyes and, stooping over, peered into the drift. He
was looking between the two men who at that moment were arguing
excitedly. They appeared to have forgotten that they were treading on
dangerous ground, but long familiarity with high explosives had made
them careless.

The lad saw something a few feet beyond them that caused his heart to
leap. A tiny spark had sprung up from the darkness, then as suddenly
died out.

"Look out!" shouted the young miner, now keenly alive to the danger of
the men ahead.

"Keep that kid still, or throw him down on the next level!" called
Spooner over his shoulder. "I expect he'll have an attack of hysterics
when we fire the blast."

"I tell you it isn't a missed hole!" cried the boy.

"Don't be a fool," jeered the head trammer.

Steve did not hear him. The boy had started off with a bound. His hat
dropped from his head and his shovel fell clattering to the ground.
"Come back, I tell you!" shouted Rush.

A few seconds more and he was right upon them. Without wasting further
words of warning, he grabbed the contractor, and with surprising
strength for one of his build, Steve hurled Spooner far out into the
drift, that official bellowing his rage at the indignity.

Steve reached for the powder-man. His hands had just been laid on the
man's shoulders when there came a blinding flash, a detonating report, a
rending and tearing of rocks, then a shower of ore and stone.

Darkness settled over the drift and all was still.




CHAPTER VI

IN THE POWDER-WRECKED DRIFT


For a moment those outside the end of the drift stood in awed silence.
The candles on the hats of the miners had been extinguished by the
explosion.

Nothing will cause an underground miner to lose his head quicker than
being plunged into sudden darkness. Several of them set up a terrified
yell.

"Hold your tongues!" bellowed the contractor. "You haven't been hurt.
Don't you know enough to light your candles? That's the best way I know
of to get rid of the darkness."

Spooner lighted his own candle, holding it in his hand above his head as
he looked about. He stepped forward toward the place where his men had
been drifting in the ore.

"Just as I expected," he growled. "More time wasted."

The timbers that had supported the roof of the drift had crashed
downward, carrying with them a few tons of rock and ore, blocking the
passage completely.

"Are--are the men in there killed?" questioned a trammer in unsteady
tones.

"How should I know?" growled the contractor. "I do know that we are
losing a lot of valuable time. If that fool powder-man hadn't been in
such a hurry we should have been spared all this delay. Get busy with
your shovels and picks here."

There were ugly scowls on the faces of the miners as they sprang forward
to obey the order of their employer. They knew full well that it was not
the fault of either the powder-man or Steve Rush, but of Spooner
himself. It was he who had insisted upon going into the drift to examine
the missed hole, and had it not been for the bravery of Steve the
contractor would now be lying dead behind the mass of rock.

The men spoke no word, but their hearts were full of indignation. They
cared not for the loss of time, nor for any other loss that their
employer might have suffered. They did care for the unfortunate man and
boy buried in the drift.

In the meantime word had been conveyed to the mine captain that an
accident had occurred in number seventeen. With a force of men he was
already hurrying to the scene as fast as an electric tram could carry
him. The word he had received was to the effect that several men had
been killed. The company's surgeon had been sent for and all
preparations were made to care for the wounded.

During all this time brave little Steve Rush lay inside the drift, half
buried under rock and red ore. He had toppled backwards when the
explosion came, half turned and had fallen face downward, his arms
crossed under his forehead so that his nose and mouth were free.
Otherwise he undoubtedly would have smothered before help could reach
him.

Steve stirred uneasily, coughed and tried to raise himself. He could not
do so. He found himself held down by an oppressive weight. Some little
time elapsed before his return to consciousness, and even then he was
still dazed. At first he tried hard to recall what had happened, and at
last it all came back to him.

"There was another in here with me--the powder-man. I wonder if he is
dead?" muttered the lad.

After some difficulty the lad got his hands free of his head and began
feeling about him. He made a discovery that thrilled him through and
through. The body of the powder-man lay across his own, holding the lad
firmly to the ground.

Yet under these trying conditions the lad did not lose his steady nerve
for an instant. As his mind became clearer he began weighing the
possibilities of getting out of his predicament. He reasoned that he and
his companion must have been imprisoned in some way by the explosion.
All the time he was carefully twisting his body this way and that in an
effort to free himself without hurting the man who was lying across him.

At last Rush succeeded in crawling from under his human burden and the
weight of ore and rock that hemmed them both in.

Steve's first act was to stretch forth a hand to his companion. The hand
wandered from the face of the prostrate man down over the heart, where
it paused.

A faint, irregular beating of that organ rewarded Steve's effort.

"He's alive," cried the lad, scrambling to his feet. "He's----"

A severe fit of coughing cut short the young miner's words. A dense
cloud of suffocating powder smoke hung over the drift like a pall.

Steve dropped to the ground, pressing his face close to the earth, where
he found the air better. After a few long breaths he began searching for
a candle. He knew there had been one on the powder-man's cap when the
explosion came. A search, however, failed to locate the candle.

"I wish I knew what to do for him," muttered the lad. "He surely will
die here unless they get us out pretty soon, and I wouldn't give much
for my own life if I had to stay in this awful air very long."

Steve uttered a long shout, which ended in a fit of coughing.

"No more shouting for me," he muttered, wiping the tears from his
eyes--tears not caused by fear or grief.

He next tried shaking the powder-man, which drew a groan from the man,
whereupon the lad quickly desisted.

After a moment's reflection, the boy stuffed a handkerchief in his
mouth, permitting it to cover his nose, to keep out the full strength of
the powder smoke. This done, he got to his feet again, and began feeling
his way about the chamber in which the accident had occurred.

"Ah, this is it!"

His hands paused when they came in contact with a heap of crushed
timber, and his feet struck a mass of ore piled against the foot-wall of
the drift.

For a moment Rush stood motionless, reflecting on the situation. He
could hear no sounds on the outside.

"Either they are all killed out there, or else we are buried so deep
that I cannot hear them. I do not know which it is, but I think it must
be the latter," the boy decided. "We are imprisoned in the drift; that
is certain."

The lad, after some searching about, found a shovel, and with this he
began throwing the dirt back from the place where the opening had been.
The effort was too much for him. Strong as he was, the shock of the
explosion had weakened him and the powder smoke choked him until he went
off into another fit of coughing. To relieve himself he lay down again.

The fresh air along the floor of the drift strengthened him somewhat,
and once more he turned his attention to the powder-man. He lifted the
miner's head gently, placing it in his own lap, after which he chafed
the man's hands and forehead. The miner drew a long, deep sigh and
stirred uneasily. Perhaps something of the lad's tender sympathy touched
his inner consciousness.

"Poor fellow!" murmured Steve, forcing back the lump that rose in his
throat. "This is not a life for the weak or the timid. It is a man's
work and I'm going to be a man."

Steve continued to stroke the face and hands of the powder-man until,
becoming dizzy from inhaling the powder smoke, he lay down again until
somewhat revived.

"I must try to attract the attention out there," decided the lad
finally.

Choosing a piece of rock large enough to answer his purpose, he began
thumping on the broken timbers. The attempt was not very successful, for
he seemed to make no noise at all. Then something else occurred to him.

Illustration: Seizing the Shovel, Steve Began Beating the Timbers.

"The shovel!" he cried. "Why did I not think of it before?"

Grabbing up the tool, he began beating the timbers with it in wide,
swinging strokes.

Bang, bang, bang, went the shovel, the lad now and then pausing to
listen. Once he thought he caught an answering blow from the opposite
side, but he did not hear it again. Then he set up a piece of rock, the
largest he could find, and began hammering on this.

Steve's ears were ringing by this time, and during the intervals when he
ceased hammering on the timbers or the rock he was overcome by a roaring
sound as if a great flood had been suddenly let loose. He did not
understand what this meant. The silence of the underground prison had
become a chaos of noises, the lad's blows became weaker and at longer
intervals apart.

"I wonder what--what is the matter with me. I'm getting sleepy," he
muttered.

A few more blows and the shovel dropped from his nerveless fingers.
Steve staggered, then collapsed unconscious across the body of the
powder-man.




CHAPTER VII

"IS ANYONE ALIVE IN THERE?"


"Order the timber-men in here! Get a pair of jacks and raise the timbers
bodily. Get a move on you, men! We may be able to save them yet!"

Superintendent Penton, of the Cousin Jack Mine, had been summoned by
telephone at the first sign of trouble. In his miner's outfit, with a
green candle stuck in the holder on his hat, he had hurried down into
the mine and made his way quickly to the sub-level where the accident
had occurred. He needed no guide to reach the place, for he knew the
maze of tunnels of that underground hive of industry so well that he
could have followed them to any given point with his eyes shut.

A few brief, pointed questions had brought out the full story of the
accident, but Mr. Penton had not addressed Spooner; he had made his
inquiries from the men who had been working on that level and in the
drift where the explosion had happened.

"Shovelers, here! Throw that rock back! Be careful that you do not
undermine the lagging and let the roof all the way down. It's lucky the
explosion blew ore enough out to hold the timbers off the ground, or our
work would be much more difficult."

The superintendent had taken full charge of the operations. His long
experience had told him exactly what to do. The official showed no trace
of excitement; instead, his every faculty was centered on the work in
hand. His tones were stern, his orders sharp and incisive.

By this time the jacks had been brought. At the superintendent's
direction a heavy timber had been placed as a support under those that
had been broken and the jacks set to work. Little by little, creaking
and groaning, the wrecked lagging was raised inch by inch.

"Steady, there! Hold it, men!"

Those at the jacks stopped work.

"Let half a dozen shovelers get in there," Penton directed. "Throw out
some of that dirt. We must get an opening as soon as possible to let air
in. Throw away the larger pieces first."

In the meantime the superintendent had ordered a fresh drill brought up,
the one belonging to that shift being in the wrecked drift. A line of
pipe had been laid to the nearest connection to furnish the compressed
air with which to operate the drill.

As soon as the rock had been removed sufficiently, the official ordered
the drill set in place. He indicated where the drilling was to be done
and a moment later the steady "bang, bang" of the diamond drill filled
the air to the exclusion of all other sounds.

"She's through, sir," announced the drill-man, nodding to the
superintendent.

"Withdraw the drill."

The official placed his nose to the hole thus made, and shook his head.

"You haven't reached it. Try a hole above the shoring. We must get air
in there."

Again the powerful drill began its work. Gathered in a closely massed
group were the other miners waiting, silent, anxious, the flames of
candles on their caps flickering and swaying from side to side in the
faint draft that swirled through the long, dark cavern. Attention was
divided between the working drill and the calm-faced, strong,
resourceful man who was directing the operations. He was master and the
men knew it.

"All right." announced the drill-man again.

The superintendent nodded. The drill was withdrawn. Following it came a
little puff of white, nauseating smoke.

"We've hit it," announced the executive calmly. "Now, bore another hole
on the same line but about six feet to the left, so we shall get a draft
through the enclosed drift."

This was promptly done.

The superintendent, as soon as the noise of the drill had ceased, placed
his lips close to the hole thus made.

"Hello, in there! Is anyone alive in there?"

No answer came from the closed drift.

"They're dead. What's the use in bothering about them?" growled Spooner.

Mr. Penton shot a withering glance at the contractor.

"We will proceed on the theory that they are alive until we have learned
that they are not," replied the superintendent coldly.

"Shall we go on raising the lagging?" asked the timber-man.

"No; wait until the powder smoke is out of the drift and some fresh air
has taken its place. The two men in there will be suffocated unless we
free the place of powder fumes. Remove the drill from the pipe and force
a little air through the vent holes. Not too much; just enough to
dislodge the smoke and force it out. It won't stand much pressure.
There, that will do. Now, jackmen, get to work. Keep on shoveling below
there."

Giving his orders calmly and encouragingly, the work proceeded with
great success. The diggers were gradually boring in under the timber
that the jacks were raising.

After a time their shovels and bars poked a hole through the debris into
the drift. It was a small hole, so small that the average man would have
difficulty in getting through it.

Among those who had hurried to the scene was Bob Jarvis. He had been
using a shovel industriously, and when the opening had been made he
stepped up to the superintendent.

"I think I can crawl in there now, if you will let me. I want to get
that Hurry-up kid out," added Bob.

"Go in, if you think you can get through," nodded the superintendent.
"Better tie a rope to one foot before you start, so we can pull you out
if you get wedged in."

While Bob was making ready, the official got down on his hands and knees
and examined the opening in the attempt to satisfy himself that it would
be safe for a man to go through.

A moment more and Bob Jarvis was wriggling through the little tunnel on
his stomach. There was still so much smoke in the drift that he nearly
choked as he pulled himself up and began groping about in the darkness.
Now that he was in he lighted his candle, and there before him lay the
man and the boy.

Bob gave Rush a violent shake. Steve opened his eyes.

"So you're all right, eh?"

"Ye--yes. Have--have you come to li--lick me?" mumbled Steve closing his
eyes.

"No; I've come to get you out of this hole. We'll talk about the licking
later on. Is the other fellow dead?"

Rush pulled himself to a sitting posture at this.

"No; I think not. He was alive when I went to sleep. He may be dead now.
Come, we must get him out. How did you get in?"

"Crawled in through that hole. Come along; I'll help you out first. You
need looking after, judging from your appearance."

Steve Rush's face was ghastly white and covered with blood in spots. He
had sustained a scalp wound where a sharp-edged rock had hit him. It was
evident, however, that the powder-man was in much more serious
condition. The man was still breathing when Bob peered into his face.

"Yes; he's alive, but I'll help you out now," Jarvis repeated.

"You will do nothing of the sort. This man needs attention first. I'll
help you with him. How are we going to get him through that small
opening without hurting him?"

"We'll have to do the best we can," answered Bob.

"I'll tell you, Jarvis; you crawl in backwards and I will hand him to
you. Tell those on the outside to get hold of your feet and pull when
you get far enough in. Do you think he will go through the hole?"

"No; we've got to dig away some dirt inside here first. This end is the
smaller. The other is large enough for him. It's lucky he isn't a fat
man, or we could not do it."

Together the lads labored industriously for several minutes.

"Are they alive?" called the voice of the superintendent through the
hole.

"Yes, both of them. Powder-man badly injured, I think."

All preparations being made, Bob crawled into the hole, while Steve, as
carefully as he could, thrust the powder-man in after, feet first.

It was a difficult task that Jarvis had set for himself, but he went at
it with stubborn determination. Finally, after moments of wriggling and
inch-by-inch progress, the men outside the drift managed to get hold of
his feet, as Steve had directed them to do. The rest was easy.

It was now Steve's turn, and he crawled through the hole as quickly as
possible, though he felt himself growing momentarily weaker. At last he
stood outside the drift. He was swaying giddily.

"Take this boy to the hospital," directed the superintendent.

"I'm all right, sir. That is, I will be as soon as I recover from the
effects of the smoke. I'll----"

"I suppose you hid behind the powder-man to save yourself," sneered
Spooner.

Mr. Penton turned on the man, his face flushing hotly. It was the first
time the superintendent had shown the slightest trace of excitement.

"That will do, Spooner. You cut that out. You ought to be ashamed of
yourself after this boy has saved your life. I know all about it. You
will see to it that he gets full time while he is laying off in the
hospital."

"Not at my expense he won't."

"Very well; then let it be at my own. But I shall see to it that you do
not get another contract in the Cousin Jack Mine after you have finished
with this one. I shall have something to say to you later, also, about
this accident."

"Oh, of course I'll pay him if that's the way you feel about it. I'll
pay him."

"I thought you would," answered the superintendent dryly.

In the meantime the powder-man had been conveyed to the surface and
removed to the hospital in the superintendent's carriage, the driver
having received orders to return at once.

"Do you feel able to walk, Rush?" questioned the executive.

"Ye--yes, sir; I--I think so, sir."

"I'll help him," spoke up Bob Jarvis quickly.

"Yes; help him to the cage and go up with him."

Steve found that he was weaker than he thought, but leaning on Bob's
strong arm he made his way to the lower level, where the lads caught the
cage a few moments later and were conveyed to the surface.

"I'll not forget this, Jarvis," murmured Steve.

"Forget what?"

"Your kindness to me."

"I'm kind to you for another reason. I'll see you later. When you get
well I'll have something to say to you, Miss Hurry-up," was Bob's
parting shot, as he lifted the lad into the carriage and turned back to
the shaft to return to his work below ground.




CHAPTER VIII

BOB MAKES GOOD HIS WORD


"The superintendent wishes to see you at his office when convenient."

This message was brought to Steve Rush at his boarding house on the day
following the accident in the drift. The lad's wounds had been treated,
and he had been allowed to go home late in the afternoon of the same
day. The powder-man, however, had been much more seriously injured. It
was doubtful if the man ever would be able to work in the mines again.

Steve would have returned to work on the following morning, had the
superintendent not given orders that he was not to do so, and the
superintendent's orders were law in the mines.

The lad was somewhat surprised at the summons. However, he lost no time
in going over to the offices. The superintendent was out at the moment
and Rush was ushered into the handsome private office, where he was told
to wait. Steve gazed about him, nodding thoughtfully.

"One of these days I shall have an office like this," he thought aloud.
"Some day, in the distant future, I shall be a superintendent, too."

"So you want to be a superintendent, eh?"

The boy turned to find himself looking into the smiling face of Mr.
Penton. Steve's face flushed rosy red.

"I--I guess I must have been thinking out loud, sir."

"Your ambition is a worthy one. Keep on in the way you are going and
promotion is sure. You are now a part of one of the greatest games in
the industrial world. Realize this and you have made a long stride
forward. How are you feeling to-day?"

"I do realize it, sir, and I am proud of the very small part I am
playing in that world. In answer to your question, I am feeling
perfectly well to-day; I am ready for work."

"To-morrow will be time enough. Take the day off. Your pay will go on
just the same. In this connection there is another little matter that I
have sent for you to adjust. You are not of age?"

"Oh, no, sir."

"I will state what I have to say, just the same. It is customary, when
one has been hurt in the mines, to have our claim adjuster call upon him
at proper time and make such settlement as can be agreed upon, after
which the injured party signs a release. I have prepared a release here
with the amount left blank. You have done a very brave act; I am
willing to do what is right in the matter. To what extent do you think
you have been damaged, Rush?"

There was a quizzical look in the eyes of the superintendent as he asked
the question.

"Have you the release?"

Mr. Penton handed a paper to the boy. The latter read it through
carefully, then asking for a pen, drew a line through the space left
blank for the amount and signed his name.

"I am not that kind of man, Mr. Penton," said Steve. "If you wish my
mother's signature to the paper, I will have her sign it. I do not care
to receive any money that I have not earned."

"Rush," said the superintendent, rising and placing a hand on the boy's
shoulder, "you talk like a true man. You _are_ a true man. It is not
your refusal of the money that causes me to say that, but the principle
that prompted the refusal. I felt that you would act as you have done. I
see I was not mistaken in you. You will get on. No boy with your spirit
could help getting on. Do you wish to be transferred from Spooner's
shift to one not so hard?"

"No, sir; I am not looking for an easy job. I am looking for hard work
and to learn everything there is to learn in this great industry. When I
have earned promotion I want it."

"And you shall have it. Finish the week in level seventeen and I'll see
what can be done for you in some other direction. Do you think you will
be able to work to-morrow?"

"Oh, yes, sir."

Mr. Penton shook hands with him and the lad departed, light hearted and
happy. He did not waste the time that he was resting--not Steve. Instead
he went directly back to the works, remaining all day in the vicinity of
the shaft watching the progress of the work and asking questions
whenever he could find anyone willing to answer them. He visited the dry
houses, where the miners changed their clothes and took their shower
baths, a clean, comfortable building provided with numbered lockers for
the street clothes of the employes of the company, and where those who
chose might eat their lunches in the cold weather.

Steve learned a lesson that he did not forget. He learned it from the
old pensioner in charge of the dry houses.

"Make your men comfortable, look out for their safety and you will get
fully a third more work out of them," said the old attendant. And this
was the principle on which the company acted.

The day passed quickly, and Steve went early to bed, in order to be up
early on the following morning. This time he took no chances of getting
lost in the mine. He followed one of the trammers who worked in his part
of the mine, and reached Spooner's contract some fifteen minutes before
the hour for beginning work. The contractor liked to have his men on the
job early, and when he could drive them into doing so, he managed to get
ten minutes or so extra work out of them before the whistle on the level
blew the signal to begin work.

Steve smiled good-naturedly when Spooner ordered him to get in and begin
shoveling. The lad was not averse to doing so. All evidences of the
accident had been removed and once more the drift was open and workable.
A new powder-man had taken the place of the injured man, a quiet,
self-contained young fellow on whom Spooner's bulldozing tactics had no
effect.

"See here, boy, how about that shovel?" demanded the contractor, after
the lad had been working a short time.

"What do you mean, sir?"

"I mean the shovel you banged up hammering on the drift to make us
hear."

Rush looked puzzled.

"What about it, sir?"

"Shovels cost money. I have to furnish the tools on my job. I'll expect
you to pay for that one. Got any money with you?"

"No, sir."

"Well, see that you bring it to-morrow. The shovel's worth a dollar."

"Yes, sir. I will speak to the superintendent about it, and if he says
it is proper for me to pay you I will do so," replied the lad wisely.

"Speak to the superintendent?" shouted the contractor. "You'll do
nothing of the sort. I'm running my business; the super isn't. If you
try that game on me I'll fire you. You don't have to pay for the shovel
if you don't want to. But you're a cheat if you don't."

"I am not a cheat," protested Steve indignantly. "As I said before, if
the superintendent says I ought to pay you, I shall do so gladly. You
can fire me if you wish to. I am not so much in love with number
seventeen that I would shed tears were I ordered out of it."

The contractor glared, started to speak, then gaining control of
himself, turned and walked away. Rush, in the meantime, was
energetically throwing dirt and when the long day was ended he had
shoveled into ore cars ten tons of soft ore. The lad handed his tally
slip to the contractor at the close of the day's work.

Spooner uttered a grunt of disapproval.

"Only ten tons!" he groaned. "You'll have to do better than that. Unless
you can handle twelve you're not fit to be below ground."

"I understand, sir, that twelve tons a day is the record and that only
one man has accomplished that in the last ten years," answered the boy
promptly. "But I'll equal it before I am through here; not especially to
gratify you, but for my own satisfaction."

Mr. Spooner had no more to say.

"How many tons a day does he get out of this contract?" asked Steve, as
he was waiting for the cage to ascend to the surface.

"Fifty tons is the most we ever got out in a day," was the answer from
Steve's companion.

"How much does he get a ton?"

"That we don't know. He never tells his business. Some contractors get
less and some more, depending upon how the ore runs, how much paint rock
there is to be thrown out in the dirt."

"Do the others run about the same?"

"I reckon they do."

Steve was always seeking for information, and what he was learning in
these early days was to serve him well in the future.

For the rest of the week he worked diligently, increasing his daily
output by at least a ton. One day he fell considerably below this, as
the ore came out hard and was not delivered to the car men as fast as
they could handle it. That was a day that Spooner was at his worst.

Saturday came, the day that the young miner was to receive his first pay
envelope. He had made it a practice to carry his lunch below and eat it
there. This saved him considerable effort, and gave him an opportunity
to rest before the whistles blew to resume work. Steve usually chose
some quiet spot in an unused drift, where, seating himself by the side
of a little stream of water trickling from the rocks, he would stick his
candle-holder in a crevice and tuck the cover of his dinner pail under
the trickling stream to catch water to drink with his meal.

He had just settled himself down for his noon-day meal, on this Saturday
afternoon, when he was attracted by a bobbing candle on a miner's cap
approaching him from down the drift just off the main level.

"Now, I wonder what he wants?" mused Rush, peering out curiously. "I
believe that's Bob Jarvis. He is probably coming in here to eat his
dinner. He'll be surprised to find me here. Hello, Bob."

"Hello yourself."

"I just did. Sit down and have lunch with me."

"I ain't lunching to-day. I----"

"Eat some of mine if you haven't yours with you. There is enough for
both of us in my pail, and here is some of the finest water you ever
drank. It's colder than any ice water I ever tasted."

Bob did not reply. He was standing over Steve, peering down at the
latter with a steady gaze. Presently Rush noticed that Jarvis was acting
peculiarly. There was a constraint in his manner that Steve had never
seen there before.

"What's the matter? Anything gone wrong, Bob?"

"No; nothing has gone wrong. Something's going that way pretty soon,
though."

"What do you mean?"

"I promised you a licking, didn't I?"

"I believe you did, but that is all past now. You saved me from the
drift. I shan't forget that, old fellow. I hope I get a chance to do you
a good turn one of these days."

"You're going to get it now."

"I am going to get what?"

"The licking."

Steve rose slowly to his feet after carefully placing his dinner pail to
one side.

"Do you mean you want to fight me after having saved my life, Bob
Jarvis?"

"That's what!"

Rush gazed steadily at his companion of the moment. The taller boy had
assumed a pugnacious attitude.

"I don't want to fight you, Bob."

"Then you'll stand for a coward; you'll be a 'missie' for certain."

Steve began slowly to strip off his oilskins. His blouse and flannel
shirt came next. These removed, he stuck his candlestick in a crevice in
the rocks high enough up to shed a fairly good light over the drift.

"How'll you have it?" he asked coolly.

"No hitting below the belt; hammer in the clinches when we can. All fair
and above board," answered Jarvis, making himself ready for the fray.

"Very well," replied Steve. "I am ready whenever you are."




CHAPTER IX

YOUNG GLADIATORS MEET


"Going to take off your boots?" questioned Steve.

"Sure."

"Then I'll take mine off, too."

He did so, tightened his belt and stepped out into the drift well within
the flickering circle of light shed by the two candles.

"How are we going to decide it, Bob?"

"The fellow who gets knocked out first loses. No second chance. Are you
ready?"

"I've been ready for the last five minutes."

"Look out--I'm coming!"

Jarvis made a rush, swinging a quick blow at the head of his opponent.
Steve ducked and went under it, at the same time giving Bob a jolt in
the ribs that made the larger boy grunt.

"Hello! You ain't such an easy mark as you'd have me believe, eh? Been
playing off, have you? Said you couldn't fight."

"I never said so. I said I wasn't a fighter. I hope I have higher
ambitions in life than that. But is this a fight or an argument?"

"It's a fight," shouted Jarvis, dancing in, his arms working like a
piston rod.

Both boys led for the head at the same instant. Each countered with his
left, receiving the other's blow on his arm. After a rapid exchange of
blows, none of which landed, they backed away. But Steve, without
waiting for his opponent to take the lead, became the aggressor now. He
sprang in as lightly as a cat, and ere the taller boy could get his
guard up, had planted a blow on Jarvis' nose that sent the other's head
back and the blood spurting from his nose.

Whack!

Steve landed another on the side of Bob's jaw. It was a glancing blow,
Jarvis having turned a little, else the boy would have been knocked out
and the battle ended then and there.

Quick as a flash, Jarvis put a fist to Steve's neck and the lad went
down in a heap while Bob stood over him exultingly.

"Got your medicine that time, didn't you?" he jeered.

Steve, on all fours, was getting ready to spring up. His eyes were on
his adversary, watching him narrowly. Rush's head was aching, but he
gave no heed to that.

"You will have to give it to me in bigger doses than that if you expect
a cure," retorted Steve, with a short laugh, as he sprang up and danced
away from the taller boy for a few seconds. Then he closed in like a
whirlwind. For a full minute it was give and take. Both lads were
strong, and each was handy with his fists, though Steve Rush showed more
skill than did his opponent. This was offset by Jarvis' greater height
and weight.

Many a hard blow was struck in that round, after which the boys backed
away instinctively. Jarvis' nose had sustained several bangs. It was
somewhat larger than when the fight had begun; Steve, on the other hand,
had a half-closed eye.

"I'll put a spectacle on the other one before I've done with you,"
jeered Bob.

"Then I'll give you one of the same sort," retorted Steve, planting a
blow on Bob's right eye. Bob dropped as if he had been hit with a club.
But he was up like a flash. This time he was thoroughly angry. He
charged Steve with a roar, receiving two quick, short-arm jolts on the
side of the head that made that member spin dizzily.

For the next five minutes it was give and take again. Then Steve struck
his opponent a blow in the ribs that brought a loud "ouch!" from the
taller boy.

Rush grinned, but there was no mirth in the grin. It was one of savage
satisfaction. Now the lad settled down grimly to his work. He battled
with dogged determination, taking his punishment as a matter of course,
beating, hammering, dodging, ducking, but without the slightest trace of
anger or excitement in his face. His was a will that in the battle of
life sweeps all obstacles from its path.

The battle had not been in progress long before a miner passing the
outer end of the drift had discovered what was going on. Summoning some
of his companions, the men ran down where the fight was in progress.
They were about to interfere, when Steve, in a momentary lull, said:

"Please don't interfere. This is a perfectly friendly little argument.
We've got to fight it out."

The men laughed uproariously.

"You look the part, both of you. Go it, then, if you've got to fight.
We'll see that each of you gets fair play."

But the boys did not hear. They were at it again and with a savageness
that had not marked their fighting before. Two blows delivered at the
same instant landed both boys on their backs on the ground.

The miners yelled for sheer joy.

Bounding to their feet, the combatants went at it again hammer and
tongs; and, though they were mere lads, it is doubtful if the
spectators ever had witnessed a more scientific battle with fists. The
lads were side-stepping and dancing in their stocking feet, not heeding
the sharp pieces of rock and ore that cut into their feet, drawing the
blood at almost every step.

They had battled steadily for over ten minutes. The face of each was
covered with blood and it was with difficulty that the lads were able to
see at all. They had barely one set of good eyes between them. Jarvis
was getting more and more desperate. Try as he might his superior
strength was not equal to the task of putting Steve Rush down and out.
For every blow delivered Bob got a return that he felt all over his body
from his head to his feet.

At last Bob thought he saw an opening to deliver a knock-out blow. He
let go with all his strength. The blow struck nothing more substantial
than thin air. Then, like a bolt of lightning, the fist of Steve Rush
shot out, catching Jarvis under the nose, lifting the larger boy from
his feet, sending him crashing against the shore wall of the drift.

"That settles him," shouted the spectators. "My, what a wallop! That
would have knocked down one of the mules in number seven level. I'll bet
he doesn't wake up in----"

Bob Jarvis was already awake. Despite the terrific blow under which he
had gone down he was quickly on his feet. It was observed that he
staggered a little. Both boys were beginning to show their weariness,
though Jarvis exhibited more of this than did Steve.

"Call it a draw, lads," yelled the miners.

"Not till I give him back for that last one," roared Bob, making a
vicious lunge at his companion.

The blow barely grazed the left cheek of the smaller of the lads, he
having moved his head slightly to one side to avoid the blow.

"I'll hand it out to you, Bob," said Steve.

Once more Jarvis was lifted from his feet and this time he was laid on
his back on the ground, while Steve leaned against the wall of the
drift, panting heavily.

"Call it off! Call it off, or we'll take a hand in the game," warned the
miners.

Jarvis had staggered to his feet and Rush was lurching to meet him.

There was a slow exchange of blows and the lads clinched, each with an
arm about the other's neck. For a full minute they stood thus, panting,
striving to collect their strength to continue the battle.

Jarvis made a feeble effort to deliver a right-hand hook on his
opponent's jaw, but there was not enough steam in the blow to do any
damage.

Steve retaliated with a vicious punch in the pit of Jarvis' stomach--a
blow that made the larger boy grunt and cling heavily to the neck of his
adversary.

"Have you got enough?" breathed Steve.

"No!"

Bob managed to land a fairly strong blow on Steve's neck.

The latter returned the compliment by a vicious punch in the ribs that
caused the larger boy to hug his opponent closer. Then all at once, with
the last ounce of their failing strength, the two youthful gladiators
began delivering short-arm jolts, each standing with an arm about the
other's neck, driving in the blows with all the strength he had left.

Not for a moment had either lad sought to foul the other. It was a
"square" fight, such as is seldom seen between professionals.

No more steam was left in their blows. They had fired their last round.

"Shall we call it quits, Bob?" breathed Rush in the ear of his opponent.

"I--I guess we'd better, if we expect to report for duty this
afternoon."

Steve promptly released himself from the grip of the other boy's arm,
and, staggering to a side wall, leaned against it heavily. Jarvis did
the same.

Just then the whistle blew three sharp blasts. It was the signal for the
miners to return to their work. Jarvis staggered out into the centre of
the drift, extending a hand. Steve met him half way.

"Shake!" said Bob. "You're the squarest and the pluckiest bundle of
muscle that I ever went up against."

"The same to you," glowed Steve Rush, gripping the hand of his late
adversary. Then each with an arm about the other's shoulder started for
the main level. The desperate battle that was to be the beginning of a
friendship of many years, had ended in a draw, with Steve having a shade
the better of the argument.




CHAPTER X

IN A NEW JOB


That afternoon was the longest that Steve Rush ever remembered having
put in. Spooner saw at once that the lad had been in a fight, and that
he was well nigh spent. The contractor took the keenest possible delight
in driving Steve, just because the lad was in no condition to work.

The Iron Boy, however, possessed too much grit to show the white
feather. In spite of his swollen face and aching body, he summoned all
his courage and worked as he never had worked before.

With Bob Jarvis it was different. Bob worked half of the afternoon, when
the shift boss under whom he was laboring, observing that the lad could
scarcely stand up, sent him home, and Jarvis promptly went to bed. The
shift boss reported the circumstance to the mine captain and the latter
made a written report to the general superintendent, Mr. Penton. Another
report showed that Steve Rush had also been in a fight.

When the superintendent had read these two reports, he at once
understood that Jarvis and Rush had had a battle. The rules against
fighting were very strict; therefore he sent for the mining captain, the
one directly in charge of all the operations underground. The two men
had a long interview and when the captain finally left the
superintendent was smiling broadly.

On the following Monday morning Steve was requested to call at the
office of the general superintendent before reporting for work in the
mine.

"Bob, he's heard about our difficulty and he is going to fine or fire
me," said Steve.

Bob's face took on a serious expression.

"Then I'm going to see the superintendent," he said in an emphatic tone.

"What for, Bob?"

"I am going to tell him that you are not to blame--that I forced you
into the fight. I'll take whatever punishment is coming to me, but I
won't stand by and see you get the worst of it--not for a skip full of
red ore."

The boys were in their room at the boarding house, they having asked the
boarding boss to bunk them in the same room after their fight in the
mine. This had been done willingly enough and to their mutual
satisfaction.

"I guess not," replied Steve firmly. "What do you take me for?"

"You know what I take you for. I have already told you."

"If I remember correctly, you called me Little Miss Rush up to a couple
of days ago," answered Steve, with a twinkle in his eyes.

"Forget it. I've changed your name. You're Mr. Big Rush now. Such a
walloping as you gave me I never had before in my life. You're a regular
little cyclone. And to think that I had picked you for an easy mark."

Bob smiled as broadly as his swollen face would permit.

"We have agreed to forget that. It was worth while, though, because it
was the beginning of our friendship," replied Rush thoughtfully. "We
shall never have another misunderstanding."

"I hope not."

"But we must be going. You will be late for work. I will see the
superintendent; then I'll let you know, to-day noon, what he wanted of
me."

The lads hurried out.

"I wish you would let me go with you and tell him," urged Bob.

"No. Time enough when he sends for you."

As the lads moved along the workmen laughed and some of them jeered, for
it was plain that the lads were on terms of intimate friendship. The
story of their great battle had been circulated until most of the men in
the mine had heard of it.

Bob's face flushed angrily.

"Never mind, old man," said Steve in a soothing tone. "A lot of those
fellows who are laughing at us to-day will be shoveling dirt for you and
me before many years have passed."

"I doubt it."

"I do not. There are great opportunities in this big corporation, and I
am going after them. I am after them now, and I propose to take you
along with me. You'll find the company will be glad to help us on if
they find we are worth helping. Here we are at the superintendent's
office. I shall have to leave you now."

The boys shook hands warmly, Bob turning reluctantly and going on his
way, while Steve ran up the steps and entered the executive building. He
asked for the superintendent and was told to go in at once. The clerks
all smiled at Steve's disfigured face, but he pretended not to have seen
their scrutiny of him.

"Good morning, Rush," greeted Mr. Penton, with a quizzical look at his
caller.

"Good morning, sir. You sent for me."

"Yes; sit down."

The superintendent was a large man, six feet tall, big, broad and
powerful, but good nature shone from his round, full face, and his eyes
always appeared to be sparkling with laughter. For all of that, Mr.
Penton was a strict disciplinarian, as a number of those who had worked
under him had reason to know.

"Who was the young man with whom I saw you shaking hands in front?" was
the superintendent's first question.

"Bob Jarvis, sir. He is my roommate."

"Oh, is that so?"

"Yes, sir."

"How long have you been rooming together?"

"Since Saturday."

"Indeed. This is somewhat surprising. But, Rush, what has happened to
you? You look as if you had been through an ore grinder."

Steve flushed, then straightened up, eyeing the superintendent steadily.

"I have been in a fight, sir. I had a little disagreement, but it is all
right now."

"My lad, did you not know that it was against the rules of the company
to fight?"

"I did not at the time."

"With whom did you fight?"

"Must I answer that question, sir?"

"Yes."

"I fought with Bob Jarvis," replied the lad, after slight hesitation.

"Who started the fight?"

"I guess I was the one most to blame."

The superintendent already knew all about the matter. He well knew who
had started the fight and why, and he knew also of the warm friendship
that had sprung up between the two boys since the battle; but Mr. Penton
was a shrewd man--one who judged men with almost unerring instinct. He
was drawing Steve out to verify his own impressions.

"And you two are rooming together now?"

"Yes, sir. We are friends now. There will be no more trouble between us.
As a matter of fact, our little battle was an entirely friendly one."

The superintendent leaned back, laughing heartily. His plump sides shook
with merriment, while Steve sat calm and respectful, his eyes fixed on
the face of his employer.

"You are quite sure that you two will not fight again, are you?"
questioned Mr. Penton, after regaining his equanimity.

"Oh, yes, sir."

"Who won the fight?"

"Neither of us, sir, though Bob gave me about all I wanted."

"And I understand that you gave him a little more than he wanted. Now,
Rush, let me give you a piece of advice. Never indulge in fights, unless
in self-defence, in defence of the company's property or to save
another person. We have a rough element in the mines. Naturally that
cannot be wholly avoided, especially among the foreigners, though many
of them are self-respecting citizens. It requires a strong man to cope
with them and every executive must be equal to the task, but we cannot
tolerate any rows except for the reasons mentioned."

"I understand, sir. I think you can trust me."

"I am sure of that. I want to see you get ahead. You are both fine boys.
You have the making of men worth while--in other words, you are 'live
ones,' and this company is always in the market for just that kind of
material."

"Thank you, sir."

Steve's face glowed happily.

"I am going to take you off the Spooner contract and give you another
place to work. I have taken a keen interest in you, and I want you to
learn all about the workings of the mine."

"That is what I am going to do, sir," answered Rush in a quiet but firm
tone.

"I have decided to place you at the main chute on the same level where
you have been working. Your duty will be to dump the cars as they come
in. You will be right by the tally-boards and you will learn how we
count up there, besides many other things. It is an important point,
the central point of each level. After you have become familiar with the
operations at that point, perhaps I may be able to transfer you to some
other."

"I thank you very much, sir. May I ask where Bob Jarvis is going to
work? He said he was to be transferred to-day."

"Yes; I have put him on the Spooner contract to fill the place you had."

Steve smiled. He could well imagine what would happen if Spooner treated
Bob as he had treated Steve. Bob was too hot tempered to endure the
contractor's insults without resenting them.

Mr. Penton seemed to understand what was in Steve's mind.

"It will be good for the boy," he nodded. "Every boy needs a certain
amount of hard knocks. They make a man of him."

"Bob is quite a man already," replied Rush, with a faint smile.

Mr. Penton laughed good-naturedly.

"Yes, I understand. You will report at the chute at once. Tell the mine
captain to inform the time keepers of your change of place. That will be
all."

Expressing his thanks to the superintendent, Steve left the office and
made his way to the mine, to take up his new work--work that was to be
much less trying than that of the previous week.

After the lad's departure Mr. Penton spent a long time in studying a
bundle of reports of the work in the Cousin Jack Mine. His eyes soon
lost their twinkle, and his forehead wrinkled with perplexity.

"This passes all understanding. This shortage in the output is something
that I cannot understand. If I do not find the leakage soon I shall be
in trouble with the company," he muttered.

Then, putting on his coat and hat, he left the office and started for
the mines.




CHAPTER XI

RUSH MAKES A DISCOVERY


Steve's new station was located on the main line of the electric tram
road. Long rows of dump cars were drawn there by an electric motor, on
which sat a motor-man controlling the speed of the car with one hand,
and with the other continually ringing a gong warning everyone to get
out of the way.

In the narrow levels, there was barely space enough for one to stand
between the trams and the wall, but the trams never stopped. Miners were
supposed to look out for themselves, according to the code of the tram
motor-man.

At the chutes, however, there was a large open space at one side, with a
plank floor laid down, and above this hung the tally-boards, a series of
boards with quarter-inch holes bored in them. Every time cars were run
over the chutes the men on the cars would call the name of the
contractor or the drift whence the cars had come, and the tally-boy or
man, as the case might be, would then move the peg in the board forward
as many holes as there were cars. Each contractor had a tally-board, as
had each drift operated by the mining company's own labor.

The tally-man at the chutes on level seventeen was a man named Marvin.
Steve took a violent dislike to the man the moment he set eyes on him,
and the questions that the lad would have asked about the working of the
tally-boards remained unasked.

Rush's duty was to strike the catch on the side of the car with an iron
bar, permitting the side board to swing out, whereupon the load of ore
would drop through the iron chutes to a lower level. From there it was
shot to the surface in the fast-moving skips, or ore elevators, that ran
up an inclined plane.

"This work is so easy that I am ashamed to draw pay for it," muttered
Steve, after an hour or so had passed.

Still he was obliged to keep a sharp lookout for approaching trams, as
every second in this operation counted. The tram trains must unload and
get back for other cars promptly, else miners working in the drifts
would be held back and the work of that level delayed.

As soon as a car was dumped, the dumper would call out "clear,"
whereupon the motor-man would shove his train forward. Though the work
was easy, it had to be done quickly.

During the forenoon Superintendent Penton and the mine captain came
swinging along the tracks. The superintendent spoke pleasantly to
Steve, after which the two men took a seat on a bench in the planked
alcove close to the place where the boy was dumping cars of ore.

"This shortage is troubling me greatly Jim," said Mr. Penton.

Steve could not help but hear their conversation, his station being on
that side.

"It has me beaten, too, sir," answered the mine captain. "I have been
through this mine from top to bottom, and from end to end, and for the
life of me I can't see where any such shortage as you say the reports
show could have occurred."

"You are sure the tally-boards are being properly kept?"

"Yes; I have looked into that. Have you any idea that someone is
tricking us?"

"No; I hardly think so. I believe, rather, that it is the result of
carelessness somewhere. The report sheets show more ore mined than
weighs up after it is put on the cars. In other words, the output shown
on our reports doesn't check up with the company's tally-sheets at
Duluth. We are a good many tons short. It is up to you, Jim, to put your
finger on the shortage. There is going to be trouble over this, unless I
am greatly mistaken."

"Yes; there'll be trouble enough when we find out where it is--trouble
for the fellow or fellows who are to blame for it," answered the mine
captain.

"Well, keep your eyes open. If you need any help, let me know."

"I've had the inspectors on the job for a week now, and they are no
nearer solving the mystery than they were before they began."

Mr. Penton was watching Steve at work with a thoughtful expression in
his eyes.

"That's a promising boy, Jim," he said.

"You mean young Rush?"

"Yes. This is the kind of job I should like to turn him loose on, if he
had more experience. He's as sharp as a steel trap."

"That is true."

"He has that dogged persistence that would make him hang on like a bull
terrier. I'm going to push him along as fast as seems advisable."

"He's a likely youngster," admitted the mine captain, studying Steve's
back as the lad swung his iron bar with unerring precision. "Yes, he's a
very likely lad."

"I want to make an inspection of number twelve," said the
superintendent, rising. "Will you come along?"

The captain followed his superior officer, the two men soon disappearing
down the level. Steve watched their bobbing candles until he could see
them no longer.

"Something is going on here," muttered the boy. "Reports show more ore
taken out than has really been mined. I didn't want to listen, but I
couldn't help hearing what they said."

For the rest of the forenoon Steve occupied his leisure moments in
trying to study out how such a mistake could occur. He was not
thoroughly familiar with the working of the system as yet, but he
possessed a good general idea of the methods employed to protect the
company against mistakes and dishonesty.

The time-keepers made their rounds four times a day, and any man not at
his post lost his time until the next round. The ore was tallied at the
chutes and weighed again after it had been placed on railroad cars for
transportation to the Great Lakes. All this Steve went over, his mind
working actively on the subject while his hands were busy dumping cars
of ore.

"The mistake, if it is a mistake, must occur somewhere between this
chute and the freight yards," was the lad's mental conclusion.

In this he was right. So full of his subject was he that, when the
whistle blew, he sat down on the bench that the superintendent had
occupied a few hours before and studied the tally-boards as he ate his
lunch. The manner of the tally operation was clear to him. There was
nothing complicated about it.

Having finished his lunch, the lad strolled over to the tally-boards,
and, with hands behind his back, began studying the names of the drifts
or contractors represented there. Spooner's was the first to attract his
attention.

"I'll bet I have shoveled that board full half a dozen times," muttered
the lad, with a grin.

"What do you want here?" demanded a surly voice at the lad's elbow.

Rush turned and found himself facing the tally-man, Marvin.

"I was just looking over the boards as a matter of curiosity."

"Oh, you were, eh?"

"Yes."

"Well, folks' curiosity sometimes gits them into trouble," sneered the
tally-man.

"There is no harm in my looking at the boards, is there?" demanded
Steve, raising his voice ever so little.

"Git out of here! Git out, I say! If ever I catch you fooling around
these boards I'll trim you so you won't forget it," growled Marvin.

Steve stepped back. Perhaps he had no business there, but he resented
the manner in which the information was delivered to him.

"I do not think it will be well for you to lay hands on me," he
retorted.

"What's that?"

"If you don't hear well, I'll shout. I don't think it will be well for
you to lay hands on me."

The tally-man strode across the planking and stood threateningly over
the lad, who had reseated himself on the bench.

"Git off this platform!"

"Oh, no, you don't. I have as much right here as you have. You can't
drive me away from here, my friend. I'll stand on my rights here. This
is the place where I'm going to stick until the whistle blows to go to
work. If you think I am not going to do so, just try to put me off."

Rush's jaw assumed a stubborn set. The man and the boy eyed each other
for a moment; then Marvin turned on his heel and walked away.

Steve grinned appreciatively.

"I guess I had better look out for him. He surely has it in for me now."

The whistle blew soon after, and work was resumed. Steve, during the
afternoon, was too busy to pay much attention to the tally-boards, for
the cars were coming fast, additional motors having been sent out to
take care of the rush. But every time the lad glanced toward the boards
he found Marvin watching him narrowly.

Once the lad observed something that set him to thinking harder than
ever. After that he paid no further attention to Marvin, nor to
Marvin's work. When the whistle blew at six o'clock Rush picked up his
dinner pail and made his way to the shaft, and a few minutes later had
been hoisted to the surface by the cage. He waited at the mouth of the
shaft until Jarvis came up, when the two boys started for home together.

"How did you get along on the Spooner contract?" questioned Rush, with a
quizzical smile.

"Never did such a day's work in my life! That fellow is a slave driver."

"He is all of that," agreed Steve. "Have any words with him?"

"Nothing of consequence. I threatened to break his head with a shovel
once--that's all."

"I should think once would be enough," replied Steve, laughing softly.
"Don't let him run over you, but keep your hands off him. It's a pretty
serious thing to have an argument with one's superior, even if he _is_ a
brutal contract boss."

"I'm surprised that they have a fellow like that in the mines."

"He gets out the ore, that's why," answered Rush. "And, by the way, I
want to talk over something with you after supper to-night."

"You have something on your mind, eh?"

"Yes; I have something that I want you to help me with. Perhaps we may
be able to do a great service for our employers. I am not quite sure
yet. I can't be until we have tried something."

"I'm with you in anything, Steve," answered Bob with emphasis.

After supper, that night, the boys went directly to their room, where
they were soon lost in earnest conversation. Their conversation was
carried on in whispers and the hour was well along toward midnight when
they had finished with their plans.

"Now what do you think of it?" questioned Steve, as they started to make
ready for bed.

"If you've struck it right we have stumbled on to the biggest game of
crookedness in the mines. I mean _you_ have discovered it; you didn't
exactly stumble on the game."

"Be very careful. Don't make any mistake. I, on my part, will keep my
eyes open if I find I can do so without attracting attention. To-morrow
night we will compare notes."

"Don't worry about me. I'll have it down pat. All ready to turn in?"

"Yes."

Bob blew out the light and the boys tumbled into bed, where they were
soon fast asleep.




CHAPTER XII

THE BOYS EXPOSE A PLOT


On the following morning, when the lads reported for work, they were
full of their new purpose. Each was silent as to what that purpose was,
but a close observer would have noticed that the boys were keenly
watchful of everything that was going on about them. To all intents
Steve was devoting his energies to unloading the dump cars in the
shortest possible time, and Bob to filling them again in record time.

Up to the noon hour nothing had occurred of interest. The two boys did
not meet at the lunch hour, deeming it best not to arouse suspicion by
their actions, and thus possibly defeat their purpose. Steve ate his
lunch in silence, not once looking toward the scowling Marvin. In fact,
Marvin had not caught the boy looking at him during the forenoon.

"I think the fun will begin before long," mused Steve, wiping his mouth
and moving over to a trickling spring on the other side of the level. "I
have prepared the way and now we shall see."

A long train of ore cars came in a few moments after the whistle blew,
and the tally-man was kept busy plugging the holes in the boards as the
cars were called out.

So busy was Marvin that he did not get a chance to turn about to look at
Steve. Perhaps he would not have done so, at any rate. Steve, however,
was looking at the tally-man, watching the latter out of the corners of
his eyes.

The pegs moved skilfully and quickly from hole to hole on the boards,
then the man Marvin sat down while the unloading progressed.

Rush had seen that which sent the color to his cheeks, and caused his
heart to beat a little faster. His sharp eyes had made a discovery. He
was as positive as it was possible to be but there was more to be done
before his case was fully made out.

The lad could hardly wait until night to see his companion. During the
afternoon Steve obtained further evidence to strengthen his case. By
quitting time his face had taken on a look of stern determination that
had not been there when he went to work that morning.

"What luck?" demanded Bob, in a low voice, as he joined his companion
near the mouth of the shaft.

"The best," answered Steve.

"Tell me about it."

"Not here. Wait until we get home. I do not dare to speak of it now.
Someone might overhear us and then all our efforts would have been for
nothing. I'll tell you all about it before we sit down to supper."

"Well, that beats all," muttered Jarvis. "I didn't think we should
succeed so easily. What are you going to do about it?"

"I'll answer that question also when we get home, old man."

The boys did not wait until after supper that night. Closing and locking
the door after reaching their room, Steve asked:

"How many tons did the Spooner contract turn out to-day?"

"Forty by the dump cars."

"Is it possible?"

"Yes. What does the tally show?"

Steve leaned over and whispered in his companion's ear, whereat Bob
uttered a low, long-drawn whistle.

"You--don't--say?"

"That is exactly what I do say."

"This will raise a merry row."

"I think it will. And there's another thing: I will wager that this is
not the only place the same game is being worked."

"Maybe you're right. What shall we do?"

"Go to the superintendent. We will go to him as soon as we finish our
supper."

"But he isn't at his office."

"No. We will go direct to his house. I rather think he will be glad
enough to see us when he hears what our mission is. Come, now, we'll go
to supper, but not a word at the table," warned Steve.

"I should say not."

Supper finished, the Iron Boys went to their room, returning a few
minutes later and strolling from the house as though they were going
nowhere in particular. After they had put a block between themselves and
the boarding house they quickened their pace. Bob was excited, but Steve
was as calm and collected as if nothing unusual had occurred.

"Do you know where the superintendent lives, Steve?"

"Of course I do. I make it my business to know everything that I ought
to know. 'Live and learn' is my motto. It's a good one for you to adopt,
too."

"I am beginning to think you are right."

Reaching the house of the general superintendent, Rush halted. The
blinds had not been drawn and, looking through the front room into the
dining room beyond, the Iron Boys could see the superintendent seated at
the table with his family.

"I think we had better walk up and down a few times until Mr. Penton
finishes his supper," suggested Rush.

"He'll be better natured if we do, I guess," agreed Jarvis. "You have a
long head on you, Steve, but the trouble with you is that you keep that
fact so carefully concealed that a fellow doesn't get wise to it until
it's too late."

Steve laughed softly. They had made their third trip around the block
when, halting once more in front of the house, they saw that the
superintendent had finished his supper. He was standing in the dining
room, hat in hand, talking with a member of his family.

"Come on," called Steve, running up the walk, up the steps and ringing
the bell.

"My, but you do bear out your name, the way you rush about," laughed
Jarvis.

The door was opened by a servant. Steve gave his name and asked to see
Mr. Penton. The latter came out into the hall a few seconds later.

"Good evening, boys. I was just on my way downtown to the post-office.
You may walk along with me and tell me what I can do for you."

"We would rather speak with you here, sir, in private," answered Steve
earnestly.

"Is it so important as that, my lad?"

"It is, sir."

"Come into the parlor," said Mr. Penton, leading the way and switching
on the electric lights. "State your business as briefly as possible."

The superintendent seated himself, motioning the boys to be seated also.

"By chance, I overheard a conversation between you and the mine captain
at chute seventeen the other day," said Steve. "I did not want to
listen, sir, but I will confess that what you said impressed me so
strongly that I took a deep interest in it."

"Conversation about what?" demanded Mr. Penton rather more sharply than
was his wont.

"About a shortage in the ore. You said the mine count did not agree with
the figures as reported from the head office, sir."

Mr. Penton gazed shrewdly at his callers. Then he rose, and, closing the
door leading into the dining room, returned to his chair.

"Well, lads," he said. "Have you come to see me on this subject?"

"Yes, sir."

"I suppose you think you might be able to solve the mystery?" This was
said smilingly.

"We have solved it, sir."

"_What?_"

"I said we have solved it; at least, enough of it to make the rest
comparatively easy."

"You astound me beyond words. Will you be good enough to tell me then
the cause of this shortage?"

"Yes, sir; the fault lies with your tally-boards."

"That was my idea originally, but the mine captain assures me that he
has careful tally-men on every board."

"I think he has very careful men there, sir. At least, they seem to me
to be looking out for their own interests pretty carefully."

"You are making a most serious charge, Rush. Are you able to
substantiate this?"

"I am, sir."

"Do so."

"Sub-level seventeen, to-day, as you will find by referring to your
report sheet, has sixty tons to its credit."

"Wait a moment, Rush. My report sheet is in my desk in the library."

The superintendent left the room, returning with the report sheet. He
ran down the page, placing his finger on a line, which he followed out
to the margin.

"Your information is correct," he said, glancing up. "How do you happen
to have these figures?"

"I have been watching the boards for two days."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, sir. As a matter of fact, though the tally sheet shows sixty tons
as having come from number seventeen sub-level, only forty tons were
actually mined there to-day."

Mr. Penton gazed at Steve Rush, who had risen and was standing before
the superintendent, erect, steady-eyed and calm.

"Again, my lad, I ask you how you come to be in possession of these
figures?"

"My chum, Bob, here, got the figures from the drift to-day."

"Ah, I see. You had arranged the plan?"

"Yes, sir. Bob kept a very careful tally."

"Jarvis, were you absent from sub-level number seventeen at any time
during the day?"

"No, sir, excepting at meal time."

"Are you positive enough of your own tally to be willing to swear to
it?"

"I am, sir."

"Then you have rounded up the whole case. There is nothing more to be
done--nothing more left for me to do except to act on the information
you have furnished me, which I shall do at once."

"May I make a suggestion, sir?"

"Certainly."

"If you have any reason to believe this will not fully account for the
shortage, would it not be an excellent idea to have the other tally-men
inspected?"

Mr. Penton reflected.

"An excellent idea; yes, it shall be done. Tell me how the tally-man,
Marvin, worked his end of the game. Although you have not explained that
part of it, it goes without saying that he was in collusion with
Spooner."

"Yes, sir; so I suspected from the first. I did not like his actions. He
appeared to be watching everyone about him. That aroused my suspicion
after hearing what I did when you and the mine captain were there. So I
watched him without pretending to do so. In the meantime he had driven
me away from the tally-boards while I was standing there looking at
them. While watching him I distinctly saw the fellow juggle the pegs and
give the Spooner contract credit for more loads than were then on the
chute. I counted and kept track of the Spooner cars, so that I could
check up with Bob. You see, I wanted to make absolutely sure that I was
right."

"And your figures tallied?"

"They did."

"Lads, you have done the company a great service. I have no doubt but
that both of you will receive a substantial reward. Personally, I cannot
find words to express my appreciation. You have relieved me from a very
embarrassing situation. I shall show my appreciation in a more
substantial manner in due time."

"We do not wish to be rewarded, Mr. Penton," returned Steve. "We are
working in the interest of the company that pays us our wages, just the
same as we should expect men to serve us if we were employers."

"And you would find that you would be sadly disappointed in the rank and
file, boys. When I said 'reward,' I did not mean exactly a money reward,
although indirectly it will amount to the same thing. This company is
not slow to recognize merit. It gives every man a chance to show what
sort of stuff he is made of. If his is a low grade of ore, as we would
term it in the mines, then he stays where he is, but if of a higher
grade from which the finest steel is made, then the man goes on up as
fast as he is fitted to hold higher positions. There is practically no
limit to the positions to which young men in this company may aspire.
Take, for instance, the present president of this mining company, who is
now drawing a salary equal to that received by the President of the
United States. How do you suppose he began his career?"

"I--I do not know, sir. I never heard," answered Steve.

"He began with a shovel in his hands, just the same as you did something
like a week ago, and so did I, and so did the most of us who have risen
to the higher positions. But to return to our subject, I will have the
other tally centres investigated secretly."

"It might be a good plan for you to have your captain watch the
tally-board at level number seventeen to-morrow. He can do so by
secreting himself in the skip shaft," suggested Steve.

"I think your suggestion is a good one. In the meantime, of course, you
lads will be discreet--you will not mention what you have told me?"

"You may depend upon us, sir."

"Yes, I am aware of that. Come to see me to-morrow. I shall want to talk
with you. Good night, lads."




CHAPTER XIII

STRAIGHTENING THE CROOKED ONES


A brief investigation on the part of the mine captain on the day
following verified all that the boys had told the superintendent.
Watching the tally-board man from behind the partition that shut off the
skip shaft, the captain saw the man falsify the tally of the ore cars,
making it show a considerable excess of the actual amount of ore
contained in each car.

At noon Marvin was summoned to the office of the superintendent and
confronted with the facts. After a few minutes of stubborn denial, the
rascal gave in and told the whole story. He was to share half of the
amount thus gained with the man Spooner. Up to that time the two men had
made a substantial rake-off six days in every week.

After the tally-man had made a clean breast of the steal the
superintendent said:

"Go back to your post. You will receive further orders later in the day.
But see to it that nothing is said to Spooner until I have seen him;
then you two can talk and growl all you wish. You will have something to
growl about, I promise you that. How long has this thing been going
on?"

"For six weeks, sir."

"How much have you cheated the company out of thus far?"

Marvin handed Mr. Penton a slip of paper on which he had made some
figures while talking, after which the tally-man departed very much
crestfallen.

Spooner was the next man summoned, and the contractor passed the most
uncomfortable hour of his life under Mr. Penton's shrewd questioning.
Spooner had been a miner and his contracting was of only recent date.
When he saw that the superintendent was in possession of all the facts,
he admitted that he had been receiving pay for many tons a day more than
he had delivered to the company.

Mr. Penton considered the matter for some moments, while the contractor
stood before him twisting his hat nervously between his hands, now and
then shifting his weight from one foot to the other.

"What do you think I ought to do with a rascal like you?" finally
demanded the superintendent.

"I'll give up my contract and go back to working in the drift."

"You will do nothing of the sort! You will keep on with your contract
until you have paid back what you have robbed the company of, you and
your partner in crime, Marvin. You are a fine pair. By rights I ought to
send both of you to jail. Perhaps I may do that yet, but that will
depend upon what officials higher up order me to do. For the present,
however, you will engage to pay back what you have stolen; that is,
unless you prefer to hand over the money in a lump."

"I haven't that much money--I have no money."

"I thought not; therefore two thirds of the amount will be deducted from
the money due you each week and one third from the wages of the
tally-man."

Spooner essayed to speak, but the words seemed to stick in his throat.
Finally he managed to mumble:

"All--all right, sir."

"But, mind you, no more of your thieving tricks, or I'll have you in the
cooler before you realize it."

"All right, sir. I--I'd like to ask a question."

"Ask it."

"Who was the man who gave me away?"

"You ought to know better than to ask me that question. Frankly, it is
none of your concern. We have been looking for this leak for some time,
and we have found it. Had you possessed a grain of common sense you
would have known that, sooner or later, you would have been checked up.
You're checked. The interview is ended. Go back to work."

"I'll _find_ the man!" growled Spooner. "I'll find him if it takes all
the rest of my life to do it, and when I do----"

"What then?" interrupted the superintendent, fixing stern eyes on the
man before him.

"I'll tell him what I think of him," answered the contractor lamely, as
he left the room.

All the other contract drifts had been found to be working regularly, so
it was reasonable that the entire shortage might be charged to Spooner.
As a matter of fact, this shortage tallied very closely with the figures
that the tally-man had given to the superintendent.

When the contractor returned to his drift he was more subdued than any
of his regular shift had ever before seen him. They could not understand
the sudden change. There was one there, however, who did understand.
That one was Bob Jarvis. Bob was leaning against the "shore" just
outside of the vein the men were working. He was doing nothing in
particular.

Some moments passed before Spooner discovered this.

"Get in there, you, before I shove you in! Get hold of a shovel! What do
you think I'm paying you for? What are you trying to do--hold up the
wall? The lagging will do that without your help. Get to work."

"I am working," answered Bob coolly, making no effort to obey the order
of the contractor.

"You are working, eh?"

"Yes."

"May I inquire what you are working at?"

"Yes, I'm working for the company. My particular business at this moment
is watching you."

"Watching me?"

"Yes, sir; I am here to check you up. I am not working for you to-day.
As I said, I am working for the company. Don't let me disturb you, sir.
I'll try not to get in the way."

"Do you know why you are doing this?"

"Yes; because I am ordered to do so."

"Is that all you know?"

"It may be, and then again it may not be."

With a growl, Spooner turned and began to abuse his men, while Bob
remained leaning against the wall, checking each car as it was filled.

In the meantime, when Marvin returned to his station on the level below,
he stepped to the tally-board and relieved the man who had been placed
there to act during the regular man's absence.

As Marvin was looking over the boards Steve stepped up, touching him on
the shoulder. The tally-man's face flushed angrily.

"What do you want?"

"Merely to say to you that I have had orders to check you up, to see
that you check every car properly."

"I won't stand it. I'll----"

Steve shrugged his shoulders.

"That is a matter with which I have no concern. You will have to fight
that out with the superintendent. I shall obey my orders and it will be
better for you, I should imagine, to submit without trying to make
matters uncomfortable for me. I shall do what I have been told to do,
just the same. When a train draws up you will plug only when you see
that I am looking at the board, please. I'll dump the cars after you
have done that and I shall know if you have moved the plugs when I am
not looking."

Marvin's face twitched nervously, but he made no reply.

There was nothing of triumph in Steve's attitude. The lad was attending
to business to the best of his ability. He discovered, after a time,
that Marvin was watching him narrowly. As he watched, the tally-man's
face grew blacker and blacker.

"I wonder if he suspects?" thought Rush.

As a matter of fact, Marvin was beginning to see light. At noon the
tally-man hurried away, after sulkily asking Steve to watch the
tally-board. First, however, the man made a memorandum of the tally, so
that Steve could not change it without Marvin's being aware of the fact.
The lad pretended not to have observed this, but a quiet smile hovered
about the corners of his mouth as he laid out his lunch on a clean,
white napkin on the bench beside him.

Instead of going up in the cage, Marvin hastily climbed a ladder to the
sub-level, where he waited for Spooner to come out.

"Well, what is it?" demanded the contractor in a surly tone.

"I've got wise to something. Where can we talk?"

"Come over in the drift here. There's no one near by."

The men slipped into a dead drift, extinguished their candles and
engaged in earnest conversation.

Bob Jarvis' shrewd eyes had observed the actions of the men. He was
sitting in the Spooner contract eating his lunch, but they had not
noticed him.

"I wish I could find out what they are talking about," he muttered. "But
I am not a spy. I don't know that I care particularly. I'll tell Steve,
for I have an idea there is mischief in the air. There they go down the
level."

The two men climbed down the ladder to the main level. A few minutes
later Steve saw Spooner alone, sauntering along the tracks. When the
contractor reached the chute he halted, peering over at the lad as if he
had just discovered him.

"Hello, Rush," he greeted, turning and coming over to where Steve was
sitting.

"Good afternoon."

Spooner sat down on the bench, and, for a moment or two, nothing was
said, Steve continuing with his lunch as indifferently as if the
contractor had not been there.

"So you're the sneak who gave me away, are you?" demanded Spooner,
turning upon the lad savagely.

Steve eyed the contractor calmly.

"Am I?"

"You are!"

"I may be the man, and in fact I will admit that I was instrumental in
exposing your crookedness, but I am not a sneak. It strikes me that you
have laid yourself open to being called one."

The man's face turned white with anger. He opened and closed his
fingers, with difficulty restraining himself from fastening them upon
the calm-faced boy beside him. Steve munched his food steadily, but he
was watching the man narrowly.

"I--I'll be even with you for that, you sneaking cur!" shouted Spooner.
"Yes, I'll be even with you!"

"I wouldn't threaten, were I in your place. If anything should happen to
me you might be accused, you know," answered Rush in a tantalizing tone.
"What do you propose to do to me?"

Spooner leaped up and shook his fist under the Iron Boy's nose. The
latter did not flinch.

"What do I propose to do to you? I'll tell you what I am going to do to
you. I'm going to drive you out of this mine. I'll never stop till I've
driven you off the range and out of the mine country. You'll never be
able to get a day's work in a mine on this range after I get through
with you, if nothing worse happens to you in the meantime. I'll----"

"It strikes me that you are pretty much in the same box yourself----"

"Oh, I wish you were a man! I wish you weren't a weak, baby-faced kid!
I'd beat you to a pulp right----"

"Don't let that worry you, Spooner. Sail in, if you feel you have got to
take it out of me. Perhaps you will feel better after you have vented
your ugly temper on someone, even if it is a boy. Now get off from this
platform!" commanded Rush, with a sudden change of tone, as he rose
quickly to his feet. "You've got no business here, anyway. Get out!"

Steve grabbed up the iron bar with which he dumped the cars and started
for the contractor. He had no intention of using it on the man, but he
did not wish to engage in a fight with the fellow, being pretty sure
that he would get the worst of it, for Spooner was a large and powerful
man. Therefore the Iron Boy chose what he considered to be the most
effective way of ridding himself of the contractor's presence.

Spooner hesitated a moment, then began backing up, his face pale with
rage, his fists clenched.

"You had better turn about and face the other way, unless you want to
fall through the chutes," warned Steve.

Spooner turned with an exclamation. A second more and he would have
fallen in and shot down to the level below. As it was, he was obliged to
jump over the opening to save himself, landing on the other side of the
track. There he paused and renewed his abuse of young Rush.

"I've had enough of your nonsense! Get out!" commanded the sturdy lad.
He, too, leaped the chutes and made for the contractor, brandishing his
iron bar. Spooner turned and ran down the level until he reached the
ladder, up which he climbed to his own drift.

"There, I guess I shall not be troubled by that fellow any more," said
Steve, returning slowly to his interrupted lunch.

But he had not heard the last of Spooner.

The contractor, fuming with rage, was already plotting the downfall of
the lad who had been the cause of his undoing.




CHAPTER XIV

LAYING THE TRAP


Steve Rush and his companion had held a long consultation over the
events of the past few days. They had decided that it would be well to
watch both Spooner and Marvin. Bob had overheard a conversation, or
rather a few words, between the two men that warned him they were
plotting mischief.

"What can they do?" asked Steve.

"If we knew, we should have no cause to worry," answered Bob.

"It is my opinion that they will put up some sort of job to waylay us
outside one of these nights. Well, we shall be ready for them.
Forewarned is forearmed, you know. If they try any such trick they'll
find we are pretty well able to take care of ourselves, even if we are
'weak kids,'" said Rush, with a smile.

A number of weeks passed without incident. During that time Spooner and
Marvin made good their stealings. They were then called to the office
and both men were discharged. This occurred at the noon hour. They were
told to go back to the mine, get their tools and clear out. When the men
did return Steve and Bob Jarvis were eating their lunch up in the
Spooner drift.

"There are the cubs now," whispered Marvin, pointing to the end of the
drift. "It's our chance."

"Is it safe?"

"As safe as it ever will be. If you haven't got the nerve to do it, I'll
do it myself."

"I've got the nerve, all right, but I don't propose to put my neck in a
halter. I'd rather come back at some other time and carry the thing
through."

"Getting cold feet already?" jeered Marvin.

"Don't you talk to me like that, or I'll pound you right here and now.
Nobody ever accused Bob Spooner of having cold feet without getting
hurt."

"You talk like it. But never mind; I'll do it. I owe him one and I owe
the mine more than one. They'll have something to settle and it'll cost
them a pretty penny, I reckon. It's now or never, for you and me. We'll
never get a better opportunity. How do you suppose we are going to get
in here after we leave to-day? Why, they wouldn't let us inside the cage
after the orders the big boss will give them at the top of the shaft."

"Stop it! I'll do the trick. Where are the tools, though? I haven't a
saw in my kit."

"I know where there is one. I sneaked it from the boss timber-man
yesterday after we had our talk. I hid it behind the lagging about half
way down the drift there. Come with me; I'll get it for you."

"Be careful," warned Spooner, peering around a bend in the drift at the
two boys in the far end. From that distance he could see only their
bobbing candles. "All clear. Hurry!"

Marvin reached to the top of the lagging at a certain point, and when
his hand came away it held a saw.

"Here it is. Hurry, now!"

Spooner tucked the saw under his coat. This done, he moved along the
drift away from the place where the boys were sitting, until he came to
a slanting partition.

"There is a ladder inside. You know how to climb down it," whispered
Marvin, as he cautiously opened a door in the partition. The interior
was so dark that the men could see nothing. There was a sudden rush and
some unseen object tore by them in the blackness. It was an ore skip,
with its load of iron ore thundering to the surface. Its force was so
great as to extinguish the candles of the two miners. Marvin quickly
relighted them.

"Now get in and be lively. You will have to get away before the
afternoon shift starts in, or you may get something down on your head."

"You go down and stay on guard. If there is any danger, if anything
turns up, stamp three times on the floor when there is no skip going by.
Otherwise I shall not hear it."

"I'm wise. Good luck! We can't lose this time and we'll be even with the
whole bunch for all time."

Spooner stepped inside the dark chamber, pulling the door cautiously
shut after him. His long service in iron mines had given him an
excellent knowledge of every foot of the mine he was then working in,
and though in deep darkness, he was not at all uncertain in his
movements.

The contractor was now in the large shaft through which the ore skips
ran with their cargoes to the top of the shaft, where they emptied the
ore into waiting trams which ran out over a trestle and dumped it on the
pile where Steve Rush had begun his work when he first came to the
Cousin Jack Mine. It was a dangerous place for one who was not wholly
sure of himself, but Spooner descended the ladder confidently, making
his way to the bottom, then down a short ladder to a platform that was
directly beneath that on which the tally-man and the dumper in level
seventeen stood when at their work.

Reaching this platform, the contractor removed his candle from his hat,
making a careful examination of his surroundings. His attention finally
centred on a section of the flooring above. That particular part was
held up by a post some three feet in length, the latter being supported
by a two-inch plank laid across two other posts that protruded up
through the floor of the lower platform.

"I wish those skips would get busy," muttered Spooner. "They'll hear the
saw above there if I am not careful." Then it occurred to him that, it
being the noon hour, the skips were not running regularly. With an
exclamation of disappointment, the man stepped up to the main post and
ran his hands over the plank that supported it.

"I guess this will be about the right spot," he decided, placing his saw
about midway on the right-hand side of the post. Spooner took off his
blouse, throwing this over the saw to deaden the sound. Then, holding a
corner of the coat up by one hand that he might see what he was doing,
he began drawing the saw rapidly across the plank. The latter being hard
wood, his efforts were not productive of immediate results. But the saw
slowly ate its way into the tough timber until at last the man withdrew
it, and, holding his candle low, examined the cut he had made.

"I think that will be enough for this side. I'll open up the other side
a little," he muttered.

Spooner had just begun to saw when a sound somewhere above him caused
the man quickly to extinguish his candle. He stood still and listened.

"What's this door doing unlatched?" demanded a voice, which the fellow
recognized as belonging to the mine captain.

Spooner did not catch the reply.

"Somebody will be tumbling into the shaft, first thing you know, and
then we shall have damages to pay."

"I reckon you'll have some to pay as it is," muttered the man below. "I
hope this costs you a million!"

The door through which Spooner had entered the shaft was closed with a
bang and he heard no more of the voice above him.

"I've got to look sharp or I'll be caught. I haven't had a signal from
Marvin yet, so everything must be clear above us."

Once more the steady rasp of the saw began on the other side of the
post, and a few minutes later the contractor used his candle to examine
his work.

"I guess that will do the business," he chuckled. "And now I must be
getting out of here lively."

Instead of taking the saw with him, the fellow tossed it over to one
side, then began climbing the ladder. Very soon he was at the door
opening on to the sub-level where his contract had been located. Spooner
opened it ever so little and listened. He could hear subdued voices. He
opened the door a little wider, and, as he did so, Steve Rush and Bob
Jarvis sauntered by.

"Keep your eyes open, old chap," was Bob's parting salutation.

"I will," answered Steve, starting down the ladder to his post.

Jarvis returned to the drift where he was working--Spooner's old place.
This was the chance for the other man to get out of the shaft. He knew
it was time for the afternoon shift to go to work, and just as he slid
from the shaft and closed the door behind him the whistle blew the
signal to resume operations. The contractor ran along the drift,
gathering up his tools and starting down the same ladder that young Rush
had taken.

Reaching the main level, the man took his time in going to the cage. At
the bottom of the shaft he was joined by Marvin.

"Did you fix it?" whispered the latter.

"Sh-h-h!" warned Spooner.

The men ascended to the surface without exchanging further words. Once
in the open, however, Marvin said in a low tone:

"Tell me about it."

"It's done; it's all fixed."

"You think it will work?"

"I am sure of it."

"Then somebody's stock will go down, and I don't know as I care a rap
whose it is."

"I don't think we'll have to guess far to know whose it will be,"
answered Spooner, with a grin.

"What are you going to do?"

"I am going over to Tracy to get a job. We can both get work there, but
they haven't lost us yet. No, sir; the Cousin Jack has not done with you
and me, by a long shot. We've got a few tricks left up our sleeves that
will open their eyes. But we have made a mighty good start; yes, sir, a
mighty good start."

Chuckling at his own villainy, Spooner hurried along, the other man by
his side.

Steve and Bob had returned to their work at once. The former was now
filling the place of the man Marvin at the tally-board, and at the same
time dumping the cars. The two jobs kept him continually moving, but
this Steve, true to his name, thoroughly enjoyed. He liked to be
driving ahead every minute of the day.

From the moment the whistle blew he was hard at work. He had no time to
talk with the motor-man as he had before when dumping the cars, for he
had to keep the number of cars and the drift or contractor in his mind
while he was dumping them, and until he could jump back to the
tally-board.

When night came Steve was ready to turn in. He confessed that he was
tired. For one thing he felt no little relief, and that was that Spooner
and Marvin were no longer in the employ of the company.

The next morning the boys went to work in high spirits. The shift had
been at work something more than an hour, when the catch on one of the
tram cars caught as Steve sought to release it, and resisted his efforts
stubbornly.

"Smash it!" cried the motor-man. "I'm in a hurry."

"I'm going to," answered Steve.

Raising the iron bar above his head, he brought it down on the offending
catch with all his strength. A crash followed and the ore shot down
through the chute with the roaring sound of a cataract.

Instantly the second car was pushed over the chute.

"Get busy, there!" yelled the motor-man when he saw that no effort was
being made to release the ore.

He shouted several times, but there was no response from Rush.

"Where's that lazy bones?" he demanded, hopping from his motor and
running around the end of the train. "What, what---- Something's
happened! Look!" shouted the motor-man, pointing to the platform.

Steve had disappeared. In the place where he had stood a moment before
was a black hole about three feet square. Through this hole could be
heard the thunder of the skips as they rushed back and forth at almost
projectile speed.




CHAPTER XV

BORNE SKYWARD ON A SKIP


"He's gone through the hole! Call the captain! Where is he?"

"I saw him on the sub-level above a minute ago," cried a brakeman,
running up the ladder to summon the mine captain.

The latter was on hand, it seemed less than a minute later, and behind
him came Bob Jarvis.

"What is it?" shouted the captain before he had reached the scene.

"Tally-man and dumper gone down through the hole there."

The captain started in amazement.

"How did it happen?" he demanded excitedly.

"I don't know. He just went through, that's all."

"Who--who was it?" stammered Bob.

"Steve Rush."

Jarvis uttered a half articulate cry and began to let himself down into
the opening. The mine captain grabbed him.

"You'll be killed," he said sternly, dragging the lad back to the
platform. "You cannot help your friend by going through that way."

The captain opened the door leading into the skip shaft and ran down the
ladder. His quick glance took in the broken-down supports, but what he
did not see was that the planking beneath the post had been sawed part
way through. There was no planking there to see.

There were no signs of Steve on the platform below. The captain hurried
back.

"Jarvis, run to the telephone on this level, and tell each level below
to look for the body of a man who fell through the shaft."

Bob started on a run. Despite his pluck, Bob Jarvis was trembling from
head to foot.

"He's dead, he's dead! _They've_ done it. But how? No, it is impossible.
They couldn't be to blame for that. It was an accident."

Word came back that there was no one in the shaft.

"Who opened the hole?" asked Bob.

"It is an old trap that has been closed for years. It simply caved in,
that's all. Order the timber-men to put in a new piece and some fresh
supports. Telephone to the top and find out if they have heard anything
there."

No one seemed really to know what to do. All believed that Steve Rush
had been dashed to death.

"Did--did he fall on a skip?" asked Bob in a trembling voice.

"I am afraid that is what has happened," replied the mine captain. "I am
waiting to hear from the surface and if they have seen nothing of the
body, we will examine the shaft all the way up."

Bob groaned and, walking over, leaned heavily against the partition.

Steve's fall had been so sudden that he had no time even to utter a cry.
The blow that he had given the catch on the tram car had been too much
for the sawed support under the old trap. The support had collapsed
under his weight and Rush had dropped through the opening.

He shot down feet first to the platform below, bounded off and dropped
into the shaft itself.

Something caught and lifted him through the air at a frightful rate of
speed. Steve had been caught by the ore skip, and was being borne to the
surface nearly two thousand feet above. The lad had by this time lost
consciousness, for the shock when the skip caught him had been a heavy
one. It seemed as if it must have broken every bone in his body.

On roared the skip with its human burden. The car shot out into the
daylight, then darted up the fifty-foot shaft that towered above the
opening to the mine.

Reaching the top, its burden of ore was dumped into a waiting tram car
on the trestle, after which the skip dived down into the depths again.

The dump-man on the trestle caught sight of something that was not ore
falling into his car. Instead of starting the car along the trestle, he
sprang up on the side board.

"I wonder what that was? It looked like a human being!" he exclaimed.
Then his eyes caught sight of a piece of clothing. The man tugged at the
cloth, but it did not give way.

"It's a man!" he shouted, clambering over on the car and beginning to
dig frantically with his hands. "Stop the skips, _stop_ them quick!"

But his warning came too late. A skip load of ore was dumped down on the
loaded car, most of it sliding off to the ground fifty feet below.
Enough remained, however, to bury the dump-man and the man he was trying
to drag out.

But the dump-man was full of grit. He fought desperately and in a moment
succeeded in pushing off the ore that held the body down. He was now
working with frantic haste to get the other man out, knowing full well
that the unfortunate one would be suffocated if he already were not
dead.

By this time other men, attracted by the dump-man's cries, were scaling
the trestle at a dozen different places. Among them was the
superintendent himself, who, on his way to the dry house to put on his
miner's suit preparatory to going below ground on his usual daily round,
had heard the cry for help up on the trestle. The superintendent,
despite his size, got to the top of the trestle ahead of any of the
others and started on a run for the scene.

"What's the trouble, Collins?" he shouted.

"Man thrown up on the skip, sir."

"Is he dead?"

"I can't say, sir. I think most likely he is."

"Who is it?"

"Don't know him, but he's a young 'un. He's pretty badly banged up, so
far as I can see."

Superintendent Penton threw himself to the top of the ore car and
assisted in getting the man out. At first he did not recognize the limp
figure as being that of Steve Rush, for the red ore had been ground into
the cut and bleeding face of the lad until he was almost unrecognizable.

"Send for the stretchers. This man must be gotten to the hospital on the
jump!" shouted the superintendent.

The dump-man had lifted the boy from the car, had laid him down on the
trestle and with his handkerchief was wiping the dark-red ore from the
lad's mouth, eyes and nose.

"He's alive, sir," called Collins. "But I reckon he won't be for very
long."

Mr. Penton stepped over, after giving his orders, and looked keenly down
into the pale face before him.

"What!" he exclaimed, bending close to the injured boy. "Good heavens,
it's Steve Rush! This is too bad. How did it happen?"

"I don't know, sir. The first I knew about it he came out of the hopper
kerflop. I jumped up to dig him out, and then I went kerflop with a load
of ore on my back. Woof! It's lucky for me the car was full or I'd have
been at the bottom of the heap."

Mr. Penton had picked Steve up in his arms. The burden seemed as nothing
to this powerful man. And even when he reached the ladder leading down
to the ground the superintendent appeared to experience no difficulty in
making his way down with the heavy load he was carrying.

Steve was rushed to the hospital, followed by the superintendent
himself. The lad was still unconscious. A hasty examination by the
surgeon was made in the presence of the superintendent.

"Well?" Mr. Penton threw a world of meaning into the word.

"No bones are broken. There may be some internal injury. I should judge
there might be, from the fact that he is bleeding at the mouth. What
happened?"

"He was thrown up by the skip. That's all I know about it now. I want to
know whether or not the boy is going to die. Then I will find out how it
happened."

After working over the unconscious boy for half an hour, the surgeon
decided that there had been a severe concussion that might amount to a
fracture. A few hours, he said, would tell the story.

"I'll be back within the hour. Let no efforts be spared to straighten
the lad out, if it be possible."

Steve lay limp and pallid, his face almost as white as the sheets of the
cot on which he had been placed, and there was a troubled look in the
eyes of the big-hearted superintendent as he left the company's hospital
and hurried to the shaft.

"Let me off at the seventeenth level," he directed, taking his place in
the cage. A few minutes later found him at the chutes where the accident
had occurred. Bob, pale-faced and anxious, had been placed at the
tally-board and the work of the mine was going on much as usual.

"Please, Mr. Penton, is Steve badly hurt?" demanded the lad, running
over to the superintendent the instant he saw him approaching.

"I fear he is, my boy. How did the accident occur?"

"We hear he was carried up on the skip and dropped on the trestle."

"I mean what happened here?"

"The boy fell through the old trap there," explained the mine captain,
approaching at that moment.

"Fell through the trap?" demanded Mr. Penton in surprise.

"Yes, the old trap that was closed several years ago. The men are fixing
it so a similar accident won't occur again."

"Tell me exactly what happened."

"I didn't see it. The motor-man there can tell you. He is just coming in
now."

The motor-man explained that young Rush was hammering at the dump-car
catch when the trap gave way beneath him and he went down. That was all
that anyone below ground knew about the accident. In fact, that was all
there was to tell so far as any one in the mine knew.

Mr. Penton looked grave. It was an accident that reflected on him, for
the corporation looked to him to make the mine safe. He was greatly
disturbed, but more on Steve's account than on his own.

The superintendent climbed down into the skip shaft and made an
examination on his own account.

"Where are the supports that held up the trap?" he demanded upon his
return to the platform.

"If they ain't there we must have thrown them into the shaft," explained
the timber-man.

"You should have known better than that. Was it a break?"

"It was a break, all right. The thing just gave out, and that's all
there was to it. But you can bet this one won't give way, not in a
thousand years. It'll be here long after the old mine has caved in."

Mr. Penton did not go on with his inspection of the mine that day. He
was too full of anxiety for Steve Rush. Bob had begged to be let off for
the afternoon, and Mr. Penton had willingly granted his request. The lad
hurried to the hospital, after having changed his clothes, and at his
earnest request he was allowed to sit beside Steve. The boy could
scarcely keep the tears back as he gazed down into the pale face of his
companion. Bob was sure in his own mind that Steve was dying and Jarvis'
eyes were large and sorrowful as he watched the surgeon working over the
unconscious patient.

Mr. Penton came, remained a short time, then went away; he, too,
convinced that Rush could not recover. Night came on, but still Bob sat
beside the hospital cot, one hand slipped under the sheet clasping a
hand of his companion.

"You had better go home," said the surgeon, seeming for the first time
to be aware of Jarvis' presence.

Bob did not answer.

"I said, you had better go home, Jarvis."

"I want to stay," answered the boy simply.

"You can do him no good."

"When will he get better--or worse?"

"I do not look for any change before three o'clock in the morning or
thereabouts, so you see it will be useless for you to remain."

"All right; I am not sleepy," and Bob turned his face toward the cot,
again fixing his gaze on the face of the unconscious Steve.

The surgeon shrugged his shoulders and proceeded with his duties. The
hours dragged along, but Bob never changed his position nor even moved,
so fearful was he of doing something that might retard his friend's
recovery. Three o'clock came and still there was no change. Another half
hour elapsed. The sky was graying in the east. Steve uttered a low moan.
The surgeon was at his side in an instant. He placed an ear to the boy's
heart, then took his pulse, watch in hand. Bob's eyes were fixed on the
surgeon now. The latter shut his watch with a snap, then noting the
pleading question in the watcher's eyes, he nodded.

"He is better. The change is coming, and unless something unlooked for
occurs he should return to consciousness soon."

Bob drew a short, quick breath that was half a sob, settling down into
his former watchful position.

Now the surgeon remained by the side of the cot. Occasionally he would
administer a few drops of medicine. When the patient choked a little and
swallowed, the surgeon would nod approvingly.

All at once Steve Rush's eyelids fluttered open. His gaze was fixed for
a brief instant on the face of his companion. Jarvis held his breath.

"Bob," murmured the lad, then closed his eyes wearily.




CHAPTER XVI

WHAT WAS FOUND IN THE SHAFT


"The crisis has passed," announced the surgeon in a relieved tone.

Two great tear drops rolled down Bob Jarvis' cheeks. He brushed them
away and rose from the chair in which he had been sitting all night.

"I'm going home. I must get ready to go to work. If he should become
worse won't you please let me know?"

"Yes," answered the surgeon, giving the boy a quick, keen glance. "He'll
be all right now. No need to worry."

Bob went to his boarding place happier and more light of heart than he
ever had been before.

Steve's recovery was very slow, however. All that day and the next he
was too weak to talk, having lost considerable blood. Then again the
shock had been greater than many men could have sustained and lived to
tell about.

At the end of a week the invalid was allowed to sit up, but ten days had
elapsed before it was considered prudent to permit him to dress and walk
about. Bob spent all his evenings with his companion, but they did not
discuss the accident. Each lad tacitly avoided the subject.

The first day that Rush was allowed to go out of doors he walked over to
Mr. Penton's office, a hundred yards away, and asked permission to see
the superintendent. Mr. Penton welcomed the young man warmly.

"I am glad to see you out, Rush. You had a pretty close call, didn't
you?"

"I guess so, though I do not remember much about what happened beyond a
certain point."

"If you feel strong enough I wish you would tell me exactly what
occurred leading up to the accident," said the superintendent.

"Oh, yes, sir; I am strong enough. I could go to work and I think I
shall to-morrow."

"We'll see about that."

Steve related briefly what he knew of the accident, but his story shed
no new light on the affair. He could not even guess how it had happened,
beyond what Mr. Penton himself told the boy.

"There is one thing I should like to do, sir," said Steve.

"And what is that?"

"I wish you would give me permission to examine the shaft where I fell
in."

"That already has been done. Something gave way, and----"

Steve smiled faintly.

"I have reason to know that something gave way," he said. "I wish I
could satisfy myself, though, just how it happened."

"Of course. There is no objection to your doing so."

"I will ask Bob Jarvis to help me. He is a shrewd boy, and he may see
some things that I might not notice."

"He will have to be pretty keen if he does," laughed Mr. Penton. "I
cannot imagine much of anything escaping your observation. But, my lad,
you have some reason for wanting to do this. What is it?"

"I want to find out how the accident occurred."

"Ah, you suspect something?"

"I do not know whether I do or not. Perhaps I am curious. Most boys have
some curiosity, you know, sir."

"Go ahead, but do not try it until you are well and strong. We can't
afford to have you laid up again. We need you, you know."

A faint flush stole into Steve Rush's face. He had grown to be very fond
of the big-bodied, big-hearted superintendent of the Cousin Jack Mine in
the few months that he had known him.

"I thank you, sir. You are very kind to me. I want to tell you how much
I appreciate it all."

"Rubbish!" scoffed Mr. Penton.

On the third day following, Steve made his first trip below ground since
the accident. The lad was welcomed with enthusiasm by nearly every one
he met, many of whom he knew only by sight.

"I never knew I was so popular," smiled Steve, after he had looked up
Jarvis, who was still at work at level seventeen.

Bob grinned.

"I reckon there are certain quarters where you are not so popular, eh?"

"I should not be surprised if that were true. But those quarters no
longer exist, I understand."

"Yes; the pair have hit the trail over the mountains. What are you going
to do down here to-day?"

"I am going down in the skip shaft."

Jarvis nodded understandingly.

"Mr. Penton said you might knock off and go with me."

"Did he? That's fine. I'll see the mine captain and tell him."

"I have told him already. You may come with me now, and we'll make a
little examination on our own hook."

Bob dropped his shovel, and, telling the shift boss where he was going,
accompanied Steve down the ladder to the level below. There the lads
looked over the platform by the tally-board, Steve pointing out where he
was standing when he went through the floor.

"I never knew there was a trap there," he said, pointing to the new
planking that covered the hole through which he had dropped.

"Nor I. I guess not many men in the mine knew about it. The timbers
supporting it must have been rotten."

"Perhaps," answered Steve dryly. "Come on up to the sub-level; we will
begin our investigation there."

Bob followed, though he did not fully understand the purpose of his
companion. Rush made his way to the door on the sub-level through which
the man Spooner had entered the shaft. The lad opened the door and stood
peering in, holding his candle ahead of him as he did so.

"You are not going in here, are you?" questioned Jarvis.

"Yes."

"Why not go in on the level below and save this climb?"

"I have my reasons, old man. Do you see the red mud on the rungs of the
ladder here?"

"Yes, I see it; but what does that prove?"

"No one has any business in this shaft and yet someone has been here
rather recently, for the mud is still soft. That mud came from some
one's rubber boots not so many moons ago."

"You ought to be a detective," exclaimed Bob admiringly.

"We will go down now. Be careful. This isn't a very safe place, and a
misstep would take you to the surface by the route I followed two weeks
ago."

Once on the platform below, the boys halted. Holding their candles above
their heads, they looked about them curiously. A new post had been set
in place of the old one, the latter still lying on the platform. This
the boys examined carefully.

"You see, the post is in good condition, Bob. The post didn't give way,
after all. I wonder how it was held up?"

"Perhaps it rested on a piece of wood placed across these two posts that
project up through the floor," suggested Bob.

"Yes, that's so. I think you are right. But where is the piece? I should
like to see it."

Steve was hunting here and there with his customary energy, while Bob
Jarvis stood looking on, not being quite sure what he should do.

"You look about on that side, Bob. Be careful that you don't fall into
the shaft. Here is sawdust on the floor, but I presume the men did that
when they put in the new support. Hello! I've got something."

Steve triumphantly held up a saw that he had found.

"This may mean something and it may not. We shall find out when we get
back again."

Suddenly the boy uttered an exclamation.

"What is it?" demanded Bob, hastening over to the spot where Steve was
pulling something from between the platform and the rock wall of the
shaft. What he had found was a piece of plank from which two pieces had
been split off. At the breaking point on each end they plainly saw the
cut of a saw.

"Well, what do you think of that?" muttered Bob. "Is that the plank that
held up the post?"

"Judging from the mark in the middle, I should say it was. Bring the old
post over here."

Bob did so, and at Steve's direction placed the end of the post on the
broken piece of plank. The post fitted the faint outline perfectly.

"Well, what do you think of that?" breathed Jarvis.

"That somebody has tried to make a clean job of getting me out of the
way. That plank was sawed partly through so that it might not break at
once, but would do so when any extra weight was thrown upon it. We must
find those other pieces, Bob. Look about. I guess we'll have something
to report to Mr. Penton."

Illustration: Steve Triumphantly Held Up a Saw.

"Shall we say who did it?"

"We can't really say. We may have our suspicions, but unless we get more
evidence we shall have to let it go as it is. I have some facts in my
possession that may help us, though."

Steve got down on his hands and knees and began going over the floor
with great thoroughness. He was keen and alert and his eyes glowed with
resolute purpose.

"Here's one of the broken pieces," cried Bob.

"Good. See if you can find the other. We shall have our case complete in
a few minutes if we keep on having such good luck."

But one piece was all that Bob was able to find, the other no doubt
having been thrown into the shaft. The one found was lying at the edge
of the platform near its end.

"I guess there is nothing more here for us to do," decided the lad
finally. "We will take our evidence and go to Mr. Penton."

"We haven't enough to hang a dead cat on."

Steve smiled.

"We shall see," he answered. "You tuck the saw under your coat and I
will carry the boards."

Entering the first cage that stopped at this level, the boys were
quickly conveyed to the surface. Steve asked the cage-tender at the
mouth of the shaft if he had seen the superintendent about the shaft,
and was informed that Mr. Penton was at that moment in the dry house. He
was no doubt dressing to go down in the mine.

The boys hurried to the dry house, finding Mr. Penton talking with one
of the time-checkers.

"May we see you alone, sir?" asked Steve.

"Certainly. Come into my dressing room. You have some news, eh?" queried
the superintendent, flashing a keen glance at them.

"We think we have, sir."

After entering the dressing room, Mr. Penton nodded for them to proceed.
Steve went right to the point.

"We have been down in the skip shaft."

"On seventeen platform?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you discover anything of consequence?"

"Mr. Jarvis has a saw that we found there. It belongs to one of the
timber-men, and was stolen from him the day before the accident."

The superintendent pricked up his ears at this.

"I learned that fact this morning. He doesn't know that we have the saw.
We found it where it had evidently been thrown by the person who used
it. And here is something else, sir."

Steve laid the broken pieces of plank on a table. Mr. Penton picked them
up, turning them over in his hands, pausing when he discovered the marks
of the saw, then he glanced at Steve.

"What is this?"

"It is the support that rested under the post holding up the old trap,"
answered the lad.

"Then--then----"

"Someone had sawed it partly through, so the support would give way and
let someone else down. I happened to be the one who was let down."

The smile vanished from the eyes of the general superintendent and the
lines of his face hardened perceptibly.

"How do you know this piece supported the post?"

"You will find the mark of the post on it. We fitted the post to the
mark to make sure. Whoever did the job, entered the skip shaft from
sub-level seventeen. I am sure of this, because I found fresh mud on the
rungs of the ladder. No one is supposed to go down there, is he, sir?"

"No; no one does go down there. This is very serious. Why did not my men
discover all these things?"

"I guess they did not look very sharply. The evidence was there to be
found if one looked hard enough."

"Rush, you suspect someone?" said Mr. Penton sharply. "Whom do you
suspect?"

"Perhaps this may answer the question," answered the lad, laying on the
table a brass time check about the size of a half dollar.

"Where--where did you get this?"

"On the platform where the job was done, sir," answered Steve, directing
a steady gaze at the stern face of the superintendent.




CHAPTER XVII

THEIR FIRST PROMOTION


"Wait a minute," said Mr. Penton, hurrying across the hall to the office
of the time-keepers.

He was gone but a few moments and when he returned there was a look on
his face that Steve had never seen there before. It was a look that
meant trouble for someone. The superintendent sat down, gazing out of
the window at the towering shaft of the Cousin Jack Mine.

"You did not answer my previous question. I asked you whom you
suspected."

"I dislike to make so serious a charge against anyone, sir, but a
certain man was seen standing near the door leading down to the platform
the day before I fell in. Two persons saw him."

"Who was the man?"

"The man was Spooner, sir."

"You are sure of that?"

"Sure of it according to my information."

"Well, lad, this is Spooner's time check that you have brought to me,"
replied Mr. Penton in an impressive voice.

"I reckon that evidence would hang a live cat," muttered Bob Jarvis.

"Yes, it is sufficient evidence to warrant my looking up the man and
lodging a complaint against him. Was he alone when he was seen at the
door of the shaft, or don't you know?"

"Marvin was with him, sir."

"Ah! Rush, you have done well. You are a very shrewd young man. In fact,
I am proud of both of you. When we have anything of this sort on hand
again I shall get you to investigate it. However, I do not believe there
is another man in the mine who is wicked enough to attempt the life of a
boy. There is another matter that I have had in mind for some time. That
is, your advancement. You have learned fast. You already know more about
the mine and its operation than a number of men who have spent the
greater part of their lives below ground."

"Thank you, sir. We have tried to improve our opportunities."

"You have done so. You have done the company a great service in finding
the place where the shortage occurred. I have already expressed myself
on this point. After receiving my report in that case, the president of
the company wrote me to reward you as I saw fit. I shall do so by
promoting you. It is not much of a promotion, but it will give you an
opportunity to acquaint yourselves the better with the mine and its
operations. I now appoint you two boys inspectors of tracks. Your duties
will be to see that the tram tracks are in perfect condition. It will
keep you busy, for there are a good many miles of track in the Cousin
Jack. You, Rush, will take the east half and Jarvis the west. That will
take you both well over the mine. It would be simpler to divide your
territory by levels, but I consider the former plan the better one for
your own good. You will require some technical information that the
engineer will give you. He also will supply you with maps of the
trackage, which you will study carefully."

"I am very grateful," breathed Steve, his eyes lighting up.

"You're welcome, lad. I want to push you along as fast as you are ready,
but you must not expect to go too fast."

"I think I have done very well as it is, sir."

"Your pay will be two dollars a day."

Twelve dollars a week! It was more money than either of the boys ever
had earned before. To them it seemed a large sum of money. They were
very happy and proud. Their new work was to begin on the following
morning. Jarvis went back to finish his day at drifting in ore, while
Steve returned to his boarding place, where he sat down and wrote a long
letter to his mother, telling her of his good fortune.

In the meantime Mr. Penton set an inquiry on foot to locate Spooner and
Marvin. The men had applied for work in a neighboring mine, he learned,
but had failed to get employment there. Neither man had been seen in
those parts since. Mr. Penton decided that they had left the range, and
he was thankful for it, as it relieved him of an unpleasant duty.
However, that day he made a detailed report to the president of the
mining company by letter, giving the boys full credit for what they had
discovered. Mr. Penton also made report of the promotion he had given
them. This was afterwards heartily endorsed by President Carrhart.

Early the next morning the boys went over the mine with an assistant
engineer. He gave them a long talk on tracks, Steve asking many
questions as they went along. That afternoon the Iron Boys began their
work, having laid out a certain number of levels that were to be visited
each day. As Mr. Penton had told them, their new position took them to
nearly every part of the mine, from the lowest working level to the tram
tracks on the surface and far up on the trestle.

By the time that they had been at their new work for several months,
each lad had proved that he was worthy of the confidence placed in him
by the general superintendent.

Steve had been figuring on a problem in his department for a long time,
and one day he went to the superintendent with it, or rather to learn
whether the problem were a problem at all.

"I want to ask, Mr. Penton, if the expense of keeping up your motors
that draw the dump cars in the mines is very great."

"I should say it is," was the prompt answer. "You see, they draw very
heavy loads. Those cars of ore are not light."

"I am well aware of that. You will remember that I had a load dropped on
me once," smiled Steve.

"We wear out, I should say, on an average of six motors a year. That
runs into money. And the repairs on them, in the meantime, are very
expensive."

"Would any arrangement that would tend to lessen the strain on the
motors be of advantage to the company?"

"That is self-evident. Of course it would. What is more, relieving the
cars of the strain to which they are subjected would save a few thousand
dollars a year. Have you something in mind?"

Mr. Penton smiled good-naturedly on the young man who was standing
before him.

"Yes, sir, I have a plan by which I think you ought to be able to save
your electric motors considerably and at the same time make greater
speed in getting ore to the chutes."

"If you have a practical plan for doing that you will have accomplished
a great deal, young man. What is your plan?"

"Well, sir, it is an engineering problem. Not being an engineer, I
perhaps shall not be able to overcome all the difficulties in the way. I
can tell you, though, what I think would help."

"Do so."

"I find that in most of the levels there is a considerable up grade to
the chutes where the tram cars are dumped."

"That is a fact."

"Would it not be much better to have the loaded cars run down grade to
the chutes? Then they would go back up the grade empty," suggested Steve
half hesitatingly.

Mr. Penton gazed at him quizzically.

"Do you know, my boy, you have made a suggestion that even the keenest
of our engineers evidently never have thought of?"

"I am glad if I have suggested something worth while," said Steve, with
a pleased smile.

"But how do you propose to go about it? The levels are made and the
tracks are laid to fit the conformation. How are you going to get over
that condition?" asked the superintendent, with a twinkle in his eyes.

"As I told you, I am not an engineer."

"But you have an idea?"

"Yes, sir."

"Let's hear it."

"I have watched the trackmen grading on the railroad and I do not see
why you cannot do the same thing here. You have plenty of waste dirt and
rock in the mine. It is being taken out every day. Why not utilize some
of it in raising the tracks at the 'rises'? That would give the cars a
good start and the electric motor would not have to wear itself out
getting the cars started. Continue doing this, even if you have to begin
cutting the level lower down by the chutes. I am sure that that feature
could easily be overcome by your engineers. In the sub-levels and new
drifts you could do the same thing."

"How?"

"Cut down to them, sir, when you are drifting in. I want you to know
that this is not wholly my idea. My friend Bob, in discussing the track
question with me, said it was a pity that the motors had to haul their
loads up hill in most instances. I got to thinking over this and out of
it all came the plan I have proposed, so you see he is the one who is
really entitled to the credit."

"The credit is yours. Rush, you've a great head on that slender body of
yours, and it isn't so slender, at that, judging from the ease with
which you picked up a rail one day last week and laid it in place." Mr.
Penton laughed. "No; not so slender as it might seem to one who did not
know you. This is really a very important matter. It is a matter that I
shall have to take up with the main office at Duluth. I have an idea
that they will adopt your suggestion without very much delay," said Mr.
Penton.

"Yes, sir."

"The engineering department reports that the inspection of tracks has
never been done so thoroughly and intelligently as since you and Jarvis
have been on the work. This naturally pleases me very much. It shows me
that my estimate of you was correct. Have you anything else to suggest?"

"No, sir; I think not. I think that will be about enough for to-day."

The superintendent agreed with him and Steve went back to his work. Bob
Jarvis was quickly acquainted with what the superintendent had said,
much to the latter's gratification. In due time, the plan having been
passed upon by the company's engineers at the home office, word was
received at the mines that it had been adopted. The young men who had
suggested it were highly commended, President Carrhart adding in his
letter to Mr. Penton:

"I knew that boy Rush couldn't help but do something, with a name like
his."

The work was put in progress as soon after that as the plans could be
worked out, bearing in mind that the operation of the mine must not be
interfered with. It may be imagined with what keen interest Steve Rush
and Bob Jarvis watched the changing of the grades. They were also
interested in another direction, when, one pay day soon after, they
found that their salaries had been raised to fifteen dollars a week
each.

Bob declared he felt like a millionaire.

"What are you going to do with all that money?" asked Steve.

"I think I shall buy some of the company's stock," answered Jarvis.

"Not a half bad idea. That is what I am going to do when I get money
enough. As it is, I am sending home most of what I earn. But the money
is in good hands," he smiled.

"Mine's in the bank. I am getting four per cent. interest on it, but I
haven't got to where I can live on the interest I receive from it. I was
figuring the other night, and at the present rate it will be twenty
years before I shall be able to live on my income--my interest, I mean."

"Well, I don't want to live on my income. I want to be up and doing
something as long as I've got a kick left in me. Cheer up, Bob, you may
be a millionaire yet."

"Yes; when I have long, yellow whiskers, maybe," laughed Jarvis.

In the course of two months the new system was working to the
satisfaction of everyone. Already it was being applied to the other
mines belonging to the company, and even at that early day it was
apparent that the Rush Gravity System, as it was called, was destined to
prove a great saving to the company. The name, too, was considered
unusually appropriate.

One day, a few months later, as Steve was on his rounds, he caught sight
of a man in miner's costume who instantly attracted his attention. The
man was rather tall and wore a full beard. Rush stopped and gazed after
the fellow until he passed out of sight.

"I wonder who he is?" muttered Steve. "There is something about
him--about the way he folded his hand over his mouth, that is
unpleasantly familiar to me."

On the day following, while Steve was chatting with one of the shift
bosses on the twelfth level, he saw the fellow again.

"Who is that man?" asked the boy sharply, pointing to the one who had
attracted his attention.

"His name is Klink--John Klink."

"What does he do?"

"He is acting as a drift inspector at present, I believe."

"Klink?" mused the lad. "I don't think I ever heard the name before. Do
you know where he comes from?"

"I think he comes from the San Juan Mine, over on the McCormick range. I
don't know anything about him, but he seems to know his business pretty
well. He is inspecting temporarily. The inspector whose place he is
taking is at home sick. Klink is a boss miner."

"I must have been mistaken," thought Rush, as he proceeded along his
route inspecting the tracks on that level. "But I can't get it out of my
mind that I have seen the fellow somewhere before, and under unpleasant
circumstances, at that."

He had, and at no distant day, he was destined to see the man under
still more unfavorable circumstances.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE VISIT OF THE OFFICIALS


For a week past there had been a great deal of work done in the Cousin
Jack in the way of cleaning up and putting things in the best possible
shape. The mine was to receive visitors. The annual inspection by
prominent officials of the company was to be made, and the visitors
might be looked for now on almost any day.

It was understood, also, that several New York officials were to be in
the party, and every department head in the mines was ordered to leave
nothing undone to have all things under his charge in perfect order.

"We are about the only ones whose work won't show," complained Jarvis.

"Why not, Bob?" demanded Steve.

"Why, a track is a track, that's all. It doesn't show all the work we
have put on it. They'll just walk along on our job while they are
admiring the other fellow's work."

"I think you are in error. The officials of these big corporations are
all practical men. Most of them have had personal experience; some of
them have not. I don't know about the New Yorkers, but I know Mr.
Carrhart has been all through the mill. He will notice everything; you
see if he doesn't."

Three days after this conversation the visitors arrived. The Iron Boys
were engaged in other parts of the mine and did not know of the arrival.
Along in the early afternoon, however, their duties led them to the
seventeenth level. Of course they were on opposite sides of the mine,
but as it chanced each was heading for the chutes on that level, where
their patrol would end. After a time a bobbing candle appeared far down
the level. A moment later another appeared coming from the opposite
direction.

Two young men came swinging along the tracks. Their step was springy and
there was an alertness about them that at once attracted the observing
ones. These two were Steve Rush and Bob Jarvis. They approached each
other rapidly and waved their hands in greeting.

"Bob, there are the visitors," said Steve in a low tone.

"Oh, that's so; I hadn't noticed them. When did they come in?"

"I do not know. I had not seen them before."

Eight or ten men were assembled on the platform where the tally-board
was located. The superintendent was holding an earnest conversation
with them, the visitors keeping up a running fire of questions and
comment. They had been through part of the mine and were discussing
conditions and proposed improvements.

The boys had matters of their own to discuss, so they gave little
attention to the gathering, so far as the latter observed. But the lads
were interested, just the same.

"I suppose most of those fellows are millionaires," said Bob, indicating
the group by a jerk of his thumb in their direction.

"They are not fellows, Bob; they are gentlemen," corrected Rush.

"How do you know they are?" came back the quick question.

"It is reasonable to suppose they are. I know one of them is, for I have
met him."

"Who is that?"

"Mr. Carrhart, president of the company."

"They all look like miners to me. Put a shovel in their hands and they
wouldn't be at all different from us. But we mustn't be standing here
doing nothing. While we are here, let's take a look at the tracks over
the chutes. There is a rail a little down at the heels. I shall have to
report it as dangerous. Getting a car off here blocks the whole line. I
wonder when that edge broke down. It was all right when I inspected it
yesterday."

Steve took out his memorandum book and made a note of the condition of
the rail for immediate report to the engineering department.

While the boys were thus engaged some of the party stood looking in
their direction.

"Mr. Penton, who are those young men standing over yonder?" asked Mr.
Carrhart.

"They are my track inspectors. They are a pair of likely young fellows.
I'll wager there isn't a another pair of their age on the range that can
equal them."

At this every one of the party turned to look at the Iron Boys, who, all
unconscious of the attention they were attracting, were busy with their
work.

"The chances are they do not even know you gentlemen are here, so
attentive are they to their work."

"Who are they, Penton? I am interested in these prodigies," laughed Mr.
Carrhart.

"The taller of the two is Robert Jarvis. The other is Steve Rush, after
whom the Rush Gravity System is named. You will remember, Rush suggested
the change to the gravity system."

"Steve Rush?" exclaimed the president. "Why, I was going to ask you
about the young man. I wish to talk with him, and the boy Jarvis, also.
Rush is my find, you will remember, Penton."

"I was congratulating myself that I was his discoverer," laughed the
superintendent.

"No, you will remember my sending him up to you with a letter. You know
I saw that he had good material in him. He was a live wire, even then."

"I give way; the honor is yours," answered Mr. Penton.

The party was in great good humor.

"If you can spare your young friends from their duties, for a few
moments, I should like to speak with them."

"Surely. Rush!"

"Yes, sir."

The lad straightened up, touching his cap immediately.

"Will you step over here, please?"

Steve strode across the tracks.

"Jarvis, you, too."

"Yes, sir."

"How are you, Rush?" exclaimed President Carrhart, stepping forward and
extending a cordial hand.

"How do you do, Mr. Carrhart. I am afraid my hand is not shakeable. It
is grimy with red ore."

"We will shake all the same, lad."

They did so, the president holding to Steve's hand as he gazed keenly
into the manly face of the boy, Steve returning his gaze, respectfully
but steadily.

"I am glad to see you, Rush."

"Thank you, sir. And I want to thank you also for giving me the
opportunity that you did. This is my companion, Bob Jarvis."

The superintendent stepped forward at that juncture, presenting the boys
to each member of the party in turn. There were vice-presidents,
secretaries and directors--more titles than the boys could remember. To
their surprise these big men greeted them as if they were equals.

"I hear you already have made a record for yourself, Rush," said Mr.
Carrhart.

"I don't know about that, sir. I am just beginning to realize that I
have a lot to learn."

"I hear also that you have had some exciting experiences. You must learn
to safeguard yourself, and remember another thing, make your mine safe
for your men and you will always get results. You and your friend are in
charge of the tracks?"

"Yes, sir."

"I am pleased to see them in such splendid condition. It is almost like
riding on a rock-ballasted railroad, they are so smooth."

Bob threw his shoulders back ever so little as he heard this.

"My, but those fellows must have eyes all around their heads the way
they take things in," muttered Jarvis. "No wonder they are millionaires!
They can see what the fellow behind them is doing as well as they can
what's going on in front. You can't beat that kind of a game."

"I hope he doesn't see that turned rail there over the chute," thought
Rush.

"I noticed only one bad rail in the entire system, the one there by the
chute. I see you have caught that, however."

"Well, what do you think of that?" muttered Bob under his breath. "I
never heard anything like it."

"Yes, sir; but that rail has gone bad within the last twenty-four hours.
It was in apparently good condition yesterday. Perhaps I did not examine
it closely enough on my last inspection, though."

"No; you can't avoid those things now and then. There might have been a
defect in the steel, a blow hole or something of the sort. The principal
thing is not to let them get away from you. Catch the deterioration in
time, before it causes more trouble--that is all we can expect of you.
Gentlemen, this is the young man who invented our gravity system.
Perhaps you heard the superintendent speak of it just now. And, let me
tell you, he will bear watching. One of these days, if you do not keep
your eyes open, he is likely to be found sitting in the chair of one of
the other of you, either in Duluth, or Pittsburgh, or New York."

The gentlemen joined in Mr. Carrhart's laugh, much to Steve's
embarrassment, though one would have never known, by looking at him,
that he was experiencing any such emotion.

"You are doing well, very well; but do not be in too big a hurry and
don't get a swelled head. It is fatal to progress."

"No, sir. If it does not get smashed, I am sure I shall be able to keep
it from swelling," replied Steve, with a faint smile, bringing a laugh
from the assembled company.

"Where did that accident occur?" asked the president, turning to Mr.
Penton.

"Right where Mr. Gary is standing now."

The gentleman referred to, a vice-president of the company, promptly
stepped back, glancing at the floor almost apprehensively. This brought
another laugh from the visitors.

"Come here, gentlemen," said Mr. Carrhart, "and I will show you where
this young man fell in. I do not think we should be alive now had we
been through that experience."

The president threw open the door leading into the skip shaft. The
others had stepped up to him, but as the skips thundered past them,
leaping for the surface, faintly outlined monsters as they shot by, the
members of the party instinctively drew back, casting wondering glances
at the keen-faced boy who stood calmly, almost indifferently, looking
into the shaft.

Mr. Carrhart was explaining to them how the accident had occurred.

"Excuse me," said Mr. Cary. "I think I should prefer to be run over by a
touring car on Broadway."

"And so should I," chorused the others, with the exception of Mr.
Carrhart, who smiled grimly.

A lunch had been prepared for the guests and they were to eat in the
mine, on the platform by the tally-boards and the chutes. Tables were
being set, and by the time the visitors had turned away from the shaft
opening they were invited to be seated on the benches drawn up for the
purpose.

Steve and Bob stood talking with Mr. Carrhart, the president asking many
questions.

"Come, Carrhart," called one of the others.

"I will be with you in a moment. Don't wait for me. Rush, how would you
like to come to headquarters at the end of your year in the mines?"

"You mean to take a position there?"

"Yes."

The lad reflected for a moment.

"Would you advise me to do that, sir?" questioned Rush, looking Mr.
Carrhart squarely in the eye.

"So you are putting it up to me, are you, you young rascal?" laughed the
president.

"You know best, sir."

"The question is, would you like to come into the offices?"

"I am afraid I should not be worth much there. I think, sir, that I like
the activity of this life better, so long as you have asked me. It is a
rough, hard life, but I am happy here and I hope to learn the business
so well that in time I shall be fit for a higher position."

"I don't think there is any doubt about that, my lad. By all means
remain here. I shall have an eye in your direction, as I have had ever
since I sent you up here. Good afternoon, boys; the gentlemen are
waiting for me."

While this conversation was in progress an Italian was making his way
down level seventeen. Over his back he carried a bag, the ends of which,
fashioned into a loop, had been fastened in front of him, passing around
his neck. The fellow was plodding half sleepily along, his boots
slopping in the water beside the track as he staggered under his heavy
burden.

When near the chute a man suddenly appeared behind him, paused an
instant, then walked swiftly away. A few seconds more and the Italian
appeared passing the chute.

"Look!" exclaimed Bob. "Great goodness! Look at that!"

Steve Rush did look. One look was enough. With a sudden exclamation he
sprang for the slow-moving Italian, leaping the chutes at the risk of
his life. The lad knew that the lives of every man there were in peril.
By quick work only could he save them, and perhaps not then.




CHAPTER XIX

FACING A GREAT PERIL


Bob Jarvis was after him with a bound.

The lads had seen a little tongue of flame creeping up the sides of the
bag on the back of the Italian.

Mr. Penton saw it also, as did the president of the company. The two men
understood the situation as fully as did the lads themselves, but the
others of the company were laughing and chatting, unmindful of the dire
peril that was threatening them. Mr. Carrhart and Mr. Penton half rose
from their seats, their faces blanching noticeably.

Steve by this time had reached the Italian burden-bearer. Stretching
forth his hands, he grasped the bag, giving it a powerful tug. The
Italian toppled over backwards, the loop slipping over his head, leaving
the sack and its contents in the hands of Steve Rush.

In the meantime the attention of the visitors had been attracted. They
discovered all at once that something unusual was taking place.

"Hello, what's this--a fight?" cried Mr. Cary.

Those who knew did not answer. They stood with pale faces, wide-eyed,
watching the efforts of the Iron Boys.

No sooner had Steve gotten possession of the bag than the Italian leaped
to his feet. With an angry imprecation, he sprang at Steve, knife in
hand.

But Jarvis was watching him. The boy made a leap, landing a powerful
blow with his fist on the back of the Italian's head. The man collapsed
in a heap. Bob was down on his knees beside his companion in an instant.
Steve had thrown the burning bag into the gutter extending along the
track, where there trickled a little stream of water that had been
turned a dull red by the iron ore. There was little water there, but
Rush was scooping up what there was of the water and mud, and with it
patting out the fire in the sack.

Bob began doing the same, but now little flames were starting up all
over the bag.

"Beat it out with your hands!" cried Steve. "It's getting the best of
us. If it reaches the fuses, we're done for!"

"Skip, Steve; let me do it."

Rush did not answer. He was beating a tattoo on the bag, now and then
grabbing up a handful of mud and water to soothe the hands which were
already quite badly burned.

"It's out," announced Bob at last.

The Iron Boys' prompt action had prevented the fuses from igniting. All
this had occupied but a few seconds. Instinctively the visitors realized
that something was wrong, but they did not understand what that
something was.

Steve rolled the bag over two or three times, soaking it as well as he
could with the little water at hand. He then opened the mouth of the
sack, emptying the contents into the gutter and soaking that with water.
This done, he threw the sack away and straightened up, his face flushed
from his exertions.

The Italian was just getting to his feet unsteadily, but there was an
angry light in his eyes.

Steve pointed to the sack.

"How did that happen?" demanded the lad.

"Me not know," was the answer, with a shrug of the shoulders. "Why you
hit me?"

"Why did I hit you?" repeated Bob. "If I hadn't you'd been sailing
skyward by this time."

The Italian started away, muttering sullenly. Steve stepped forward,
laying a restraining hand on the man's arm.

"Wait a minute. I want to talk with you."

Mr. Carrhart sat down on the bench rather heavily, wiping the
perspiration from his forehead.

"Now, Carrhart, perhaps you will tell us the meaning of this remarkable
scene," said Mr. Cary. "Something is up. I have a suspicion."

"Yes, you are right; something is up--or _was_. Do you gentlemen know
what was in that bag that you saw on fire just now?"

"No."

"It was dynamite," said the president in an impressive tone.

"Dynamite!" exclaimed the visitors in one voice.

"Yes. How much was there in the bag, Mr. Penton?" asked Mr. Carrhart.

"I should judge there were a dozen charges; about fifty pounds, I should
say."

The blanched faces of the visitors evidenced their understanding.

"Enough to blow us into kingdom come," added the superintendent.

"Then--then those boys have saved our lives?"

"They have," said Mr. Penton.

"Yes, and that act of theirs is sufficient to earn for them the Medal of
Honor. I never knew of a braver act," added the president. "Rush, come
here! Jarvis, I want you, too."

The boys obeyed the command, Steve leading the unwilling Italian around
the chutes to the platform, where he stood him against the wall.

"You stay there until you are wanted!" ordered the boy, at which Mr.
Penton nodded his approval.

The visitors crowded forward, expressing their admiration at the bravery
of the Iron Boys, at the same time plying them with eager questions.

"How did you ever have the courage to do it?" questioned one man.

"Because I didn't want to be blown up," answered Steve simply, at which
the tension was relieved and everyone laughed.

"What I should like to know," exclaimed Mr. Carrhart, "is how this
affair occurred--how did that bag of dynamite chance to catch fire?"

"From the Italian's candle, of course," said Mr. Cary. "I always have
considered those open lights dangerous, especially where high explosives
are used. We should have enclosed lights, the same as they do in the
coal mines."

"What do you think about it, Rush?" asked the president, turning to the
young man inquiringly.

"It did not catch from the man's candle, sir," answered the lad
confidently.

"You think not?"

"I am sure of it, sir."

"What makes you think it did not?"

"Because the candle was on the front of his cap. It is there now, as you
can see for yourself. The fire, when I first saw it, was burning at the
bottom of the bag on the man's back. I do not see, by any stretch of the
imagination, how the candle could have fired the cloth."

"You're right."

"Mr. Penton, would you like to question the man?" asked Steve, nodding
toward the Italian.

"Yes. Come here, Dominick."

The Italian obeyed with sullenness.

"How did this thing happen, Dominick?"

"Me not know."

"You did not have your candle in your hand at any time, did you?"

"Me have candle in hat."

"Was it there when you picked up the bag?"

"Yes."

"You are sure of that?"

"Me sure."

"May I ask a question?" inquired Steve.

"Certainly."

"Did you pass or meet anyone just before you reached the chutes here?"

"Me not meet any one."

"I don't understand this at all," said Mr. Penton. "Dominick is
trustworthy, so far as I am aware. At least no charges ever have been
made against him."

"He seemed to me to be pretty handy with his knife," suggested the
president. "I shouldn't want to trust a man very far who acted that way,
would you, Rush?"

"Well, no, sir; but I shouldn't accuse him of setting fire to a bag of
dynamite, then calmly shouldering the bag and marching off. At least,
not unless he was determined to commit suicide."

There was a hearty laugh, this time at the expense of the president.

"There's good logic in that, at any rate," agreed Mr. Carrhart.

Steve was studying the face of the Italian keenly. This Mr. Carrhart
observed and nodded significantly to Superintendent Penton. But Steve
could not make up his mind that Dominick was in any way to blame for
what had barely missed being a great disaster.

Both lads were puzzled. They could not understand it at all.

"Perhaps a spark dropped from the trolley wire, thus firing the bag,"
suggested the superintendent, after briefly turning the question over in
his mind.

"That is a plausible explanation," said Mr. Carrhart, "and for want of a
better one we shall have to let it go at that. Yes, I think that must be
the explanation."

The party decided that they had seen enough of the Cousin Jack for one
day. Some of the officials were more anxious to get out of the place
than they cared to admit. They were not used to having their luncheons
interrupted by fifty-pound sacks of dynamite catching fire.

Each, before leaving, stepped up and shook hands with the Iron Boys.

"I want to see you before I leave the range," said Mr. Carrhart as he
bade Steve good-bye.

"Yes, sir," answered the boy, touching his hat, as he stepped to one
side to permit the visitors to pass around the chute.

"We must do something for those boys," said Mr. Cary to the president.

"Yes," agreed Mr. Carrhart.

"They are doing something for themselves, gentlemen," returned the
superintendent. "They are not lads to need much help. They are the kind
who carve out their own futures."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, they've gone," announced Bob, stamping the dirt from his shoes.
"What do you think of it?"

"Of the fire--the burning bag, you mean?"

"Yes."

"I think it was a mighty queer occurrence."

"So do I," agreed Jarvis, "and it's my opinion that it will bear looking
into."

"Where's Dominick?"

"He sneaked away when the others left. But he is of no use to us. He
knows nothing about this affair, beyond what we all saw. We must look
beyond him for the cause of the fire. Well, I'm off."

The lads separated for the time being and went off about their duties.
But the thought of the fired bag kept recurring to Steve Rush. He turned
the matter over and over in his mind, yet without being able to reach
any definite conclusion regarding it.

"I wish I knew," he mused. "It is not my business, however, to inquire
into the affair unless I have orders to do so."

He was to receive his orders sooner than he imagined, and his
investigations were eventually to develop some startling facts
concerning conditions in the Cousin Jack Mine.




CHAPTER XX

INTO A BLACK GULF


While the Iron Boys were trudging through the mine, completing their
weary rounds of miles with their eyes fixed keenly on the tracks, a
meeting had been called at the office of the superintendent. All of the
gentlemen who comprised the party of visitors at the mine were at the
meeting.

Maps of the mines on the range were spread out on the table before them,
and they were going over and discussing these maps in detail. Business
was transacted with a speed that would have made most of the business
men in that remote region dizzy headed.

Having disposed of the matters before them, the conversation turned to
their recent narrow escape in the Cousin Jack Mine. The visitors were
fully convinced now that the fire had been caused by a spark from the
trolley wire, and Superintendent Penton, if he thought otherwise, did
not say so. He had made up his mind, however, to push his inquiry a
little further. He wanted to make sure that the suggestion was the
correct one.

From the subject of the fired bag the men turned to a discussion of
Steve Rush and Bob Jarvis. This ended in Mr. Cary's making a
proposition. After a little discussion it was put in the form of a
motion and passed with enthusiasm.

Of all of this, of course, the lads tramping along the levels far
underground knew nothing. It was destined to come as a great surprise to
them when they learned of the action taken by the officials of the
company in the interest of the two plucky boys.

That night the officers boarded their private car and went on to visit
other of the company's mines further up the range. Early on the
following forenoon Superintendent Penton visited his own mine, and while
there looked up Steve Rush.

The superintendent asked Steve what he thought about the theory of a
spark from the wire having fired the dynamite bag.

"I don't take any stock in it," answered the boy promptly. "Do you,
sir?"

"I have had my doubts, but how else could it have started?"

"I will answer that question by showing you that it could not have
started from a wire spark. The fire started on the underside of the bag.
Did you notice that?"

"No; it had spread over the bag when I caught sight of it. But I was
reasonably certain there was more to it than we imagined when you asked
Dominick if he met anyone in the level just before reaching the chutes."

Steve nodded reflectively.

"What do you infer from the fire starting on the under side of the
dynamite bag?"

"That someone had either accidentally or by design shoved a candle under
the bag while Dominick was carrying it. That is the only way I can see
that the fire might have started."

"I think you are right about that. But it surely was an accident. No one
would be willing to take such terrible chances. Why, it might have blown
everyone up within a wide radius."

"Yes, it would have done so."

"And yet you were down on your knees, with your nose right over the
stuff, as if it were so much clay. I have steady nerves myself, but I
don't believe I should have had the pluck to do that. At least, I know I
should have turned my head away."

Steve laughed.

"I am afraid that would not have helped you much if the stuff had gone
off."

"Rush, if you suspect anything keep your eyes open; that's all I have to
say. What you don't see will not be worth the seeing."

"Very well, sir; I will do as you request, but I have not much hope of
getting at the truth."

"I'll risk that. I am going to the lower level. There is some difficulty
with the pumps there, the engineer tells me," said the superintendent,
proceeding on his way.

Steve had not very much to do, so he walked back to his old post on the
seventeenth level to wait until Bob Jarvis should come along. Steve and
the superintendent had no sooner left the spot where they had been
talking than a figure slunk from a deserted drift near by, glanced up
and down the level, then hurried away. The man's hat was pulled down,
and the candle above aided in throwing his face into deep shadow, but
the full beard was not hidden, had anyone been near by to observe it.

Steve had been sitting on the platform at the chutes for about thirty
minutes when the level's telephone rang.

"Mr. Penton wants to see you on the lower level," said the telephone
boy.

"Where is he?" questioned Steve.

"He says he'll meet you near the suction pipes."

"Very good," answered the lad, rising. "If Mr. Jarvis comes along tell
him where I have gone. If I get through in time I will meet him here and
go up with him."

Rush hurried over, signaled the cage tender that he wished to descend,
and a short time afterwards was being plunged deeper into the mine.

He left the cage at the sub-level just above the last level. The last
level was flooded with water some twenty feet deep. All the water from
the mine was drained down into the last level and from there pumped to
the surface and thus disposed of.

There were naturally no mining operations carried on down on the last
level.

Steve had been down there on numerous occasions and every inch of the
ground was familiar to him. Upon leaving the cage he made his way
through the dark, damp tunnels, whistling as he stepped briskly along.
He could not imagine what Mr. Penton could want of him down there, for
if anything were wrong with the pumping system it was a matter for the
engineering department and not for a track inspector.

Turning the last bend in the sub-level, Push began to move with more
caution. A moment more and he caught sight of the big water pipes
winding up through the roof of the level.

"I wonder where Mr. Penton is?" muttered the lad, stepping out on a
plank platform.

As he did so a wave of dampness that almost chilled him swept up from
the dark depths of the last level. An open space extended from the
floor down to the level itself and from this soundings were occasionally
taken to determine the depth of the water. The lead line hung from a peg
driven into a crevice in the rock. Steve noted that the line was dry.

"That is curious. Mr. Penton evidently has not made a sounding. I should
have thought he would have done so if he had reason to think the water
was not being pumped out as fast as it should be."

Rush raised his voice and called out the name of the superintendent.
Only the echo of his own voice came back to him.

"That's queer," decided Steve. "But, of course, he did not telephone me
from here. He probably is on one of the levels above this. I will wait."

Resuming his whistling, the lad began pacing back and forth on the
planking, having stuck his candlestick back on his miner's hat.

The young inspector had been waiting for fully half an hour, but not a
sign of the superintendent did he see.

"Well, this is getting rather tiresome," he said, pausing to listen to
the rhythmic click of the pumps that his ears could faintly catch. "I
think I will amuse myself by sounding the water level."

The lad took down the rope, to one end of which a piece of lead had been
attached, spun the weighted end a few times about his head, letting it
fly out into the darkness, listening intently as the line ran swiftly
through his hands.

A distant splash followed a few seconds later, whereupon the line gave
out not quite so rapidly.

"It's down," nodded Steve. He leaned over the edge to pull the line in
without drawing it over the edge of the planking, so that he could the
better see that mark of the water on the rope.

"Gracious, I should hate to take a swim in that hole," said the Iron
Boy, with a laugh.

He stopped suddenly. Steve thought he had heard something behind him.

"Is that you, Mr. Penton?" he asked, turning and peering into the
darkness.

There was no reply.

"I must be getting the creeps," said Steve, beginning to whistle as he
hauled in the line. "Wha--what--here, let go of me. Let----"

Some invisible force behind had put a sudden pressure upon Steve Rush.
He was being rapidly shoved toward the edge of the platform.

All at once Steve felt the flooring drop from beneath his feet; and,
without making a sound, the lad plunged over into the darkness.

A loud splash followed, then all was still.




CHAPTER XXI

THE SEARCH FOR THE MISSING BOY


Bob Jarvis waited a long time at the chutes for his companion, but Steve
did not return. This did not cause Bob any particular worry, as Steve no
doubt had been called to some other part of the mine. So Bob deciding to
wait no longer, strolled away.

At the close of the day's work, however, when Steve was not at the mouth
of the shaft waiting for him, Bob began to wonder. He waited about the
shaft for half an hour, then went on to his boarding place. Steve had
not returned.

"Where's Rush?" demanded the boarding boss, knowing Steve's habit of
punctuality.

"That is what's bothering me. I haven't seen him."

It was the business of the boarding boss to look quickly into any
absences and report them to the superintendent or the mine captain. He
got busy at once. Calling up the time-keeper's office, he inquired if
Steve Rush had checked in.

The information came back a moment later that Steve had not come up from
the mine yet; or, if he had, he had failed to report himself.

"Then something has happened to him," was Jarvis' emphatic conclusion.
"He left word for me to meet him at seventeen, but when I got there he
had gone. I haven't seen him since."

The boarding boss agreed so strongly that he telephoned to the
superintendent. The latter had not yet arrived home from his office, so
the mine captain was communicated with.

But Bob Jarvis already was out of the house, headed for the shaft at top
speed.

"Has Steve Rush come up yet?" he demanded of the cage-tender.

"Haven't seen him."

Bob hesitated. He realized the futility of wandering about the mine not
knowing in what part of it he should look for the missing Steve. He then
hurried to the time-keeper's office, learning that nothing had been seen
of the missing boy.

Bob did not know which way to turn. But by the time he had reached the
shaft again Superintendent Penton was there, together with the mine
captain, preparing to go below. The cage had just come up and the men
were stepping aboard when a boy from the boarding house where the Iron
Boys lived came running up out of breath.

"Wait!" cried Bob. "Here comes a boy from our hashery. Maybe Steve has
gone home."

"What is it, boy?" called the superintendent.

"Boss wanted me to tell you that the telephone man who lives with us
says Mr. Rush got a telephone message from you to meet him at the lower
level this afternoon. He says Rush didn't come back."

"I didn't send for him to meet me anywhere," answered the
superintendent. "We'll go to the lower level. Shoot us down as fast as
is safe," he added, addressing the cage-tender.

The bottom of the car seemed to be dropping from beneath their feet, so
rapid was their descent.

Bob, holding to the support rod above their heads, was thinking fast and
hard.

"I knew something had happened to Steve," he said. "Something has
happened to him."

Mr. Penton had not spoken since the cage started. He, too, was thinking
deeply. There was something about all this that he could not understand,
though he was unable to clearly define what really was in his mind. If
someone had called Steve Rush to come to the sub-level above the lower
level, and had done so in the name of the superintendent, it must have
been done either as a joke or for some other purpose that could only be
surmised.

"Why should anyone have resorted to such a subterfuge?" wondered Mr.
Penton.

Very much the same thoughts were running through the mind of Bob Jarvis.
So engrossed was each with his own thoughts that neither man seemed to
realize the dizzy rate of speed at which they were descending. Finally
the cage began to slow down gradually, then finally came to an easy
stop.

There was no light in that sub-level, but the occupants of the cage knew
exactly where they were. They knew the place as well as though the
sub-level had been ablaze with light.

"All off," ordered the superintendent. "The cage will wait for us here."

He had given orders that the cage was to remain below until he signaled
the tender to hoist. If the latter found it necessary to raise the cage
before that he was to ring a certain signal on the gong, each level and
sub-level being provided with one.

"All hands keep their eyes open," directed the leader of the searching
party. "I haven't much hope that we shall find him here, however."

The group moved along the sub-level, glancing about them keenly as they
did so, until they reached the turn or bend in the tunnel, where they
paused to listen. The sub-level was as silent as a tomb. They could not
even hear the rush of the water as it dashed into the lower level, some
of it coming all the way from the surface.

"Shall I call out?" asked Bob.

"Yes."

"Steve!" Bob's voice did not seem to carry far. It sounded weak to him.

"Oh, Steve! Steve Rush!" shouted the superintendent.

There being no response, he repeated the call several times, but with no
better result.

"I guess it is useless, boys. I am afraid we shall not find him here. In
fact, I can't believe that he came down here at all."

"The boy said you had telephoned to Steve to come down, didn't he?"
asked Jarvis.

"Yes; but I did nothing of the sort. The telephone man must have made a
mistake in the message--or else----" Mr. Penton checked himself sharply.
"We will look further, though I am sure we are wasting time. We shall
probably find that he has fallen somewhere on one of the upper levels
and hurt himself. If that is so, one of the watchmen is sure to discover
him and report the matter at once. We will go out to the platform, then
on up to the next level. I'll have all the watchmen notified at once to
take up the search."

The searchers walked out on the planking where Steve had stood a couple
of hours before. Mr. Penton peered down into the black pit, while the
others stood a little back from him.

"He is not here. It is as I thought. He has not been here, in all
probability. We shall have to go on up, boys. I----"

Bob suddenly jerked his candle from his hat, holding the light to the
floor. As he did so, he uttered a half-smothered exclamation, at the
same time grabbing something from the planking and holding it up to the
light.

"Look!" cried the lad. "Look! He hasn't been here, eh?"




CHAPTER XXII

WHEN THE WATERS CLOSED OVER HIM


Steve did not cry out when he found himself plunging into the water,
principally for the reason that he was too plucky to make an outcry when
his safety was imperiled. In the second place, his mind was working so
rapidly that he did not have time to cry out.

He struck the water with a splash, broadside on, quickly sinking beneath
the surface. Steve was too good a swimmer to swallow any water, however,
and began holding his breath even before he struck the water, knowing as
he did what was about to happen. The result was that he had propelled
himself to the surface before many seconds had elapsed. He came up
shaking himself like a water dog, but was careful to make as little
noise as possible.

As soon as he succeeded in getting the water out of his eyes, he looked
up, expecting to see a light on the platform on the sub-level. All was
inky blackness there, and not a sound could be heard save the rush of
water.

Young Rush began swimming. He did not know whether there was a ladder
extending down into the level or not, so he swam about for some time,
feeling along the wall in search of something by which he might pull
himself up. But he did not find a projection of any kind. The rocks
forming the wall were smooth and slimy and felt like ice to the touch.

He was beginning to feel chilled. Steve tried to recall what the map of
the lower level looked like, but try as he might he could not recall a
single detail of the map filed in the engineer's office. By this time he
did not know where he was. He had lost all sense of direction.

"I guess I am a goner. They've got me this time," he said aloud. "I hope
that Mr. Penton will find out how it happened."

The boy was now shivering violently. His teeth were chattering and he
began to wonder if he were freezing to death, for the sense of feeling
seemed to have left his legs and arms. A numbness was slowly creeping
over him.

"I must keep going, or I shall surely be drowned," he cried, once more
striking out and swimming as fast as he could, hoping thereby to restore
his circulation to its former condition. But the water was too cold and
the young miner's efforts grew weaker as the moments passed.

Though he did not know it, the drift of the water on the lower level was
toward the large pipes, where it was being sucked to the surface by the
powerful pumps above.

As Steve reached over and over in a slow over-hand stroke, which now and
then he varied by falling into the frog stroke, he forged slowly ahead
until his hands suddenly struck some object that was not the rocky side
of the level. The lad grasped it quickly.

"A plank. Thank goodness!" he cried.

The plank had floated off either from the platform or from the lagging
somewhere on that level. It made no difference to the swimmer where it
had come from. He threw both arms about the plank and lay there resting
for some time, breathing heavily. Finally he pulled himself over on the
plank, stretching out lengthwise on it. The piece of wood held him up
very well. Now and then he would paddle a little with his hands,
propelling himself in one direction until it bumped against a wall,
floating off with the current again.

While the lad realized that the chances were against his ever getting
out of the level alive, he felt little fear. He was one of those rare
beings in whom the emotion of fear had not been fully developed.

All the time the numbness was growing upon him. Instinctively realizing
that he was likely to lose control of his muscles, Steve wrapped both
arms and legs about the plank so that he might not fall off and drown.

At last he became so benumbed and dazed that he could not help himself
at all. A warm glow seemed to be spreading itself over his body. He had
never felt more comfortable in his life, and a short time afterwards he
gave way to his drowsiness.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a few moments later that Superintendent Penton and his searching
party entered the sub-level in search of Steve. Rush heard them call out
his name, but he was too sleepy to answer. Then he heard no more.

When Bob Jarvis cried out "look," Mr. Penton and the mine captain had
turned sharply.

"What is it?" they demanded eagerly and in one voice.

"A hat! It's Steve's hat!"

"Are you sure?"

"Yes. Here's his name inside the crown. We wrote our names in with ink
at the same time. You can see mine is the same--the same kind of
ink--purple."

As the two men started toward Bob the mine captain stumbled over the
sounding rope that lay on the platform. He stooped to pick it up, and as
he did so he, too, uttered an exclamation.

"This line is wet, Mr. Penton," he said excitedly.

"Then Steve has been casting it. He has been sounding the level,
probably to pass away the time while he was waiting for me."

Once more the superintendent raised his voice, calling out the name of
Steve Rush. As before there was no response.

"Boys, I see--I understand. Steve has fallen into the level and drowned.
No doubt he fell in while casting the lead, for part of the line is
dangling over the edge there now. Too bad, too bad. But----"

"He may not be drowned. Let's do something," begged Bob.

"What would you suggest?"

"Why, look for him, of course. I'll go over myself and look for him."

"Lad, it would be suicide. You would drown, even if you were not too
chilled to swim after you got into the water. You----"

"I'd like to see any water that could drown me," answered Bob.

"We must have help, and at once. Jim, run up to the next level and
telephone for help. Have them send down several men. Be quick about it."

"Ask them to bring ropes," interjected Bob.

"Yes, have them bring down ropes," repeated the superintendent.

Bob began ripping up the planking on the platform. His active mind had
thought out a plan and he did not wait for permission to put it into
operation.

"What are you doing there, lad?"

"I am making a raft. We have got to have something which will float on
the water. We can fasten it together when the men get here with ropes.
I'll be ready before they can get here."

Jarvis was working with desperate haste. Perhaps his companion was not
yet dead. At least Bob would know that he had done his best.

"Hark!"

"What is it?" whispered Bob.

"I thought I heard someone call. I am sure I did. Rush! Oh, Steve!"

A faint "here," that sounded far away reached their ears.

"He's alive! I tell you, he's alive!" cried Bob Jarvis.

Grabbing the end of one of the planks that he had torn loose, Bob began
dragging it toward the edge of the platform.

"What are you going to do, lad?"

"Do? Why, sir, I'm going after him."

"Wait; let the men do that. I cannot have you going in there," objected
Mr. Penton. But Bob did not stop. He hauled the plank over, and,
snatching the rope, made one end of the latter fast about the plank. He
then began letting the plank over the side, end first. It nearly got
away from him, the rope burning the skin from his palms as it spun
through his hands.

"Let me help you." Mr. Penton sprang forward, throwing himself on the
fast running rope.

"The plank is on the water. It can't get away from us now," said Bob,
beginning to strip off his jacket, first having stuck his candlestick in
a niche in the rocks.

"You are not going over!"

"Yes, sir, I am going over. We haven't a minute to lose."

"I advise you not to do so."

The superintendent was far from being a timid man, but he knew the
danger; he felt that his responsibility was too great to permit the boy
to enter that black hole.

"You hold the rope. Nothing can happen to me. I am not afraid of ice
water, nor any other kind. Maybe I shall be able to find him by the time
the men get here. We shall gain some precious minutes in that way."

Next the boy's heavy boots came off, leaving him in his stocking feet.
He passed the end of the rope to the superintendent.

"Will you please hold your candle over the edge, so I can see where the
plank is, sir?"

Mr. Penton did so.

"Be careful, Jarvis; do be careful," he urged. "I ought not to let you
do this. If anything happens to you I shall feel that I am directly
responsible."

"Do not fear; nothing will happen to me."

Bob peered down into the dark waters, where, after a moment, he made out
the plank floating slowly toward the spot where the pipes disappeared
beneath the surface.

"Now, please hold the light up high, so that I can see what I am doing."

The lad poised a moment, then leaped far out into the darkness. Instead
of making a dive, head first, Bob chose to go down feet first. His body
straightened, and as he neared the water he clasped his hands above his
head. He took the water cleanly, making only a slight splash as he
disappeared beneath the surface.

As soon as he felt the water closing over him the Iron Boy threw out
both hands to stay his progress and began treading water vigorously. He
soon regained the surface.

Jarvis came up blowing and puffing, shaking his head and making the
water fairly foam about him as he struck out with hands and feet.

"Are you all right, Jarvis?" called Mr. Penton in an anxious tone.

"Yes, where's the plank?"

"To the right of you. A little more to the right. There, it is directly
ahead of you now."

A few powerful strokes and Bob had grasped the plank. He pulled himself
partly up on it and looked about him.

"Can't you let a candle down to light up this hole?" he called.

"I have nothing to let one down with. Do you see anything?"

"Nothing that I want to see. Ho, Steve!"

"Here," sounded the faint answer that seemed to come from several
different directions at the same time.

"Did you hear that?" demanded Bob excitedly. "Where did the sound come
from?"

"It sounded to me as though he might be over to the left. Have courage,
Steve; we will have you out in a few minutes. I have sent for help. Can
you keep up?"

Their ears failed to catch any answer.

"I'm coming, Steve," roared Jarvis. "Keep shouting if you can, so I'll
know where you are."

"Stay where you are, Jarvis!" commanded Mr. Penton sternly.

"Do you think I'm going to stay here and let him drown?" demanded the
lad. There was a splash as Bob Jarvis left the plank and began ploughing
through the water at racing speed.

"He'll be drowned; they both will be drowned!" exclaimed the
superintendent. "Such pluck, such pluck! Hurry up, men; hurry!" he
shouted as he caught the sound of voices off in the darkness of the
sub-level.

Half a dozen men, headed by the mine captain, came running toward him.

"Look out! Look out for the hole in the floor. Have you ropes?"

"Yes."

"Then tie a few planks together. Make a raft and let it over the side.
Work fast, for once in your lives! There are two men down there and they
may be drowning."

"Oh, Steve!"

They could hear Bob's voice calling to his companion. The voice sounded
far away, for Bob had plunged ahead, beating his way courageously
through the waters in the black darkness.

"I hear him. He's ahead of me," Jarvis shouted.

"Can you hold out?" called Mr. Penton.

"Yes--_as long as there's water to float on_!" the answer came back
faintly.

In the meantime the men were ripping up the planks. Several of these
they lashed together and let carefully down over the edge of the
platform, or what was left of it. They had made ropes fast at both ends,
in order that the raft might make a landing platform.

"Now you men let me down," commanded the superintendent.

"You had better let me go, sir," advised the mine captain. "I am lighter
than you."

"It's my place to go; do as I tell you. While I am down there rig a
sling to pull us up on. Jim, you take charge of the operations at this
end and see that there is no slip anywhere."

"I will, sir," answered the mine captain.

Superintendent Penton grasped the rope that had been made fast to a
shore post on the sub-level and let himself down. He was a strong man,
used to emergencies and well able to take care of himself anywhere in
the mine. Shortly afterwards he was standing on the platform or raft
below, steadying himself by holding to the rope and the side wall.

"Are you all right, Bob?" he shouted.

"Yes."

"If he happens to get into a drift, they're both lost. Pass down some
candles from above, Jim."

Several were let down on a rope and these Mr. Penton stuck into the
wall, lighting up the scene fairly well.

"They're calling you, sir," cried Jim.

"What is it?" roared the superintendent.

"I've got him." It was Jarvis' voice, and Mr. Penton breathed a sigh of
relief.




CHAPTER XXIII

A THOUSAND FEET OF LADDERS


After what seemed an endless wait, the watchers heard a great splashing
far out on the water. It was Jarvis paddling toward the raft. He had
found Steve, the latter unconscious. Just as Bob reached the plank on
which the other boy was hanging Steve slipped off into the water.

Bob dived for his chum without an instant's hesitation and when he came
up he was gripping the half-drowned Steve. The latter had relapsed into
unconsciousness. By this time the plank had floated away several yards.
Bob had a hard struggle to reach it, but at last he succeeded, and after
great effort managed to place Rush partly on it, so the latter's head
would be out of water.

Bob pulled himself upon one end of the plank, so that the other end
would be clear of the water, and began paddling. The water fairly flew
under his efforts, the swimmer now and then using his feet to help steer
the awkward craft.

"I can't see the light. Where are you?" Jarvis cried.

"Here!" shouted Mr. Penton.

A bend in the rocky wall hid the light of the candles from the raft.
After several minutes of paddling Bob caught the faint light ahead of
him.

"I'm all right now, if Steve is only all right."

"Is he alive?" called Mr. Penton, as he made out the strange craft
bearing slowly down upon him.

"Yes, but he's unconscious."

"Then hurry as fast as you can."

"I am hurrying. This isn't a speed boat."

The plank drew up alongside the raft after some difficult manoeuvring
on the part of Bob Jarvis. Mr. Penton grasped the limp form of Steve
Rush, hauling him to the raft.

There was a splash and a choking exclamation. The plank had turned
turtle, landing Bob in the water on his back. The boy was almost
exhausted, but he righted himself and swam to the raft, to which he held
for a moment to rest himself. He then clambered to the raft. He had
barely enough strength left to support himself.

The superintendent was tying Steve in the sling that the men had made.

"Haul away, above there!" he roared. "Be as quick as you can, but be
careful. Look out, there! What are you trying to do?"

Steve's body had hit the rocks with a resounding bump, but the boy did
not feel the shock.

"Let the sling down at once. Two of you get at Rush and rub him. Don't
be afraid of rubbing too hard. Start his circulation."

The sling was dropped over the side again, while two of the miners set
to work on Steve.

"Get in," commanded Mr. Penton, as the sling came down to them.

"You first, sir," said Bob.

"Get in, I said!" The superintendent's voice had a note of authority
that was not to be disputed.

Jarvis reluctantly took his place in the sling.

"Haul away," he called, and Bob was quickly drawn to the platform, where
he dropped on his knees by Steve's side, pushing one of the men away,
and began slapping the unconscious boy's feet, from which the boots and
stockings had been removed. Steve was scarcely breathing.

The sling had been lowered quickly after bringing Jarvis up, and the
superintendent took his place in it. The men began hauling him up, but
with great difficulty, for Mr. Penton was a heavily built man.

All at once the men sat down. A splash followed almost instantly.

"The rope's broken!" cried one, as Bob bounded to his feet.

"Are you hurt?" he cried, running to the edge.

There was no reply.

"He's fallen into the water!" shouted another of the men.

Once more Bob Jarvis leaped from the platform, but this time he dived
head first. Like a flash he realized that, having struck the platform,
Mr. Penton undoubtedly had been stunned and was unable to help himself.

Such was the case. Coming to the surface almost at once, Bob swam about
for a minute or so before discovering Mr. Penton's whereabouts. The
superintendent was beginning to struggle, but he was too much dazed to
help himself.

Jarvis was by his side with a few swift strokes. He did not wait to
inquire whether the superintendent were hurt or not, but, grabbing the
man by the collar, Bob began kicking himself toward the platform. By the
time they had reached there Mr. Penton was able to help himself a
little, but the boy had a hard tussle to get the superintendent on the
platform.

Mr. Penton lay down for a brief moment, then sat up.

"Are you able to try it again?" asked Bob.

"Yes. What happened?"

"The rope broke. You got a pretty hard bump."

Another sling had been quickly rigged, and this being let down, Mr.
Penton was drawn up again, Bob waiting below, but standing to one side,
so that in case another accident occurred he should not be carried down,
too.

The next trip Jarvis was drawn up. He found the superintendent a little
dazed, but holding himself together firmly.

"Thank you," he said shortly, flashing a look at Bob. "We must get Rush
up at once where he may have care. Carry him over to the cage. Leave
everything as it is here. We have no time to attend to anything but the
boy."

The men picked up the lad and bore him through the sub-level. Steve was
still limp and unconscious.

Reaching the cage, Mr. Benton gave the signal to hoist. The car did not
move, whereupon the superintendent, with an impatient exclamation
reached out, giving the signal lever another pull.

"What does this mean?" He rang again to hoist the cage. "Bob, run up to
the telephone on the next level and find out what's the matter. The Evil
One himself seems to have taken possession of this mine of late."

Jarvis came running back a few minutes later.

"Well, what is it?"

"The cage-tender says the machinery has broken down."

"Did he say what the trouble is?"

"He said the engineer had sent word that the big cog wheel had stripped
itself. They can't move the cage, and probably will not be able to do so
for some hours. They are taking the old wheel off now, preparatory to
putting on the spare wheel."

Mr. Penton clenched his hands to keep from expressing himself as he
would like to do.

"We must get this boy somewhere where we can warm him up, or he will die
on our hands. The only place I know of is the pump station and----"

"Then we will carry Steve up the ladders," interrupted Bob.

"But, boy, it is nearly a thousand feet from here to the pump station.
We can't get him up there by hand."

"I'll show you whether we can or not. One of you go ahead and light the
way. Help me through the manholes at the platforms and we'll get him up
there in short order. Mr. Penton, will you have somebody follow close
behind me to help a little?"

"Do you think you will be able to do it?"

"I don't think! I know!"

"Then I will carry him myself."

"No, sir; I will carry him. You are not able. You are still suffering
from the bump you got."

Without further words Jarvis picked up the limp form of his companion.
He staggered a little as he swung Steve over his shoulder, the boy's
head drooping over on Bob's left breast. Then began a climb that is
talked of to this day in the Cousin Jack Mine. Up ladder after ladder
staggered Bob Jarvis with the form of his companion over his shoulder.
Now and then he would pause on a landing for a breathing spell, where,
with heaving chest, he would lean against the rocky wall with eyes
closed and everything swimming dizzily about him. Mr. Penton and the
searching party followed him up the ladder, but he would let none of
them relieve him of his burden.

"Had--hadn't you better telephone for a surgeon to meet us at the pump
station?" asked Jarvis.

"Yes, but how will he get down?"

"Let him climb down the ladders. I guess he can climb down if we can go
the other way."

"It shall be done at once." Mr. Penton gave the order and the mine
captain left them at the next landing to telephone to the company's
hospital.

After a long struggle they reached the level where the pump station was
located. Even here Bob Jarvis refused to give up his burden. He
staggered down the level to where the big pumps were working, tenderly
laying Steve down on a blanket that the engineer had thrown down. Then
Bob settled down in a heap.

Illustration: Bob Staggered Up the Ladder With His Burden.

"Strip the boy," commanded Mr. Penton. "If you have any warm blankets
here, wrap him in them. If not, use some of your waste. You have barrels
of that on hand."

Steve's wet, clinging clothes were quickly removed. There being no other
blankets, waste used for wiping the engines was wrapped about him, the
rubbing process having been resumed.

Nearly an hour elapsed before the surgeon, red of face, puffing from his
exertions, came hurrying down the level.

He was quickly made acquainted with the situation and got to work at
once.

"Do you think his condition is serious?" demanded the superintendent.

"No, not unless pneumonia sets in. That is the great danger, and he will
be lucky if he escapes it. Is there any chance of getting him up
to-night?"

"I can't say. I am going on up as soon as I hear something definite from
you regarding the boy's condition."

"I shall be able to give that to you very soon, for his circulation has
already started."

The color was returning to the lad's lips and cheeks, and his breath was
coming more regularly. Half an hour from that time Steve had fully
recovered his senses and announced himself as ready to get up and dress.

The surgeon advised him not to do so, finally ordering the patient to
remain as he was. Rush accepted the order with poor grace. His clothing
was being dried out by the pump engineer, the garments being ready very
shortly afterwards.

Jarvis had wholly recovered from the strain that he had been under,
except that he was still a little weak in the knees.

"We owe our lives to your friend Jarvis," said Mr. Penton, after Steve
had been made as comfortable as possible. "But what I wish to know is
how you happened to get into the lower level. Did you fall while
sounding with the line?"

Rush hesitated, then glancing up at the superintendent, replied:

"No, sir; I did not fall."

"I don't understand."

"I was pushed in, Mr. Penton."

"You don't mean that--surely you cannot mean that, Rush!" exclaimed Mr.
Penton in amazement.

"Yes, sir; I was."

"Who pushed you?"

"That is what I should like to know."

"This is really incredible, Rush. Are you quite sure you are not
mistaken?"

"I am not mistaken."

"Tell me about it."

"When you sent for me----"

"I did not send for you. That was a mistake. And that is what puzzles
me. I am told you thought you received a message from me to meet you on
the sub-level above the lowest level."

"Yes, sir; that was the message I received."

"Well, I never sent it. I haven't been down there recently. I had
started to go there to-day when some other matters came up calling me
back to the office."

"You did not send for me?"

"I certainly did not."

"Then whoever did send that message must have done so for the purpose of
getting me down there to do me up. I begin to understand."

"But, Steve, who could bear you such ill will?"

"I don't know."

"It isn't Steve alone they are after," interjected Jarvis. "The rascals
seem to have it in for the mine, too. Take, for instance, the cage.
They've put that out of business."

"The villains! I should like to catch them--I should like to get my
hands on the man who pushed me in this afternoon."

"You did not finish telling me of the occurrence," said Mr. Penton.

Steve related the story of his adventure, the others listening with
grave faces as the narrative proceeded.

"Now, tell me how you found me," he said in conclusion.

"Jarvis missed you. But did you not get sight of the man at all?"

"No, sir."

"You do not know whether there was more than one?"

"I do not. I didn't know there was one until he placed his hands against
my back and pushed me in. When I came up, after the first plunge, I
tried to see who was on the platform, but I neither saw nor heard
anyone. I can't understand why he didn't hit me."

"The scoundrel probably wanted it to appear to be an accident. He
thought you would not get out of that hole very easily," said Bob.

"Nor should I, in all probability, had it not been for you."

"Rush, we must go into this matter very thoroughly. The man who let you
through the trap on number seventeen is no longer with us. He has not
been with us for several months, but the attacks on you have been
renewed. Next thing we know damage will be done to the company's
property. I don't want to confess that we are beaten and send for
detectives."

"You leave it to us--we'll catch him," spoke up Bob Jarvis. "I have an
itching at my finger tips and I won't do a thing to him when I get them
on him."

"That is exactly what I want you boys to do--find the man or men guilty
of this outrage, and I shall not be as lenient as I was in the other
affair."

Steve lay with half-closed eyes thinking deeply. Instinctively there
appeared to his mental vision the picture of the bewhiskered man whom he
had seen several weeks before, and who made such an unfavorable
impression upon him.

"Yes; I shall be very glad to do what I can," he said, glancing up at
Mr. Penton. "I am ready to begin at once. Doctor, don't you think it is
about time you were letting me get up?"

After taking Steve's temperature and thumping him upon the chest, the
physician decided to let the lad get up and dress. He did, however, most
emphatically protest against Rush climbing the ladders all the way to
the surface.

Steve found himself a little weak from his experiences, and it was
decided that he should remain in the mine for the rest of the night, or
until the cage machinery had been repaired so he could ride up. The
surgeon sat nodding in the pump-man's chair, and the men who had
assisted in the rescue returned to their duties in other parts of the
mine.

Mr. Penton had been in communication with the surface by telephone. He
learned that all was being done that could be done to repair the
hoisting apparatus in the shortest possible time, so there was no
necessity for him to climb the rest of the way up.

"I think I'll stay down here with you boys for the rest of the night,"
he said. "Everything is quiet. I see the surgeon has put the engineer
out of house and home, so I think I shall lie down on the work-bench and
get a little sleep."

"Yes, it is quiet enough," began Steve, when suddenly there came a dull,
muffled report. The ground beneath their feet trembled perceptibly, then
silence reigned.

Mr. Penton sprang from the bench where he was just composing himself for
a sleep.

"Did you hear that!"

"Yes, sir; we heard it," answered Rush.

"What was it?" questioned Bob, his head inclined in a listening
attitude.

"It sounded like an explosion," said Steve.

"It _was_ an explosion. That was dynamite, boys. Something is going on
here. There should be no blasting in the mines to-night."

Mr. Penton ran to the telephone to find out what the explosion meant.

"It looks as though our work were cut out for us, Steve," said Jarvis in
a low tone.

"I am beginning to think so myself," answered Steve, after listening
intently for a moment.




CHAPTER XXIV

CONCLUSION


"What was it, Mr. Penton?" called Steve, as he saw the superintendent
approaching.

"I shall have to leave you," returned the superintendent. "Jarvis, if
Rush does not need you, you may come with me."

"Is there any trouble, sir?" questioned Steve.

"Yes; there is trouble. Someone has dropped a charge of dynamite down
the cage shaft. They tell me the cage is wrecked. Of course that doesn't
amount to much, if there is no further damage, but there is no telling
where this business is going to end. I must get up to the surface, and
at once."

"Then I am going with you," announced Steve with emphasis. "I am
perfectly able. There is nothing the matter with me except inactivity. I
am anxious to be doing something. But, Mr. Penton, that charge of
dynamite surely was not dropped in from the surface, was it?"

"No; that would not be possible."

"That means that someone in the mine has dropped it from one of the
levels."

"Yes, yes."

"Then I would suggest telephoning to the top of the shaft to have the
ladder hole leading to the open watched, and no one to be allowed to
leave the mine unless able to give a good account of himself."

"Your idea is an excellent one. I will give the order at once."

The superintendent did so; then the men started upward. At Rush's
suggestion the party divided. The mine captain had been picked up in the
meantime, and the four men divided themselves into two parties, each
party taking a level through which it moved, visiting every place where
men were at work, questioning each sharply as to whether any of their
shift had left their work during the last hour.

The search was fruitless. There were not many men working on the night
shift, and beyond considerable ladder climbing, the two parties had
finished their search within a few hours.

The four men met on the surface shortly after midnight.

The Iron Boys had nothing to report; neither had Mr. Penton nor the mine
captain met with any better results. The mystery was still unexplained.

"Rush, you usually have ideas on most subjects. What do you think about
this affair?"

"I hardly know what to think. I have an idea, however, as to where the
charge was dropped from."

"From where was it dropped?" demanded the superintendent sharply.

"From the first sub-level below the surface. You see, it would be very
easy for anyone to go down that ladder there at night, without
attracting attention. He could have dropped the charge down through the
shaft and been out and away long before you telephoned up here."

"That is very true. It may explain that part of the affair."

"We found a fuse on the first sub-level near the shaft, but of course
that doesn't prove anything. It may have been dropped there by any one
of fifty different men."

The superintendent's face was stern as he pondered over the matter that
was disturbing them all.

"Rush, I want you boys to devote your time, during the next few days, to
working on this case. I know of no one else better qualified to do it.
If you can't get to the bottom of the mystery, I know of no one who can.
In the meantime I shall be pursuing some investigations of my own."

"Very well, sir; do you wish us to drop our work?"

"As a matter of fact, yes; but you need not appear to have done so.
Pretend to make your rounds, but devote your time to running down this
mystery. The officials will be back here within the next few days. I
want this affair cleared up before they get here, so work fast. You have
my authority to go to any length necessary to solve the mystery and to
discover the guilty ones. Now, show me what you can do."

"It is a pretty big contract you have given us, sir, but we will do the
best we can. We have personal reasons for wanting to succeed, as you can
understand."

"We have," affirmed Bob Jarvis grimly.

The boys bade the superintendent good night and went to their boarding
place. The following morning found Rush suffering from a severe cold. He
could barely speak, but he went to the mine, nevertheless. The cage was
not yet ready for use, but the superintendent had had the ore skips
rigged to carry men down, which was done at greatly reduced speed, but
at the usual time the mine was in full operation.

All that day the two boys tramped about the mine, part of the time in
company and at other times pursuing their investigations separately.
They talked with the men, working in various subtle ways to obtain hints
that might start them in the right direction.

Night came, but when they compared notes they found that they had made
no progress.

"I would go back to-night," said Steve thoughtfully, "but to do so would
attract attention. They know we do not work at night and someone might
become suspicious."

The next day was a repetition of the previous one so far as results were
concerned. Not a clue did either boy find. This went on for three days,
during which time they had not seen Mr. Penton. He was giving his two
track inspectors a clear field, unhampered by any directions from him,
and this put them on their mettle, perhaps more keenly than would
otherwise have been the case.

"To-morrow will be Saturday. Don't you think it would be a good time for
us to camp on the trail steadily?" asked Jarvis on Friday night as they
were going home.

"I have been thinking of that. I'll tell you what I want you to do
to-morrow. Go to the pay clerk and time checker and find out who is left
in the mine after all hands who are going to do so have checked in and
drawn their wages. When you get the list bring it below to me. I will
meet you somewhere near the chutes on seventeen. I want only the names
of those who belong on the shift working Saturday afternoon. There will
not be many of them."

Jarvis carried out his instructions and brought the list to Rush on the
following day. The two boys scanned the list keenly, after which they
made tours of the working drifts, finding all the men at their stations
and no one in the mine who did not belong there.

"I'm coming back to-night," decided Steve with emphasis. "I am satisfied
that the people we are looking for are not on the day shift. We will
come down about eight o'clock, by way of the ladders, and prowl quietly
about. We will use our candles only when we get in drifts where there is
no one at work."

"We won't catch anyone. They're too sharp for us."

"Perhaps not to-night, but we'll get them if it takes a year to do it.
I'll never give up till I have won this game of hide and seek. When you
go after a thing, Bob, make up your mind you're going to get it. You'll
land somewhere near the mark if you follow that policy."

"I've got the dynamite report here for you."

Steve examined the report carefully. He had done a very shrewd thing. He
had held the keeper of the dynamite stores responsible for a complete
list of all the sticks of dynamite given out to the miners each day, and
then had visited the drifts to find out how many charges had been fired
and how many sticks had been used. As dynamite is never issued, except
for immediate use, there could be none left over after the day's work
was done. By the time the holes are drilled a messenger is on hand with
just enough sticks of the deadly stuff to fill the holes.

After checking up, the young inspectors found that twelve sticks of the
explosive were unaccounted for. They had been drawn from the stores, but
not used.

"We are beginning to get somewhere, old chap," Steve said, nodding to
his companion.

"That means that someone--some unauthorized person--has drawn some
dynamite from the stores, does it not?" questioned Jarvis.

"That is the way I figure it out. It may mean nothing, so far as our
case is concerned, and it may mean much."

The boys remained in the mine as usual until the shift went up at six
o'clock. At the appointed hour, eight o'clock, they made their way back
to the shaft, but instead of going down on the cage they slipped into
the ladder hole and began their descent in this way. It was decided that
Bob should begin at the upper levels and work down, while Steve was to
make his way to the bottom of the shaft and work up. When they met they
would compare notes. Each had a list of every man who had business in
the mine that night, so that they could find out, by asking a man's
name, whether or not he had a right to be there.

Steve had gone directly to the bottom and covered every level up to that
where the pump station was located, about half way up the shaft. He
started along this level, keeping out of sight as much as possible,
which had been the policy of each lad, as agreed upon beforehand.

Steve had not proceeded far when he discovered that someone was walking
along the level ahead of him. At first he thought it was Jarvis, as the
man's hat held no light, and Bob should be somewhere about at that time.

Steve quickened his steps, intending to overhaul the man and speak to
him. All at once the fellow turned abruptly off from the main level,
entering a drift that ran to the south, but as he passed under the
electric light at the turn Steve Rush made a discovery.

The man was heavily bearded and Steve recognized him instantly.

"It's the man Klink," he muttered. "What is he doing in that drift at
this time of night?"

Consulting his list, the boy saw that Klink did not belong to the night
shift of that particular night. He moved up, intending to follow Klink
into the drift, when the man suddenly emerged. Steve flattened himself
on the ground and waited, while the other glanced cautiously up and
down the level. Satisfying himself that no one was about, Klink turned
and walked on.

The watcher lost no time in following, but Rush kept at a safe distance,
dodging when he had to pass an electric light, now and then throwing
himself beside the track flat in the mud and water of the gutter when he
thought Klink was about to look back. In this way he avoided discovery.

Klink continued on until he neared the pump station, when he slackened
his pace. Fortunately for Steve, there were no lights in that part of
the level, so that he had little difficulty in keeping out of sight.
Klink kept on walking until nearly opposite the pump station, when he
suddenly disappeared. For a moment Rush was puzzled; then he discovered
that his man had stepped in between two posts that held up the lagging
at the side of the tunnel.

The boy's eyes gleamed.

"Now, my fine gentleman, we'll find out what is going on here! I believe
I have landed the man I am looking for. I----"

It was just midnight, and the pump man had left his machinery to go for
water to drink with his lunch. Steve understood this, and evidently the
man who was pressed close up against the lagging did also, for he
quickly stepped out, glanced about him, then ran to the square opening
cut in the rocks in which the pump machinery was located.

Rush ran up on tiptoe to within about twenty yards of the pump station.
He was watching Klink narrowly. The latter snatched something from
inside his coat, thrusting the object under the plunger of the largest
of the pumps. Next came something long, slender and white that looked
like a large string.

Almost holding his breath, Steve crept nearer.

"He is attaching a fuse. That was dynamite that he put under the
plunger. He's going to blow up the pumps and flood the mine!"

Klink struck a match and applied it to the end of the fuse.

It was now Steve Rush's time to act. Seconds were precious. The boy
seemed scarcely to touch the ground as he sprinted forward. He was upon
the man before Klink saw him. One swift kick from Steve's heavy boot
toppled the man over on his side.

The Iron Boy snatched the burning fuse from the stick of dynamite and
hurled it from him.

By that time Klink was on his feet. With blazing eyes he rushed at the
boy. Steve believed, and with good reason, that Klink intended to murder
him. But the boy stood calmly awaiting the onslaught. The man was large
and powerful, but this did not daunt the plucky lad.

Klink was now more than three feet from him when, suddenly, Steve's
right foot flew out, catching the fellow fairly in the pit of the
stomach. The man uttered an exclamation, at the same time pressing both
hands to the spot where the heavy boot had landed.

Rush fairly leaped into the air, his fist catching Klink directly
between the eyes. Klink toppled over backwards, and Rush, having lost
his balance, fell prone on top of him.

The fellow's arms and legs instantly clasped the boy in a tight embrace.
But in that one close look into the fellow's eyes, Steve had recognized
him.

"I know you! You're Spooner, and I've got you, you villain!" breathed
the lad, writhing and twisting to get his right knee up where he could
use it to advantage.

Spooner, for it was the same man who had let the trap down under Steve
on the tally-board platform, did not answer. He pressed the boy to him
with a force that made the lad think his ribs were going to be crushed
in. At the same time the man was trying to turn over and get Rush under
him, where he would have quickly settled his young antagonist.

All at once the Iron Boy jerked his knee up, planting it in the other's
abdomen. Now the more Spooner hugged Rush, the harder did the knee
press against him. With a mighty effort the rascal threw himself on his
side. But in doing so he had relaxed his grip. Steve's right arm was
jerked loose, and like a flash the Iron Boy delivered two short-arm
jolts on the side of his opponent's jaw.

The blows half stunned the big man. Steve struck him in the nose with a
blow that was intended to reach the jaw and complete the work.

At that instant there was a shout from down the level. Bob Jarvis came
charging upon the scene.

Steve recognized the voice of his companion.

"I've got him, Bob!" shouted the lad with what little breath he had
left. "I've got him down and out!"

But Spooner was not quite "down and out" yet. He began fighting again in
sheer desperation. His one thought now was to free himself from the grip
of those young arms of steel.

Bob grasped Spooner by the collar, and after a few violent tugs jerked
the fellow free from Steve's embrace. Spooner staggered to his feet.

Bang!

Bob smote him a terrific blow on the jaw, and Spooner dropped in a heap.
He was going to strike the man again when Steve stopped him.

"Get a rope, quick! I'll take care of him. There's some rope over there
by the pumps."

Steve threw the prisoner over on his face, twisting the man's hands
behind his back, and a few minutes later they had the fellow's hands
securely tied behind his back.

About that time the pump-man came running up.

"Telephone to the superintendent that we have the man," commanded Steve.
"Hurry, now! Don't stop to ask questions. Tell him we are bringing the
fellow up in the skip."

Spooner by this time had recovered sufficiently to walk with an Iron Boy
on each side of him. In that formation they made their way to the skip.

"None of your funny business now, unless you want another thump on the
jaw," warned Jarvis threateningly.

Mr. Penton had not arrived when they reached the surface, so they took
their prisoner to the dry house, leaving word with the skip-tender to
send Mr. Penton over there at once.

The superintendent was not long in reaching the shaft, whence he hurried
to the place indicated.

"Mr. Penton, we have caught the guilty man," announced Steve. "There he
is."

"What--who is he?" demanded the official half unbelievingly, peering
sharply at the prisoner.

"On the pay roll he is John Klink. His other name is Spooner. He is
stouter and has grown a beard since you saw him last."

The superintendent uttered an exclamation of amazement. Steve briefly
related all that had occurred. Under pressure, Spooner made a confession
before they left the dry house that night of the whole miserable
business. It was he who had dropped the dynamite into the shaft. But he
declared that it was his partner, Marvin, also working in the mine under
an assumed name, who had lured Steve Rush to the lower level and pushed
him in. It was Marvin, too, who, by thrusting a monkey wrench into the
machinery, had stripped the gear and put the cage mechanism out of
business.

That night the villainous and revengeful Spooner slept in a cell, where
he was destined to remain until his trial and eventual sentence to a
long term in prison.

Marvin somehow got wind of the capture of his associate in crime and
fled. He was never heard from in those parts again.

On the following Monday morning the private car of the visiting
officials once more drew up at the railroad station. Later in the day
the Iron Boys were again summoned to the office of the superintendent.
They supposed it was for a discussion of the Spooner case with Mr.
Penton. They were surprised to find the officials of the company there
awaiting them.

After greeting the lads, Mr. Carrhart made a little speech in which he
paid a glowing tribute to the brave boys, and at its conclusion he
placed a packet in the hands of each.

At the meeting of the officials there, a few days previous, it had been
decided by vote to make the lads a present. The packets contained these
presents. The lads protested, but Mr. Carrhart was almost sternly
insistent.

Upon arriving home Steve and Bob each found in his packet shares of
stock in the big steel company amounting to one thousand dollars. It was
a small fortune for them, yet they had earned it. At least the officials
of the steel company considered that they had.

The Iron Boys had done their full duty. But they were as yet merely at
the beginning of their career. There were stirring days ahead of them,
as well as other promotions for work well and faithfully done.

The story of their further exciting experiences and advancement in the
great industrial world are told in the next volume of this series,
entitled, "THE IRON BOYS AS FOREMEN; Or, Heading the Diamond Drill
Shift."


                          THE END




HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY'S

CATALOGUE OF

The Best and Least Expensive Books for Real Boys and Girls


Really good and new stories for boys and girls are not plentiful. Many
stories, too, are so highly improbable as to bring a grin of derision to
the young reader's face before he has gone far. The name of ALTEMUS is a
distinctive brand on the cover of a book, always ensuring the buyer of
having a book that is up-to-date and fine throughout. No buyer of an
ALTEMUS book is ever disappointed.

Many are the claims made as to the inexpensiveness of books. Go into any
bookstore and ask for an Altemus book. Compare the price charged you for
Altemus books with the price demanded for other juvenile books. You will
at once discover that a given outlay of money will buy more of the
ALTEMUS books than of those published by other houses.

Every dealer in books carries the ALTEMUS books.


Sold by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price

Henry Altemus Company

507-513 Cherry Street, Philadelphia


The Motor Boat Club Series

By H. Irving Hancock

The keynote of these books is manliness. The stories are wonderfully
entertaining, and they are at the same time sound and wholesome. No boy
will willingly lay down an unfinished book in this series.

     1 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OF THE KENNEBEC; Or, The Secret of Smugglers'
     Island.

     2 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT NANTUCKET; Or, The Mystery of the Dunstan
     Heir.

     3 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OFF LONG ISLAND; Or, A Daring Marine Game at
     Racing Speed.

     4 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AND THE WIRELESS; Or, The Dot, Dash and Dare
     Cruise.

     5 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB IN FLORIDA; Or, Laying the Ghost of Alligator
     Swamp.

     6 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT THE GOLDEN GATE; Or, A Thrilling Capture
     in the Great Fog.

     7 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB ON THE GREAT LAKES; Or, The Flying Dutchman
     of the Big Fresh Water.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


The Range and Grange Hustlers

By Frank Gee Patchin

Have you any idea of the excitements, the glories of life on great
ranches in the West? Any bright boy will "devour" the books of this
series, once he has made a start with the first volume.

     1 THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS ON THE RANCH; Or, The Boy Shepherds
     of the Great Divide.

     2 THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS' GREATEST ROUND-UP; Or, Pitting
     Their Wits Against a Packer's Combine.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


Submarine Boys Series

By Victor G. Durham

These splendid books for boys and girls deal with life aboard submarine
torpedo boats, and with the adventures of the young crew, and possess,
in addition to the author's surpassing knack of story-telling, a great
educational value for all young readers.

     1 THE SUBMARINE BOYS ON DUTY; Or, Life on a Diving Torpedo Boat.

     2 THE SUBMARINE BOYS' TRIAL TRIP; Or, "Making Good" as Young
     Experts.

     3 THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE MIDDIES; Or, The Prize Detail at
     Annapolis.

     4 THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE SPIES; Or, Dodging the Sharks of the
     Deep.

     5 THE SUBMARINE BOYS' LIGHTNING CRUISE; Or, The Young Kings of the
     Deep.

     6 THE SUBMARINE BOYS FOR THE FLAG; Or, Deeding Their Lives to Uncle
     Sam.

     7 THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE SMUGGLERS; Or, Breaking Up the New
     Jersey Customs Frauds.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


The Square Dollar Boys Series

By H. Irving Hancock

The reading boy will be a voter within a few years; these books are
bound to make him think, and when he casts his vote he will do it more
intelligently for having read these volumes.

     1 THE SQUARE DOLLAR BOYS WAKE UP; Or, Fighting the Trolley
     Franchise Steal.

     2 THE SQUARE DOLLAR BOYS SMASH THE RING; Or, In the Lists Against
     the Crooked Land Deal.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


Pony Rider Boys Series

By Frank Gee Patchin

These tales may be aptly described as those of a new Cooper. In every
sense they belong to the best class of books for boys and girls.

     1 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE ROCKIES; Or, The Secret of the Lost
     Claim.

     2 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN TEXAS; Or, The Veiled Riddle of the
     Plains.

     3 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN MONTANA; Or, The Mystery of the Old Custer
     Trail.

     4 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE OZARKS; Or, The Secret of Ruby
     Mountain.

     5 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE ALKALI; Or, Finding a Key to the
     Desert Maze.

     6 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN NEW MEXICO; Or, The End of the Silver
     Trail.

     7 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE GRAND CANYON; Or, The Mystery of
     Bright Angel Gulch.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


The Boys of Steel Series

By James R. Mears

The author has made of these volumes a series of romances with scenes
laid in the iron and steel world. Each book presents a vivid picture of
some phase of this great industry. The information given is exact and
truthful; above all, each story is full of adventure and fascination.

     1 THE IRON BOYS IN THE MINES; Or, Starting at the Bottom of the
     Shaft.

     2 THE IRON BOYS AS FOREMEN; Or, Heading the Diamond Drill Shift.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


West Point Series

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

The principal characters in these narratives are manly young Americans
whose doings will inspire all boy readers.

     1 DICK PRESCOTT'S FIRST YEAR AT WEST POINT; Or, Two Chums in the
     Cadet Gray.

     2 DICK PRESCOTT'S SECOND YEAR AT WEST POINT; Or, Finding the Glory
     of the Soldier's Life.

     3 DICK PRESCOTT'S THIRD YEAR AT WEST POINT; Or, Standing Firm for
     Flag and Honor.

     4 DICK PRESCOTT'S FOURTH YEAR AT WEST POINT; Or, Ready to Drop the
     Gray for Shoulder Straps.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


Annapolis Series

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

The spirit of the new Navy is delightfully and truthfully depicted in
these volumes.

     1 DAVE DARRIN'S FIRST YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; Or, Two Plebe Midshipmen
     at the U. S. Naval Academy.

     2 DAVE DARRIN'S SECOND YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; Or, Two Midshipmen as
     Naval Academy "Youngsters."

     3 DAVE DARRIN'S THIRD YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; Or, Leaders of the Second
     Class Midshipmen.

     4 DAVE DARRIN'S FOURTH YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; Or, Headed for Graduation
     and the Big Cruise.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


The Young Engineers Series

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

The heroes of these stories are known to readers of the High School Boys
Series. In this new series Tom Reade and Harry Hazelton prove worthy of
all the traditions of Dick & Co.

     1 THE YOUNG ENGINEERS IN COLORADO; Or, at Railroad Building in
     Earnest.

     2 THE YOUNG ENGINEERS IN ARIZONA; Or, Laying Tracks on the
     "Man-Killer" Quicksands.

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


Boys of the Army Series

By H. Irving Hancock

These books breathe the life and spirit of the United States Army of
to-day, and the life, just as it is, is described by a master pen.

     1 UNCLE SAM'S BOYS IN THE RANKS; Or, Two Recruits in the United
     States Army.

     2 UNCLE SAM'S BOYS ON FIELD DUTY; Or, Winning Corporal's Chevrons.

     3 UNCLE SAM'S BOYS AS SERGEANTS; Or, Handling Their First Real
     Commands.

     4 UNCLE SAM'S BOYS IN THE PHILIPPINES; Or, Following the Flag
     Against the Moros.

(_Other volumes to follow rapidly._)

Cloth, Illustrated       Price, per Volume, 50c.


Battleship Boys Series

By Frank Gee Patchin

These stories throb with the life of young Americans on to-day's huge
drab Dreadnaughts.

     1 THE BATTLESHIP BOYS AT SEA; Or, Two Apprentices in Uncle Sam's
     Navy.

     2 THE BATTLESHIP BOYS' FIRST STEP UPWARD; Or, Winning Their Grades
     as Petty Officers.

     3 THE BATTLESHIP BOYS IN FOREIGN SERVICE; Or, Earning New Ratings
     in European Seas.

     4 THE BATTLESHIP BOYS IN THE TROPICS; Or, Upholding the American
     Flag in a Honduras Revolution.

(_Other volumes to follow rapidly._)

Cloth, Illustrated      Price, per Volume, 50c.


High School Boys Series

By H. Irving Hancock

     In this series of bright, crisp books a new note has been struck.

     Boys of every age under sixty will be interested in these
     fascinating volumes.

     1 THE HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMEN; Or, Dick & Co's First Year Pranks and
     Sports.

     2 THE HIGH SCHOOL PITCHER; Or, Dick & Co. on the Gridley Diamond.

     3 THE HIGH SCHOOL LEFT END; Or, Dick & Co. Grilling on the Football
     Gridiron.

     4 THE HIGH SCHOOL CAPTAIN OF THE TEAM; Or, Dick & Co. Leading the
     Athletic Vanguard.

Cloth, Illustrated      Price, per Volume, 50c.


Grammar School Boys Series

By H. Irving Hancock

     This series of stories, based on the actual doings of grammar
     school boys comes near to the heart of the average American boy.

     1 THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS OF GRIDLEY; Or, Dick & Co. Start Things
     Moving.

     2 THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS SNOWBOUND; Or, Dick & Co. at Winter
     Sports.

     3 THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS IN THE WOODS; Or, Dick & Co. Trail Fun
     and Knowledge.

     4 THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS IN SUMMER ATHLETICS; Or, Dick & Co. Make
     Their Fame Secure.

Cloth, Illustrated      Price, per Volume, 50c.


The Circus Boys Series

By EDGAR B. P. DARLINGTON

Mr. Darlington's books breathe forth every phase of an intensely
interesting and exciting life.

     1 THE CIRCUS BOYS ON THE FLYING RINGS; Or, Making the Start in the
     Sawdust Life.

     2 THE CIRCUS BOYS ACROSS THE CONTINENT; Or, Winning New Laurels on
     the Tanbark.

     3 THE CIRCUS BOYS IN DIXIE LAND; Or, Winning the Plaudits of the
     Sunny South.

     4 THE CIRCUS BOYS ON THE MISSISSIPPI; Or, Afloat with the Big Show
     on the Big River.

Cloth, Illustrated      Price, per Volume, 50c.


The High School Girls Series

By JESSIE GRAHAM FLOWER, A.M.

These breezy stories of the American High School Girl take the reader
fairly by storm.

     1 GRACE HARLOEW'S PLEBE YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL; Or, The Merry Doings
     of the Oakdale Freshman Girls.

     2 GRACE HARLOWE'S SOPHOMORE YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL; Or, The Record of
     the Girl Chums in Work and Athletics.

     3 GRACE HARLOWE'S JUNIOR YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL; Or, Fast Friends in
     the Sororities.

     4 GRACE HARLOWE'S SENIOR YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL; Or, The Parting of
     the Ways.

Cloth, Illustrated      Price, per Volume, 50c.


The Automobile Girls Series

By LAURA DENT CRANE

No girl's library--no family book-case can be considered at all complete
unless it contains these sparkling twentieth-century books.

     1 THE AUTOMOBILE GIRLS AT NEWPORT; Or, Watching the Summer Parade.

     2 THE AUTOMOBILE GIRLS IN THE BERKSHIRES; Or, The Ghost of Lost
     Man's Trail.

     3 THE AUTOMOBILE GIRLS ALONG THE HUDSON; Or, Fighting Fire in
     Sleepy Hollow.

     4 THE AUTOMOBILE GIRLS AT CHICAGO; Or, Winning Out Against Heavy
     Odds.

Cloth, Illustrated      Price, per Volume, 50c.


       *       *       *       *       *

                     Transcriber Note


  Minor spelling and punctuation errors have been corrected.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Iron Boys in the Mines, by James R. Mears

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRON BOYS IN THE MINES ***

***** This file should be named 39083.txt or 39083.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/0/8/39083/

Produced by Dianna Adair, Stephen Hutcheson, Rod Crawford,
Dave Morgan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
