The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 106,
November 8, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 106, November 8, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: March 10, 2012 [EBook #39091]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NOV 8, 1851 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts.
[Th] was used for a capital letter thorn, [th] for a lowercase thorn,
and [Gh] shows a capital letter yogh. A list of volumes and pages in
"Notes and Queries" has been added at the end.]




NOTES and QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--No. 106. SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 8. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition. 4_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Some Notes on Arundel House, Strand, and on the
      Dispersion of Sculptures formerly Part of the
      Arundelian Collection, by William Sidney Gibson            361

      Panslavic Literature, and the Library of the British
      Museum, by Dr. J. Lotsky                                   364

      On Archbishop Ussher, by Bolton Corney                     365

      Anglo-Catholic Library--Bishop Overall's Convocation
      Book                                                       365

      QUERIES:--

      The Use of Misereres                                       367

      Joceline's Legacy                                          367

      Minor Queries:--Early Muster Rolls--Convocation
      for the Province of York--The Scent of the
      Bloodhound--Cooper's Miniature of Cromwell--Lines on
      Cagliostro--The Names and Numbers of British
      Regiments--Praed's Charade--Cozens the
      Painter--Parliamentary Debates                             367

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--Merry Wakefield--The
      two Kings of Brentford--Meaning of V. D. M.                369

      REPLIES:--

      Anachronisms of Painters                                   369

      "Agla," Meaning of, by E. S. Taylor, &c.                   370

      Colonies of England                                        370

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Broad Arrow--Sacro-Sancta
      Regum Majestas--Grimsditch--"'Tis Twopence now,"
      &c.--Pauper's Badge                                        371

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     373

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               373

      Notices to Correspondents                                  374

      Advertisements                                             374




Notes.


SOME NOTES ON ARUNDEL HOUSE, STRAND, AND ON THE DISPERSION OF SCULPTURES
FORMERLY PART OF THE ARUNDELIAN COLLECTION.

The celebrated Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundel, was son of Philip Howard,
Earl of Arundel--the faithful and constant, who being persecuted for his
religion, was suffered by Queen Elizabeth to languish in the Tower,
where he died in 1595--and great-grandson of Henry Howard, Earl of
Surrey, the accomplished nobleman who was beheaded in 1547 by "the Nero
of the Tudor race." Thomas Howard was restored, as your readers know, to
the earldom of Arundel by James I., and in the reign of that king and of
Charles I., who held him in veneration, received other honours and
employments, but was yet more distinguished by his munificent patronage
of the arts and of learning. He is called "the only great subject of the
northern parts, who by his conversation and great collections set a
value" upon transalpine lands; and he began about 1614 to decorate with
the precious and costly works of art which he had collected in Greece
and in his beloved Italy, the gardens and galleries of his quaint old
palace in London, called Arundel House.

This mansion, or rather collection of buildings, the site of which had
been taken from the see of Bath in the time of "Protector" Somerset,
appears from Hollar's _Views_ (as is stated by Mr. Cunningham in his
admirable _Handbook of London Past and Present_) to have comprised a
range of irregular buildings, principally of red brick, erected at
various periods, and combined without much regard to elegance or
uniformity; although I find the earl is said to have been the first
person who introduced uniformity in building, and to have been made
chief commissioner for promoting this object in London. This famous, and
once hospitable, mansion, stood between the gardens of Essex House on
the east, and of Somerset (then Denmark) House on the west, its pleasure
grounds coming down to the river, and commanding a fine view of the city
as far as London Bridge, and of Westminster, and westward to Nine Elms.
It is mentioned by Mr. Cunningham, that in this house Hollar drew his
well-known view of London, as seen from the roof. The earl, of whose
taste and munificence the Arundelian collections formed a noble
monument, departed this life at Padua, on the 4th of October (or, as
another account[1] says, the 26th September), 1646, in the sixty-first
year of his age, having been two years before created Earl of Norfolk,
in consideration of his lineal descent from Thomas de Brotherton, Earl
of Norfolk, a younger son of King Edward I., and was interred at
Arundel. His will, dated at Dover, 3rd September, 1640, was proved in
the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, and is printed in the _Howard
Anecdotes_. His marbles, medals, statues, books, and pictures (he is
said to have possessed "a larger number of Hans Holbein's works than any
other person, and to have been the first nobleman who set a value on
them in our nation"), formed at that period, says Sir Charles Young[2],
one of the finest and most splendid collections in England. Many of the
articles of virtu and of the books were, during his lifetime, in the
possession of Alathea, his Countess (who was a third daughter and coheir
of Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury), from whom some of them were
obtained by his younger son, Sir William Howard, the unfortunate
Viscount Stafford (beheaded 1680, on perjured testimony); and a portion
of the marble statues and library devolved upon Henry Frederick, his
eldest son, who, in his father's lifetime, was summoned to parliament as
Lord Mowbray, and succeeded him as Earl of Arundel, and who died in
1652, leaving Thomas, his eldest son, who became Earl of Arundel,
Surrey, and Norfolk, and was, at the Restoration in 1660, restored to
the dukedom of Norfolk, with limitation to the heirs male of his father.
This nobleman died unmarried in 1677, and his brother Henry (who had
been created Earl of Norwich, and in 1672 Earl Marshal of England, to
him and the heirs male of his body, with other limitations in default)
thereupon became sixth Duke of Norfolk. By him the marbles and library
were finally dispersed.

  [Footnote 1: _Hist. Anecd. of some of the Howard Family_, by Mr.
  Charles Howard of Greystoke, 8vo. Lond. 1769. The writer became
  Duke of Norfolk on the death of his cousin Edward, eighth duke, in
  1777.]

  [Footnote 2: In his preface to the Catalogue of MSS. given to the
  College of Arms by Henry Duke of Norfolk (not published).]

The Royal Society had held their meetings since the Fire of London at
Arundel House; and John Evelyn, Esq., author of the _Sylva_, one of the
founders of the society, observing in 1667

  "these precious monuments miserably neglected, and scattered up
  and down about the garden and other parts of Arundel House, and
  how exceedingly the corrosive air of London impaired them,"

induced this nobleman, then Mr. Henry Howard, to bestow on the
University of Oxford

  "his Arundelian marbles, those celebrated and famous inscriptions,
  Greek and Latine, gathered with so much cost and industrie from
  Greece, by his illustrious grandfather the magnificent Earl of
  Arundel."--_Diary_, vol. ii. p. 295

In 1676 Mr. Evelyn induced the Duke to grant to the Royal Society the
Arundel library, into which many of the MSS. formerly belonging to Lord
William Howard (the famous ancestor of the Earl of Carlisle), who died
in 1640, had found their way from Naworth Castle in the lifetime of
Thomas, Earl of Arundel. In the same volume of Evelyn's _Diary_, p.
445., is a minute, under date 29th August, 1678, from which it appears
that he was then called to take charge of the books and MSS., and remove
to the then home of the Royal Society in Gresham College, such of them
as did not relate to the office of Earl Marshal and to heraldry, his
grace intending to bestow the books relating to those subjects upon the
Heralds' College. It is known, however, that many chronicles and
historical MSS. of great value formed part of the donation to the
College of Arms; and it would appear from a document in the handwriting
of Sir William Dugdale, referred to by Sir Charles Young, that many
monastic registers and cartularies which were taken to Gresham College,
had nevertheless been intended by the Duke for the College over which,
as Earl Marshal, he presided. This nobleman died 1684.

In 1678, according to Mr. Cunningham (who quotes Walpole's _Anecdotes_,
ii. 153.), Arundel House itself was demolished. This was done pursuant
to an act of parliament, which had been obtained for the purpose of
entailing the estate on heirs male, exempt from being charged with
jointures or debts, and empowering the Duke to let a part of the site of
the house and gardens to builders, at reserved ground-rents, which were
to form a fund for building a mansion for the family on that part of the
gardens adjacent to the river. The house was planned by Wren, but the
design was laid aside about the year 1690, when Henry, seventh Duke of
Norfolk, who was a favourite of William Prince of Orange, obtained an
act of parliament empowering him to lease the remainder of the
garden-ground for a term of forty-one years, and to appropriate to
himself the fund which had accumulated. He accordingly let the ground to
Mr. Stone of New Inn, an attorney, and buildings of a very different
character to the palatial mansion that had been contemplated, ere long
overspread the site of Arundel House. The seventh duke died in 1701. It
appears that his friend King William had made him Governor of Windsor
Castle; but at his death 12,000_l._ were due to him for arrears of
salary, which sum it is said was never paid.

The museum of objects illustrative of natural history, and great part of
the furniture of Arundel House, were removed to Stafford House (situated
without Buckingham Gate, where Stafford Row was subsequently built), in
which house, in the year 1720, the Duchess of Norfolk, consort of
Thomas, eighth Duke, sold an immense quantity of plate, jewels,
furniture, pictures, and curiosities. Besides these, however, many
family _reliques_ were at that time in the hands of different branches
of this noble family, as, for example, the grace-cup of St. Thomas of
Canterbury (which had belonged to Thomas Earl of Arundel, and is now in
the possession of Philip Henry Howard, Esq., of Corby Castle, M.P.), and
the staff of office of High Constable of England, formerly used by the
Earl, and which in 1757 was in the possession of the Earl of Stafford.

Of the fate of the marbles which remained at the time of the removal of
Arundel House, some interesting particulars are given by Mr. James
Theobald in a letter written from Surrey Street, 10th May, 1757, and
addressed to Lord Willoughby de Parham, President of the Society of
Antiquaries; and believing that these particulars are little known, I
will now subjoin them to the somewhat lengthy memoranda which I have
written by way of introduction.

  "As there were many fine statues, basso-relievos, and marbles,
  they were received," says Mr. Theobald, "into the lower part of
  the gardens, and many of them were placed under a colonnade there;
  and the upper part of the grounds, next the Strand, was let to
  builders, who continued the street next the Strand, from Temple
  Bar towards Westminster, and built thereon the several streets
  called Arundel, Norfolk, and Surrey Streets, leading from the
  Strand as far as the cross street called Howard Street, which ran
  parallel therewith. A cross wall was built to separate the ground
  let for building from that reserved for the family mansion; and
  many of the workmen, to save the expense of carrying away the
  rubbish, threw it over this cross wall, where it fell upon the
  colonnade and at last by its weight broke it down, and falling
  upon the statues, &c. placed there, broke several of them. A great
  part of these statues, &c., in that sad condition, were purchased
  by Sir William Fermor, from whom the present Earl of Pomfret is
  descended, and he removed them to his seat at Easton Neston in
  Northamptonshire, where he employed some statuary to repair such
  as were not too much demolished. There they continued until the
  year 1755, when the present countess made a present of them to the
  University of Oxford. In this collection was the famous sleeping
  Cupid represented lying on a lion's skin to express his absolute
  dominion over fierceness and strength, some roses being scattered
  on the skin, probably as emblems of silence and secrecy, as Cupid
  presented that flower to Harpocrates, the god of silence, as a
  bribe to him to conceal the amours of his mother, to whom the rose
  is also supposed to be sacred. Below the foot of Cupid on the
  cushion is the figure of a lizard, which some have supposed to
  have been placed here as a known ingredient of great efficacy in
  love-charms; others, as a proper attendant on those who sleep,
  from an opinion that this reptile wakes them on approach of
  danger. But the real design of the sculptor is, rather to
  perpetuate his name by this symbol, for it was Saurus. The Romans,
  observing how much the Grecian sculptors excelled them in this
  art, whenever they employed them to execute any work of this sort
  forbade them to put, as had been customary, their names to their
  works; and Pliny tells us that Saurus had recourse to this
  expedient, by putting the lizard upon this figure, as well as on
  another which he executed jointly with Batrachus, on which they
  were not permitted to put their names, therefore they placed on
  the bases the figures of a frog and a lizard.

  "Some other of these broken statues, not thought worth replacing,
  were begged by one Boyder Cuper, who had been a servant (I think
  gardener) to the family, and were removed by him to decorate a
  piece of garden ground which he had taken opposite Somerset
  water-gate, in the parish of Lambeth[3], which at that time was a
  place of resort for the citizens and others in holiday time, still
  called after him by the name of Cuper's, and thence corruptly
  Cupid's Gardens, which were much of the same nature as Sadler's
  Wells and Mary'bone Gardens. Here they continued for a
  considerable time, till Mr. John Freeman of Fawley Court, near
  Henley-on-Thames, and Mr. Edward Waller of Beaconsfield, observing
  something masterly in the designs and drapery of several of them,
  desired I would treat with Mr. John Cuper for them. I agreed with
  him for 75_l_., and soon afterwards they were divided between
  these two gentlemen, and sent part to Fawley Court, and part to
  Beaconsfield, where they at present remain.

  "What statues and broken fragments yet remained undisposed of in
  Arundel Gardens, the Duke of Norfolk obtained leave from the Crown
  to remove across the water, just on the opposite shore, to a piece
  of waste ground in the manor of Kennington, belonging to the
  principality of Wales; and one Mr. Arundel, a relation of the
  Duke's I think, at the latter end of the reign of King Charles II.
  or King James II., did obtain a grant of the said piece of ground
  at a small rent for a term of years, which was renewed on paying a
  fine. (These are again referred to.)

  "What were thought not worth removing were buried in the
  foundations of the buildings in the lower parts of Norfolk Street
  and the other buildings on the gardens. Mr. Aislabie, who
  inhabited one of these houses, found a broken statue in his
  cellar, which he carried to his seat in Yorkshire; and he tells me
  there is a sarcophagus in the cellar of Mr. James Adamson, who
  lives in the corner house on the left hand going into the lower
  part of Norfolk Street.

  "As to those carried over the water and laid on the Prince of
  Wales' ground, Mr. Arundel, soon after he obtained the grant of
  the ground, let it for a timber-yard, and the person who took it
  built up a wharf; and when the foundation of St. Paul's was laid
  (Mr. Cunningham gives 1st May, 1674, as the date when the ground
  began to be cleared), great quantities of the rubbish were brought
  over thither to raise the ground which used to be overflowed every
  spring tide, so that, by degrees, these statues and other marbles
  were buried under the rubbish, and lay there for many years
  forgotten. About 1712 this piece of ground was rented by my
  father, who, on digging foundations, frequently met with some of
  these broken fragments, which were taken up and laid on the
  surface of the ground. The late Earl of Burlington having heard of
  the things which had been dug up, and that they had formed part
  of the Arundel collection, chose what he pleased and carried them
  down to Chiswick House, where he placed one piece of basso-relievo
  on the pedestal of an obelisk he erected there. Some years after
  this, the Right Hon. Lord Petre, speaking to me about these things
  of the Earl of Burlington's, told me he had heard that on some
  parts of my ground there were still many valuable fragments
  buried, and obtained my leave to employ men to bore the ground.
  After six days' searching of every part, just as they were going
  to give over, they fell upon something which gave them hopes, and
  upon opening the ground they discovered six statues without heads
  or arms, lying close to each other, some of a colossal size, the
  drapery of which was thought to be exceedingly fine. These were
  soon afterwards sent down to Worksop, the seat of his present
  Grace the Duke of Norfolk, in Nottinghamshire, where they remain.

  "There were some few blocks of a greyish veined marble, out of
  which I endeavoured to cut some chimney-pieces and slabs to lay in
  my house, the Belvedere in Lambeth parish, over against York
  Buildings, but the expense was more than their worth; however, as
  they were cut out, some of them were used. The fragment of a
  column I carried into Berkshire to my house, Waltham Place, and
  converted it into a roller for my bowling-green, it being about
  six feet long and eighteen inches diameter."

  [Footnote 3: Mr. Cunningham mentions that the Waterloo Bridge Road
  now runs over the very centre of these gardens.]

Sic transit gloria mundi!

Such are the particulars recorded by Mr. Theobald. When I met with them
lately, I determined on asking a place for this Note in your valuable
publication, thinking that its contents might be new to some of even
your readers, and might form an acceptable page of topographical
illustration.

    WILLIAM SIDNEY GIBSON.

  Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Oct. 1851.


PANSLAVIC LITERATURE, AND THE LIBRARY OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM.

There existed, even in ancient times, some connecting links between the
_Panslavian_ and the _Anglo-Saxon_ races: the most important, the
introduction of Wickliff's Bible translation into Czechia by Anne,
sister of Wenceslaw IV., and wife of Richard II. of England,--an event
rich in great and salutary consequences. In allusion to the Library of
the British Museum, it seems to me that in former times the diplomatic
agents of this country must have taken care to collect the rare and
interesting works of the places where they temporarily resided; and that
in this way the libraries of this country became enriched by an
astounding stock of Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and Panslavic works,
which subsequently merged some way or other in the national library.
This, albeit hypothetical _genesis_ of that huge collection, will, I
think, best explain its incompleteness and even _un-systematicity_ in
former times; as there are some rare old works to be found, of which the
concluding volume is wanting. But I shall not, on this occasion,
_review_ a whole library, but confine myself to its late _exponent_ for
the world-exhibition, described in the "_Short Guide to that Portion of
the Library of Printed Books now open to the Public_, _May 1851_."

In imitation of the National Library of Paris, a number of books have
been publicly exhibited in the British Museum which, on account of their
early date, rarity, costliness and splendour of printing, binding, or
for certain interesting autographs, deserved general attention; thus
forming an exemplified memorial and history of typographic art and
enterprise. The show was a grand and instructive one, owing mostly to
the specimens of the unmatched collection of the Grenville Library, the
greatest gift ever bequeathed by an individual to a people. None could
look without deep emotion on the set of Columbus' Letters, all printed
during his lifetime (1493 _et seq._)--documents much adverted to by A.
Humboldt in his _Examen Critique_ on the discovery of America. Of
similar interest were the sets of first editions of Petrarca, Cervantes,
Camoens--leaves invaluable to the thinker on human civilisation.
Chinese, Indian, and Japanese specimens were also not wanting.

With all that, the gentleman who had arranged _en maestro_ this
exhibition, did completely ignore the existence of _Panslavic_
literature, viz. that of a race of sixty millions of people! It is the
perusal of the _Short Guide_ which will satisfy any one of the exactness
of the assertions, that _not one single_ Russian, Polish, Czechian or
Serbian book or fly-leaf was in the whole collection: an anomaly, the
explaining of which is beyond my reach.

Still, Panslavia occupies a conspicuous place even in the history of
typography and literature, although our later periods have been dimmed
by the intrusion of foreign or despotic princes. It was so early as the
year 1512, that a Slavonic translation of the Bible was begun. Ivan IV.
established the first printing-press in 1564 at Moscow; and in 1659 the
learned Patriarch Nikon published a revision of both the Old and New
Testaments. Without entering here into an investigation on the first
Slavian typographers, both Czechia and Poland were foremost in
introducing this important discovery; and even our southernmost city,
the Republic of Ragusa, printed Slavian works. Of all this the
typographical exhibition of the British Museum contained no trace. What
the Library may possess or not possess, is now more difficult to
ascertain than ever, as the different sets of Catalogues amount to a
couple of hundred volumes. In fact, I know that there exist in the
Library the _Acta Fratrum Polonorum_ (the disciples of Socinus), a work
unknown even to Lellewel but I am not aware how to find it without a
great loss of time.[4] Unfortunately also, the Catalogues are encumbered
by a host of exploded German works, which, remaining on the hands of the
Leipzig publishers, are mostly sold as waste paper. The works of the
greatest Slavian literati are wanting; for instance, Palacky's _History
of Czechia_ (in German), published by order and at the expense of the
house of representatives at Prague, of which a _second_ edition
(reprint) has already appeared so far back as 1844.

  [Footnote 4: [Our correspondent will find it in the King's
  Catalogue, tom. i. p. 281., under _Bibliotheca_. The press mark is
  273, i. 20.--ED.]]

    DR. J. LOTSKY, Panslave.


ON ARCHBISHOP USSHER.

Without designing to take part in the question at issue regarding
archbishop Ussher, I may be permitted to record the evidence of one of
the earliest and best-informed witnesses on it--Nicholas Bernard, doctor
of divinity, and preacher to the honourable society of _Grayes-Inne_,
London.

  "_Anno 1641._ The great businesse of the _Earle of Strafford_ came
  in agitation, in which there is one thing he gave me a charge, as
  I had occasion, to clear him, _viz._ of a _scandall_ raised on
  him, by a _rash_, I will not say malicious pen, in his _Vocall
  forrest_, as if he had made use of a pretended distinction of a
  _Personall and politicall conscience_, to satisfy the late King,
  that he might consent to the beheading of the said Earle; that
  _though the first resisted, he might do it by the second;_ which,
  I wonder men of prudence, or that had any esteem of him, could be
  so credulous of: but there is a presumptuous _Observator_ of late,
  hath more ridiculously and maliciously abused him in it, as if the
  root of it was in revenge, for the _Earles suppressing the
  Articles of Ireland;_ both are of the like falshood, as hath been
  already made apparent, in an answer to him.

  "And I have lately seen it under the hand of a person of quality,
  affirming, that some yeers agone, a rumour being spread of the
  death of this Reverend _Primate_ (who was much lamented at Oxford)
  and this concerning the Earle being by one then objected against
  him. He was an ear-witnesse, that the late _King_, answered that
  person in very great Passion, and with an oath protested his
  innocency therein."

Bernard received ordination from the hands of Ussher; was his librarian
at the period in question; and was honoured with his confidence for
thirty years. His _Life_ of Ussher is a work of authority, and deserves
to be held in remembrance.

    BOLTON CORNEY.


ANGLO-CATHOLIC LIBRARY--BISHOP OVERALL'S CONVOCATION BOOK.

The volume which is known under the title of Bishop Overall's
_Convocation Book_, is a document possessing no ordinary degree of
interest. It consists of a series of arguments and canons, in which are
discussed and decided several questions of great moment relative to the
authority of princes, the divine right of episcopacy, and the
differences between the Church of England and the see of Rome. Though
this document never obtained the sanction of the Crown, yet its
intrinsic value is considerable; and its claim to be regarded as an
authentic exposition of the doctrine of the Church of England, in the
beginning of the seventeenth century, is unquestionable. Drawn up by the
eminent divines who constituted the lower house of the Convocation of
1603, the signature of Bishop Overall at the end attests that the whole
had been read three times in the hearing of the house, and unanimously
approved.[5]

  [Footnote 5: "Haec omnia suprascripta ter lecta sunt in domo
  inferiori convocationis in frequenti synodo cleri, et unanimi
  consensu comprobata. Ita testor,

  "JOHANNES OVERALL, Prolocutor.

  "April 16. 1606."

  The whole of this passage, the editor informs us, "is in the
  handwriting of Overall."--P. 272.]

In the year 1844, a new edition of this document was issued to the
subscribers to the Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology. Some care and
labour appear to have been bestowed in editing it. The name of the
editor is not given: the preface does not even bear his initials.
Consequently, the Committee, whose names are before the public, and to
whom, as the subscribers are informed in the Rules of the Society, "the
whole management of the fund subscribed is entrusted,"[6] have taken on
themselves the entire and sole responsibility of this edition, and are
the only parties in any way answerable to the subscribers, for the
manner in which it has been prepared for publication.

  [Footnote 6: The fifth rule is as follows:--

  "5. That the whole management of the fund subscribed be entrusted
  to a Committee, consisting of not less than twelve nor more than
  twenty-four subscribers, who shall fill up all vacancies that may
  occur in their own body."]

How that has been done the following observations may help to determine.

In the second part of the work this passage occurs (book ii. chap.
vii.):--

  "In these times it may well be granted that there was no need of
  any other bishops but the Apostles, and likewise that then their
  churches or particular congregations in every city were advised
  and directed touching points of religion in manner and form
  aforesaid by the common and joint advice of their priests or
  ministers. In which respect, the same persons, who then were named
  priests or ministers, were also in a general sense called bishops.
  Howbeit this course dured not long, either concerning their said
  common direction, or their names of bishops so attributed unto
  them; but was shortly after ordered far otherwise, by a common
  decree of the Apostles, to be observed in all such cities where
  particular churches were planted, or, as one speaketh, _in toto
  orbe_ 'throughout the world.'"

This passage will be found at p. 136. of the edition in the
_Anglo-Catholic Library_, and at the foot of the page is the reference
given by the Convocation to the words "_in toto orbe_."

  "_Jerome in Ep. ad Tit._ cap. i. [See note O.]"

The words within brackets direct us to one of the notes which the editor
has added at the end of the volume; where, at p. 281., the following is
found:

  "Note O., p. 136.

  "_Jerome in Ep. ad Tit._ c. i. [The editor has failed in
  discovering the passage here alluded to, although the Benedictine
  and several earlier editions have been consulted.]"

Without waiting for an opportunity of referring to the Benedictine, or
any of the earlier editions, to which the writer has not access at the
present moment, it is sufficient to observe, that the passage in
question occurs in St. Jerome's _Commentary on the Epistle to Titus_,
and may be found in Vallarsius's edition, tom. vii. col. 694.

One would be glad to content oneself with this _note_, but the interests
of literature and theology demand something more; and if the anonymous
editor should feel pained by the following remarks, the writer can only
say that he has not the slightest suspicion who the editor of this
volume is, and that it is to the Committee (most especially in such a
case as this, where they have allowed the editor to withhold his name,)
the Subscribers--not to say the Church of England--will look for such a
work being brought out in a proper manner.

To confess that a passage, which the Convocation of 1603 have referred
to in this off-hand manner, is not to be found in the works of Jerome,
is strange enough: but the confession assumes a new character, as
regards both the editor and the Committee, when one reflects for an
instant on the particular passage which the editor thus candidly informs
us, he "has failed in discovering."

It is not at all too much to say, that no one could be even moderately
acquainted with the Presbyterian controversy, and the arguments in
defence of Episcopacy, without being so familiar with this passage as to
recognise it at first sight. It is, indeed, one of the chief testimonies
which the Presbyterians urged in proof of the antiquity of their
discipline,--as Bishop Pearson says: "Locus Hieronymi, quem pro fundo
habent novatores;" and, as such, it has been discussed by almost every
divine of eminence, who has undertaken to defend the constitution of the
English church.

To multiply references is needless. But, without attempting to exhaust
even the resources of a small and very incomplete private collection, it
will suffice to say, that Henry Dodwell has examined it in his additions
to Pearson. (_De Success. prim. Romae Episcop._, Diss. I. cap. ix.)
Bishop Bilson discusses it, and refers to it again and again (_Perpetual
Government of Christ's Church_, "Epistle to the Reader," p. 5.; ch. xi.
pp. 217. 268.; ch. xii. pp. 284. 289. 307.; edit. Oxford, 1842). Hooker
quotes and explains it (book vii. ch. v. 7.; vol. iii. p. 162.; Oxford,
1845). It is the subject of an entire section of Jeremy Taylor's
_Episcopacy asserted_ (sect. xxi.). And to enumerate no more, it is
fully discussed by Archbishop Potter, in his _Discourse on Church
Government_ (chap. iv.).

These facts will, it is trusted, exempt the writer from the charge of
minute and carping criticism. The Convocation of 1603, indeed, merely
allude to the passage as one with which every English divine would be
familiar and most unquestionably no one could have been a stranger to
it, who was acquainted with the subject which the Convocation were
discussing.

It is surely then but reasonable to feel surprised, that a document so
important, and drawn up by men of such eminence, should have been
confided to an editor who had never heard of the passage, and knew not
where to find it: in a word, to an editor, who, by his own
acknowledgment (and his candour is deserving of respect), is a stranger
to one of the principal subjects of the volume he was employed to edit.

The Committee of the _Anglo-Catholic Library_ are not persons who
require to be informed, that something more is demanded in an editor,
than industry in hunting out references, and transcribing scraps of
Latin. Nor could this passage have presented an instant's difficulty to
some whose names have stood on the list of the Committee from the
commencement of the undertaking. But this is the very thing which the
Subscribers have a right to complain of. They expected that the editors
employed should have the benefit of co-operation and consultation with
the Committee. They had a right to expect this. The Subscribers cannot
be expected to feel satisfied with the unrevised performance of an
anonymous editor. They had a right to expect, in the first place, that
the Committee would not engage any one to edit a book until they had
ascertained whether he was acquainted with the subject of which it
treated. They had a right to expect also, that the Committee would
exercise such a real and _bona fide_ superintendence and control as
should have prevented the possibility of any work, issued with the
sanction of their names, containing a confession so strange and so
humiliating, and manifesting a degree of editorial incompetency so
disappointing to the Subscribers, and so discreditable to the literary
and theological character of the country. The names of the gentlemen of
the Committee must be regarded as a pledge and guarantee that no such
case as this could occur. On the faith of that assurance, and in the
hope of receiving valuable editions of our standard theology, as well as
with a wish to encourage a most useful undertaking, many persons have
given their names and their subscriptions. There is too much reason to
think now that this assurance is of less value than could have been
anticipated. And when proof so unquestionable is thus forced on one's
notice, it can scarcely be thought surprising, that regret and
disappointment should be expressed by one who has been, from the
beginning,

    A SUBSCRIBER TO THE "ANGLO-CATHOLIC LIBRARY."




Queries.


THE USE OF MISERERES.

I notice the following paragraph in Mr. Howitt's _Visits to Remarkable
Places_, 1840, pp. 470, 471.:

  "Perhaps the most curious things about the chapel [of Winchester
  College] are the ancient stall-seats now affixed to the wall of
  the ante-chapel. These have their seats so fixed upon hinges that
  those who sit in them can only maintain their position by
  balancing themselves with care, and resting their elbows on the
  seat-arms; so that if the monks who used them dropped asleep
  during divine service, the seats came forward and pitched them
  headlong upon the floor; nay, if they only dozed and nodded the
  least in the world, the hard oaken seat clapped against the hard
  oaken back, and made a noise loud enough to attract the attention
  of the whole audience. Nothing was ever more cleverly contrived to
  keep people awake at church or chapel; and, no doubt, most of us
  know where they would be especially useful now."

On the latter point there is little room for doubt; but allow me to ask
whether this account of the use of the _miserere_ can be supported by
adequate authority, and is anything more than a joke? Mediaeval monks
were, doubtless, sometimes caught napping; since Dr. Maitland (_Dark
Ages_, 2nd edit. pp. 336. and 337. n.) mentions an amusing expedient
employed in the monastery of Clugni for the detection of drowsy
brethren. What I doubt is, whether the _miserere_ was intended for that
useful purpose. In the _Glossary of Architecture_ (4th edit. p. 242.)
its use is thus described:--

  "They [_misereres_] were allowed in the Roman Catholic church as a
  relief to the infirm during the long services that were required
  to be performed by the ecclesiastics in a standing posture."

In such matters, I should imagine Mr. Parker to be a better authority
than his versatile contemporary; but if they were intended and permitted
only for the _infirm_, it seems rather remarkable that they are so
general in most cathedral or monastic churches that retain their ancient
fittings. I would also ask when were they first introduced, and by whose
authority?

    QUIDAM.


JOCELINE'S LEGACY.

_The Mother's Legacy to her unborn Child_, by Elizabeth Joceline. This
is the title to a thin octave volume printed at "Oxford at the Theater
for the satisfaction of the person of quality herein concerned, 1684."
This, the first edition, is of rare occurrence; that in the British
Museum being a dirty duodecimo chap book. "The Approbation" of the
volume bears the signature of "Thos. Goad." It is addressed as a legacy
"to her truly and most dearly-loved husband, Tourell Joceline." The
letter to her husband, and _The Mother's Legacy_, are two of as
beautiful, pious, and feeling compositions, as were ever penned by
woman. The latter is so full of religious instruction and exhortation to
faith in the mercies of a Redeemer, under the apprehension that she
might not survive the birth of a child, that it is surprising this
valuable little tract has not become a standard book for distribution by
the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.

My reason for bringing it under the notice of the correspondents of
"NOTES AND QUERIES" is my strong desire to learn of what family was
Tourell Joceline, the husband of this most excellent lady. Of that of
the lady herself, I gather the following particulars from Mr. Goad's
Approbation of the volume.

Elizabeth Joceline was the wife of Tourell Joceline, granddaughter of
Doctor Chaderton, sometime Master of Queen's College, Cambridge, and
Professor of Divinity in that university; afterwards Bishop, first of
Chester, and then of Lincoln; by whom she was, from her tender years,
carefully nurtured. Her father was Sir Richard Brooke; her mother the
daughter of Dr. Chaderton. She was born in 1595, and died in childbed in
1622, six years after her marriage, as she seems to have anticipated;
and hence her previous writing of the _Legacy_. The child, a daughter,
survived the mother.

I ought to add, that I parted with the first edition of _The Mother's
Legacy_ to the Rev. C. H. Craufurd, Rector of Old Swinford,
Worcestershire, in exchange for a volume of his sermons, 1840; at the
end of which he had printed the entire of _The Mother's Legacy_, which
is well worthy to be printed separately.

    J. M. G.

  Worcester.


Minor Queries.

261. _Early Muster Rolls._--Are the muster rolls of the army that landed
with King William at Torbay, or of the army that served in Ireland in
1690 and 1691, now to be met with, and if so, where? Any information on
this subject will oblige

    BARTANUS.

  Dublin.

262. _Convocation for the Province of York._--The religious newspapers
recently gave us an account of the meeting of Convocation for the
province of _Canterbury_, but I have seen no account of the meeting of
Convocation in the province of _York_. Does that body ever meet, and is
any record kept of its proceedings?

    ENQUIRER.

263. _The Scent of the Bloodhound._--In a MS. (Camb. Univ. _Dd._ i. p.
542.) I find the following allusion to this subject:--

      "[Th]ei far as do[th] a blod hound
      [Th]at al times of [th]e yer
      Ha[th] fute and tast of eueri beste
      [Th]at hi folewi[th] fer or ner:
      But _whan [th]e hawethorn bereth blomes,
      [Th]t hound ha[th] lorn his smel,
      If he fele swetnes of [th]e flouris_;
      And [th]us [th]e hunteris tel."

Is there any truth in this statement?

    C. H.

264. _Cooper's Miniature of Cromwell._--Can any of your readers inform
me what has become of the original miniature of Oliver Cromwell painted
by Samuel Cooper? It was long in the possession of Sir Joshua Reynolds,
and given by his will to Richard Burke the younger, who survived him
only two years, dying unmarried in 1794.

Should the portrait be still extant, and the subject attract any notice,
I am prepared to supply some authentic particulars as to its early
history, respecting which Northcote was completely misinformed. See his
_Life of Reynolds_, vol. ii. p. 221. 2d edition.

    BRAYBROOKE.

  Audley End, Nov. 1.

265. _Lines on Cagliostro._--Mr. Carlyle, in _Miscellanies_, 3rd edit.,
vol. iii. p. 324., quotes the following "epigraph," as appended to a
portrait of Cagliostro:

      "De l'Ami des Humains reconnaissez les traits:
      Tous ses jours sont marques par de nouveaux bienfaits;
      Il prolonge la vie, il secourt l'indigence;
      Le plaisir d'etre utile est seul sa recompense."

Is there any possibility of ascertaining, at the present day, to which
of the countless dupes of that "quack of quacks" we are indebted for
this hyperbolical effusion?

    HENRY H. BREEN.

  St. Lucia, Sept. 1851.

266. _The Names and Numbers of British Regiments._--Formerly the
regiments in the British army were distinguished not by a particular
_number_, but the _name_ of an officer of rank.

I shall feel obliged by information on the following points:--

1. What was the origin of thus _naming_, instead of numbering,
regiments?

2. _Who_ conferred the name? Was it done at the War-office, or how?

3. If in honour of an officer commanding the corps, was the name changed
when that officer died, or removed to another regiment; or what was the
rule?

4. When did the present mode of _numbering_ regiments begin, and by whom
was it introduced; and what was the rule adopted in applying the number
to each corps? I mean, what was the principle followed in giving any
regiment a certain number? Was it according to the length of time it had
been embodied?

5. What is the guide now, in identifying a _named_ with a _numbered_
regiment?

    [Gh.]

267. _Praed's Charade._--Can any of your correspondents tell me the
answer to the following charade by W. M. Praed?

      "My first's an airy thing,
         Joying in flowers;
       Evermore wandering,
         In Fancy's bowers;
       Living on beauteous smiles
         From eyes that glisten;
       And telling of love's wiles
         To ears that listen.

      "But if, in its first flush
         Of warm emotion,
       My second come to crush
         Its young devotion,
       Oh! then it wastes away,
         Weeping and waking,
       And, on some sunny day,
         Is blest in breaking."

I have several of Praed's charades, but this is the only one of which I
have not the answer.

    E. C.

268. _Cozens the Painter._--Can any of your correspondents give me
information as to Cozens, the painter? The celebrated painter Turner has
declared that for much of the poetry of painting he is indebted to
Cozens. Now, on the wall opposite to which I am sitting, hangs a
portrait of Cozens by Pine, which has been sometime in our family. I
wish to know where I shall find mention of him, or where I can see any
of his works.

    C. S. B. S.

269. _Parliamentary Debates._--By the fortunate preservation of the MSS.
of Mr. Cavendish, there was a probability of our getting a pretty full
report of the proceedings of what has been called "the unreported
parliament," which sat from 1768 to 1774. Unfortunately, on the death of
Mr. Wright, the publication stopped, having arrived only to the debates
of March, 1771. Is there any chance of the further publication of this
important work? If not, where is the MS., and can it be consulted?

     P. D.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Merry Wakefield._--Whence arose the Yorkshire proverb "Merry
Wakefield?" Fuller mentions it in his _Worthies_; but does not give, or
guess at, its derivation.

    R. W. ELLIOT.

  [What peculiar cause of mirth the town of Wakefield hath above
  others, Fuller certainly confesses he cannot tell, unless that it
  may be entitled to that epithet from its cheapness, and the plenty
  of good cheer. Grose, however, adds, "Might it not be _mirrie_,
  that is, faithful Wakefield? and allude to some event in the
  disputes between the houses of York and Lancaster. _Mirrie-men_ is
  a term that frequently occurs in old ballads, signifying true or
  faithful men." While again it has been suggested that it derives
  this complimentary epithet from the reputation of that

      "Merry man the Pindar of the town
      Of Wakefield, George a Green, whose fames so far are blown;

  "for Braithwaite, in his _Strappado for the Divell_, applies it to
  both of them, when he speaks of

      "'Merry Wakefield and her Pindar too.']

_The two Kings of Brentford._--Occasionally when there is an expression
of ultra-friendship on the part of two persons who were before supposed,
their profession to the contrary notwithstanding, to hate each other
right heartily, the following comparison is elicited from the
bystanders: "They are like the two kings of Brentford smelling at one
nosegay." I have sought for the meaning of this _profound_ remark from
many denizens of that ancient locality, but hitherto without success; it
being, somewhat like the mud of Brentford, impenetrable.

Presuming that the remark, like most popular sayings, bears reference to
some foregone fact or event, I shall feel obliged by some one of your
contributors stating to what the adage refers, and what it is meant to
imply. Does it bear any relation to the fact that the two members for
Middlesex are nominated at Brentford? And is the comparison quoted from
any and what work?

    E. J. HYTCHE.

  [The saying owes its rise to the celebrated farce of _The
  Rehearsal_, written by _Villiers, Duke of Buckingham_, with the
  assistance of Butler, Spratt, and others, in order to correct the
  public taste by holding up the rhyming tragedies to ridicule. It
  is said that no less than ten years were employed in collecting
  and polishing the materials. The original hero was Davenant,
  satirized under the name of Bilboa; but Dryden eventually became
  its Bayes. The allusion referred to by our correspondent is to Act
  II. Sc. 2., where the stage direction is, "Enter the two Kings,
  hand in hand,"--where they probably did so--"smelling at one
  nosegay," although no such direction occurs; or to Act V. Sc. 1.,
  "The two right Kings of Brentford descend, in the clouds, singing,
  in white garments; and three Fidlers sitting before them in
  green."]

_Meaning of V. D. M._--In the church of old St. Chads, Shrewsbury, there
is a tablet to a celebrated Nonconformist minister, Rev. Job Orton,
after whose name (which is twice mentioned) occurs the (to me) uncommon
suffix or designation V.D.M written thus--Rev. Job Orton, V.D.M. "Vir
dignus memoriae," or "Veri Dei minister," &c., &c., may be suggested. All
I want to know is, whether it represents any recognised formula.

    G. R. M.

  [This suffix is _Verbi Dei Minister_, Minister of the Word of
  God.]




Replies.


ANACHRONISMS OF PAINTERS.

(Vol. iii., pp. 369. 517.; Vol. iv., p. 150.)

I have read D'Israeli's list of the above, to which J. E. alludes in
Vol. iii., p. 369., and they are certainly well-known glaring instances
of the inconsistencies and absurdities into which artists may be led by
ignorance and total want of good taste and feeling: those given by J.
E., at the same page, are also unhappy examples. I cannot, however,
think that the instance, given by G. T. R. in Vol. iii., p. 517.,
deserves to be placed in the same category: the subject is, The Woman
taken in Adultery; and G. T. R. complains of the anachronism of
Steenwyk's having represented our Saviour as writing on the ground in
_Dutch_. But this is not necessarily the result of ignorance, and is
justifiable on the ground of making the painting more intelligible to
his countrymen. For the same reason the writing is often in Latin; and,
in fact, often as the subject has been painted, I do not recollect any
instance of the proper language being used. In making the scene take
place in a building of the architecture of the thirteenth century,
Steenwyk has erred (if error it be) in company with the best Italian
masters. Both Tintoretto and Paul Veronese engraft into their paintings
the architecture and other accessories of their own day. In Tintoretto's
celebrated picture of the Marriage of Cana, the artist has made use of
the drinking vessels and loaves of bread still used in Venice at the
present day. In fact, if strict accuracy were contended for, not a
single representation by the old masters of this subject, and of the
Last Supper, would pass muster, as, according to the facts of the case,
our Saviour and His disciples would not be sitting at a table, but
reclining on the ground. But I think these liberties not only
defensible, but that the artist's faculty of thus introducing
successfully into his paintings the scenes passing before his eyes is
often a great proof of his genius; and pictures often owe much of their
power and reality to this very circumstance. Space, as well as time, is
often annihilated not from ignorance or inadvertence, but purposely,
and with the most happy results. Tintoretto, in a painting of the
Entombment of Christ, has introduced the stable of Bethlehem in the
background; thus finely contrasting the birthplace of Him who was found
"lying in a manger" with the fulfillment of the prophecy of His being
"with the rich in His death:" and such liberties both of time and place
are equally allowable in pictures of at all an imaginative character,
the artist feeling that by sacrificing a minor and lower truth he can
gain a higher, or make his subject appeal more to the sympathies of his
spectators. The instance also noticed by P. P. in Vol. iv., p. 150., is
no mistake, but a legitimate employment of a symbol: the cross or flag,
with the motto "Ecce Agnus Dei," soon became the recognised symbol of
St. John the Baptist, and as such was generally used without reference
to the exact time when the motto became strictly applicable. The same
strict criticism which would disallow this license, would require the
Madonna to be always painted as a Jewess: but I cannot think that
paintings are fairly liable to such close and prosaic scrutiny. P. P.'s
instance of Zebedee's sons being represented as young children, is
treading on more doubtful ground, and some great counterbalancing gain
to the picture would alone justify such a bold alteration of facts: but
if the subject be altogether treated in an allegorical manner, it might
be defensible. His modern instances are, of course, sheer blunders, and
cannot be too severely reprehended; and artists must always remember
that such liberties should never be taken, unless by these means some
higher object is gained. Nor should modern painters expect the same
indulgence, until they express in their works the same spirit of
devotion, and simple, childlike earnestness of feeling, which
distinguish the early painters of the Italian Religious School.

    B. H. C.

  Oxford.


"AGLA," MEANING OF.

(Vol. iv., p. 116.)

I have the pleasure of being able to refer MR. MARTIN to an
interpretation of this inscription. The mystical word AGLA belongs to
that species of Cabbala, used by the Rabbinical writers, which is called
_Notaricon_, and which consists of forming one word out of the initial
letters of a sentence. Thus Agla is composed of the initials of [Hebrew]
Attah-Gibbor-Leholam-Adonai ("Thou art strong for ever, O Lord!"), and
signifies either "I reveal," or "a drop of dew," and is the cabbalistic
name of God.

They also reversed this process, and made an entire sentence
from the letters of one word: thus of [Hebrew], Bereshith, which
is the first word of Genesis, they made the sentence [Hebrew]
Bara-Rakiya-Eretz-Shamayim-Yam-Tehomoth (_i.e._ "he created the
firmament, the earth, the heavens, the sea, and the deep"). It
would, however, be more correctly written [Hebrew]. Vide _Dr.
Hook's Church Dictionary_, art. Cabbala.

In Arnaud's work on the Vaudois, translated by Acland (Murray, 1825),
there is mention made of certain inscribed talismans or preservatives,
found on the slain French soldiers of Marshal Catinat, the inscriptions
of which are given, and among them is one bearing the legend
[+]AGVA[+]BATOME[+].

    E. S. TAYLOR.

The word "AGLA" mentioned by your correspondent MR. MARTIN as being
inscribed on a ring, is mentioned by Reginald Scott in his _Discoverie
of Witchcraft_ (1584), as being inscribed on the conjuring knives
employed to describe the circles used in calling spirits. He gives a cut
of "the fashion or form of the conjuring knife, and the names thereon to
be engraved," and on one side is AGLA.

    E. H. K.

According to M. Collin de Plancy, in his _Dictionaire Infernal_, vol. i.
p. 34., this word is composed of the four first letters of the following
Hebrew words, _Athar_, _gabor leolam_, _Adonai_, "Thou art powerful and
eternal, O Lord," and was a cabbalistic word used against evil spirits.
A brooch of gold found near Devizes, and set with rubies in the form of
the letter [A], and having the word AGLA thereon, was shown at the
Winchester meeting of the Archaeological Institute by W. Herbert Williams
(_Journal_, vol. iii. p. 359.).

    EDWARD HAILSTONE.


COLONIES IN ENGLAND.

(Vol. iv., p. 272.)

  "The inhabitants of Haverfordwest derived their origin from
  Flanders, and were sent by Henry I. to inhabit these districts; a
  people brave and robust, ever hostile to the Welsh; a people, I
  say, well versed in commerce and woollen manufactures; a people
  anxious to seek gain by sea and land, in defiance of fatigue or
  danger; a hardy race, equally fitted for the plough and sword; a
  people brave and happy," &c.--_Giraldus Cambrensis._

  "A.D. 1107. About this season a great part of Flanders being
  drowned by an inundation, or breaking in of the sea, a great
  number of Flemings came to England beseeching the king to have
  some void part assigned to them, wherein they might inhabit. At
  the first they were appointed to the countrie lieing on the east
  part of the Tweed; but within four years after they were removed
  into a corner by the sea-side in Wales, called Pembrokeshire, to
  the end that they might be a defence there against the unquiet
  Welsh. It would appear by some writers that this multitude of
  Flemings consisted not onlie of such as came over about that time,
  by reason their countrie was overflowed with the sea [as ye have
  heard], but also others that arrived there _long before_, even in
  the daies of William the Conqueror, through the friendship of the
  queen, their countriewoman, sithens their numbers so increased
  that the realme of England was sore pestered with them; whereupon
  King Henrie devised to place them in Pembrokeshire, as well to
  avoide them out of the other of England, as also by their helpe to
  tame the bold and presumptuous Welshmen: which thing in those
  parts they brought verie well to pass; for after they were settled
  there, they valiantlie resisted their enemies, and made verie
  sharp wars upon them, sometimes with loss and sometimes with
  gaine."--_Holinshed._

  "Wallenses Rex Henricus, semper in rebellionem crebris
  expeditionibus in deditionem premebat; consilioque salubri nixus,
  ut eorum tumorem extenuaret, Flandrenses omnes Angliae accolas eo
  traduxit. Plures enim, qui tempore patris pro matris paterna
  cognatione confluxerant, occultabat Anglia, adeo ut ipsi regno pro
  multitudine onerosi viderentur. Quapropter omnes cum substantiis
  et necessitudinibus apud Ros provinciam Walliarum, velut in
  sentinam congessit, ut et regnum defaecaret, et hostium brutam
  temeritatem retunderet."--_William of Malmsbury._

  "The yeare 1108 the rage of the sea did overflow and drowne a
  great part of the lowe countrie of Flanders, in such sort that the
  inhabitants were driven to seeke themselves other dwellings; who
  came to King Henrie and desired him to give some voide place to
  remaine in; who being very liberal of that which was not his owne,
  gave them the lande of Ros, in Dyvet or West Wales, where
  Pembroke, Tenby, and Haverfordwest are now built; and there they
  remaine till this daie, as may be well perceived by their speeche
  and conditions, farre differing from the rest of the
  countrie."--_Powell's Welsh Chronicle._

A similar colony is located in that part of Glamorgan called Gower; and
the Flemish population, both of Ros and of Gower, still retain many
peculiar customs and words; while they scrupulously keep aloof from the
Welsh, each people looking down upon the other, and considering
intermarriage as a degradation. I have been told by a friend that
Flemish colonies were also located in Norfolk and Cambridgeshire. This
much is certain: in the last-named county fields are occasionally
divided between different proprietors, in the manner known as
"landshares," a custom which prevails to a great extent in Gower, and
also, I believe, in Ros. Am I right in considering this Flemish
peculiarity?

    SELEUCUS.

In an ancient map of this town, Pembroke (South Wales), of which the
language is Norman-French, two districts of ours are mentioned thus: _Le
grene_, which is now called "the green;" and _Monton_, now called
"mountain." As regards the first, not a portion of _green_ is
discoverable; it is a disagreeable street, close to a large mill and
sheet of water, with none of the conditions of a country green. I have
often wondered at the name, feeling persuaded that there never could
have existed such a spot here as would be so called, and was puzzled
till I last week saw this old map. Tracing the matter, although no
French substantive seems to exist spelled _grene_, the v.n. _grener_ and
its relatives afford a solution--as _grenier_ is a granary, and
_grenetis_ the mill round a coin: so that I take it for granted, as our
_green_ in fact is in the immediate neighbourhood of the corn-mill, that
from said pounding or grinding (_grener_) it solely is derived.

The solution of "mountain" is not so easy. It is a portion of the town
outside the old fortifications, at the _foot_ of a high hill; so never
could have been dignified by the term "mountain" from its height,--in
fact, it rises but little from the estuary, one arm of which here
terminates. The tide here ceases; up to this spot "la maree _monte_." Am
I right in conjecturing that _montant_ (pronounced just like _monton_),
meaning "rising" as well as mounting, may be the origin of the
designation?

All the early memorials of Pembroke are either Norman or Flemish, those
foreigners having settled here. We have no token of Welsh; perhaps there
are not six people in the town who can speak the language. The names of
some of the inhabitants are French and Flemish, and it is to be noted
that their personal appearance corresponds with the type of their
ancestral country. Our parish clerk, named _Freyne_, is a little
Frenchman to all intents and purposes; and our street-keeper, _Rushaut_,
has all the square stolidity and heavy features of the Low Countries.

Although unconnected with the foregoing, will you allow space for
another record? Only within a few years the last of a family, invariably
called "Cromwell," died. It was not their true name, but they have held
it to perpetuate the treason of their ancestor, who followed the great
Protector after he had temporarily abandoned the siege of Pembroke
Castle; and, procuring an interview on "Ridgway," an eminence between
here and Tenby, this unworthy townsman told the general to return, as
the garrison were reduced "to a bean a day." The advice was followed.
Pembroke was taken; but the stern captor ordered the traitor to be
hanged! Thenceforward the family ever went by the name of Cromwell.

    B. B.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Broad Arrow_ (Vol. iv., p. 315.).--P. C. S. S. has always understood
that the "broad arrow" on government stores represented the _Pheon_, the
well-known arms of the Sydney family. Henry Viscount Sydney, afterwards
Earl of Romney, was Master-General of the Ordnance from July, 1693, to
June, 1702.

    P. C. S. S.

_Sacro-Sancta Regum Majestas_ (Vol. iv., p. 293).--In reply to the
second query of [Greek: Boreas], I send the following extract from Sir
James Ware's _Writers of Ireland_:--

  "John Maxwell was at first promoted to the Sees of Killala and
  Achonry, and afterwards translated to the archbishopric of Tuam.
  He writ a Treatise intitled, Sacro-Sancta Regum Majestas; Printed
  London, 1643 or 1644, 4to., which he published under the name of
  J.A. In answer to which came out a Tract intitled, Lex, Rex; The
  Law and the Prince, a dispute for the just Prerogative of King and
  People. Containing the Reasons and Causes of the most necessary
  defensive Wars of the Kingdom of Scotland, and of their expedition
  for the aid and help of their dear brethren in England. In which
  their Innocency is asserted, and a full Answer is given to a
  seditious Pamphlet, intitled, Sacro-Sancta Regum Majestas, or the
  Sacred and Royal Prerogative of Christian Kings under the name of
  J. A. but penned by John Maxwell, the excommunicate Prelate.
  London, 1644, 4to."

     TYRO.

  Dublin.

Your correspondent [Greek: Boreas] asks who was the author of the
_Sancta Regum Majestas, or the Sacred and Royal Prerogative of Christian
Kings_: Oxford, 1644.

This work has been by some erroneously attributed to Archbishop Ussher,
from the supposition that the letters J.A., subscribed to the
dedication, denoted Jacobus Armachanus; they signify, however, Johannes
Alladensis, and the real author was John Maxwell, Bishop of Killala. See
Ware's _Writers of Ireland_ (Harris's edit.), p. 357.

    J. H. T.

_Grimsditch_ (Vol. iii., pp. 192. 330.).--There is a wood so called in
the parish of Saffron Walden, which has long formed a part of the Audley
End estates. It is about a mile from the town, situated on the crest of
a steep hill, on the south side of the road leading to Linton, and from
its commanding position may have been at some time a military station.
Some portions of a fosse may still be traced on the lower edge of the
wood; but no tradition connected with its history has descended to us.
Warton, in his _Account of Kiddington_, Oxon, p. 62., edition 1815,
observes that Stukeley describes a fosse called Grimsditch, near
Ditchley House, between Stunsfield and Chipping Norton, the vallum of
which was eastward. He also says that the word means "the ditch made by
magic," and was indiscriminately applied to ancient trenches, roads, and
boundaries, whether British, Roman, Saxon, or Danish.

We learn from the same work, that there exists a vallum, or ridged bank,
within two miles of Ewelme, and near to Nuffield, called Grimsditch; and
the lands adjoining to it are described in a charter in or before the
reign of Richard I. as "extra fossatum de Grimisdic."

    BRAYBROOKE.

"_'Tis Twopence now_," &c. (Vol. iv., p. 314.).--I met with the lines
mentioned by your correspondent REMIGIUS in a newspaper about twenty
years ago, and cut them out. I cannot now remember the work it was said
they were copied from, nor do I quite understand if that is the
information REMIGIUS wants, or the verses themselves: but I think the
verses, and therefore inclose them.

      "THE ABBEY: A FRAGMENT.

      "A feeling sad came o'er me, as I trod the sacred ground
      Where Tudors and Plantagenets were lying all around:
      I stepp'd with noiseless foot, as though the sound of mortal tread
      Might burst the bands of the dreamless sleep that wraps the mighty
          dead.

      "The slanting ray of the evening sun shone through those cloisters
          pale,
      With fitful light, on regal vest and warrior's sculptured mail;
      As from the stained and storied pane it danced with quivering gleam,
      Each cold and prostrate form below seem'd quickening in the beam.

      "Now sinking low, no more was heard the organ's solemn swell,
      And faint upon the listening ear the last hosanna fell;
      It died--and not a breath did stir; above each knightly stall,
      Unmoved, the banner'd blazonry hung waveless as a pall.

      "I stood alone--a living thing midst those that were no more--
      I thought on ages that were past, the glorious deeds of yore--
      On Edward's sable panoply, on Cressy's tented plain,
      The fatal Roses twined at length, on great Eliza's reign.

      "I thought on Blenheim--when, at once, upon my startled ear
      There came a sound; it chill'd my veins, it froze my heart with fear,
      As from a wild unearthly voice I heard these accents drop--
      'Sarvice is done--it's tuppence now for them as wants to stop!'"

    FANNY.

_Pauper's Badge_ (Vol. iv., p. 294.).--The 8 & 9 Wm. III. c. 30. s. 2.,
required all paupers in the receipt of parochial relief to wear a badge
bearing a large Roman "P", together with the first letter of the name of
the parish, cut either in red or blue cloth, upon the shoulder of the
right sleeve of the uppermost garment, in an open and visible manner,
under certain penalties, and prevented paupers who neglected to wear it
from being relieved. This provision of the statute was repealed by the
50 Geo. III. c. 52.; and although by the 55 Geo. III. c. 137. s. 2.
parish officers might cause goods, &c. to be branded with the word
"Workhouse," and such other mark or stamp as they thought proper, to
identify the parish, it was nevertheless provided, with the view of
preventing a revival of the former mark of degradation, that such mark
or stamp should not at any time be placed on any articles of wearing
apparel so as to be publicly visible on the exterior of the same.

    FRANCISCUS.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Well may Mr. Layard plead the interest felt in the discoveries on the
site of Nineveh as a reason for the publication in a cheap and popular
form of his _Nineveh and its Remains_: and we know no work better
calculated to give value to Mr. Murray's _Reading for the Rail than A
Popular Account of Discoveries at Nineveh_. By Austen Henry Layard,
Esq., D.C.L. _Abridged by him from his larger Work._ The value of Mr.
Layard's first and larger publication has been so generally recognised,
that in calling attention to the present work, with its numerous and
spirited woodcuts, we feel bound to confine ourselves to pointing out
the plan pursued by the author in his abridgment; namely, that of
omitting the second part of the original work, and introducing the
principal Biblical and historical illustrations into the narrative,
which has thereby been rendered more useful and complete. "As recent
discoveries," observes Mr. Layard, "and the contents of the
inscriptions, so far as they have been satisfactorily decyphered, have
confirmed nearly all the opinions expressed in the original work, no
changes on any material points have been introduced into this
abridgment. I am still inclined to believe that all the ruins explored
represent the site of ancient Nineveh; and whilst still assigning the
later monuments to the kings mentioned in Scripture, Shalmanezer,
Sennacherib, and Essarhadon, I am convinced that a considerable period
elapsed between their foundation and the erection of the older palaces
of Nimroud."

After the pictures which our facetious contemporary Punch has furnished
of the troubles which an "unprotected female" encounters, who ventures
beyond the quiet circle of her domestic duties, one is predisposed to
regard as a heroine a lady who ventures unattended on a voyage round the
world. Madame Ida Pfeiffer has done this; and her narrative of her
adventures having excited great attention both in Germany and this
country, Messrs. Longman have shown themselves excellent caterers for
the reading public, by printing as the new parts of their _Traveller's
Library_, a selected translation of them by Mrs. Percy Sinnett, under
the title of _A Lady's Voyage round the World_. The work will be read
with great pleasure and interest; and while we wonder at the writer's
extraordinary passion for travelling, we feel that she has produced such
an amusing and instructive volume that we are glad that she had the
opportunity of indulging it. Mrs. Sinnett well characterises the book on
which she has employed her talents as a translator when she says, "Its
chief attraction will most likely be found in the personal narrative and
in the singular character of the authoress; who though apparently far
removed by circumstances from the romantic or adventurous, yet passes
through the most surprising scenes, and encounters the most imminent
perils with a calm and unconscious heroism that can hardly fail to
command admiration."

_The Gentleman's Magazine_ announces that the King of Denmark has
conferred the Order of Dannebrog on M. Worsaae, the author of the
_Primeval Antiquities of Denmark_, and other important works. This will
be gratifying intelligence to all who had the pleasure of making the
acquaintance of this accomplished antiquary during his visit to this
country. We hope the time is not far distant when similar distinctions
will be conferred in England on men of learning. The necessity for the
institution of some ORDER OF MERIT is insisted upon both in the
_Gentleman's Magazine_ for this month, and _The Athenaeum_ of Saturday
last; and a communication urging its adoption, on novel and important
grounds, has reached us, unfortunately at too late a period in the week
to admit of its insertion in our present number.

Messrs. Puttick & Simpson (191. Piccadilly) will sell on Wednesday next
a portion of the Library (including numerous curious MSS. by Sir Isaac
Newton), Medals, &c. of the late Mr. Alchorne.

Messrs. Sotheby will sell on Monday and Tuesday the valuable Library of
Dr. Ford, late Principal of Magdalen Hall, and Professor of Arabic at
Oxford; and on Thursday and two following days, a valuable Collection of
Theological and Miscellaneous Books.

CATALOGUES RECEIVED.--T. Kershaw's (3. Park Street, Bristol) Catalogue
of another Portion of his Valuable Stock; W. S. Lincoln's (Cheltenham
House, Westminster Road) Catalogue No. 74. of Cheap Second-hand English
and Foreign Books; and Supplementary Catalogue of Italian Books.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

LEWIS'S LIFE OF CAXTON. 8vo. 1737.

CATALOGUE OF JOSEPH AMES'S LIBRARY. 8vo. 1760.

TRAPP'S COMMENTARY. Folio. Vol. I.

WHITLAY'S PARAPHRASE ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. Folio. Vol. I. 1706.

LONG'S ASTRONOMY. 4to. 1742.

MAD. D'ARBLAY'S DIARY. Vol. II. 1842.

ADAM'S MORAL TALES.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF DR. JOHNSON. 1805.

WILLIS'S ARCHITECTURE OF THE MIDDLE AGES. (10_s._ 6_d._ will be paid for
a copy in good condition.)

CARPENTER'S DEPUTY DIVINITY; a Discourse of Conscience. 12mo. 1657.

A TRUE AND LIVELY REPRESENTATION OF POPERY, SHEWING THAT POPERY IS ONLY
NEW MODELLED PAGANISM, &c., 1679. 4to.

ROBERT WILSON'S SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF HAWICK. Small 8vo. Printed in
1825.

JAMES WILSON'S ANNALS OF HAWICK. Small 8vo. Printed in 1850.

BARRINGTON'S SKETCHES OF HIS OWN TIME. Vol. III. London, 1830.

BRITISH POETS (CHALMERS', Vol. X.) London, 1810.

CHESTERFIELD'S LETTERS TO HIS SON. Vol. III. London, 1774.

CONSTABLE'S MISCELLANY. Vol. LXXV.

ERSKINE'S SPEECHES. Vol. II. London, 1810.

HARE'S MISSION OF THE COMFORTER. Vol. I. London, 1846.

HOPE'S ESSAY ON ARCHITECTURE. Vol. I. London, 1835. 2nd Edition.

MULLER'S HISTORY OF GREECE. Vol. II. (Library of Useful Knowledge. Vol.
XVII.)

ROMILLY'S (SIR SAMUEL) MEMOIRS. Vol. II. London, 1840.

SCOTT'S (SIR W.) LIFE OF NAPOLEON. Vol. I. Edinburgh, 1837. 9 Vol.
Edition.

SCOTT'S NOVELS. Vol. XXXVI. (Redgauntlet, II.); Vols. XLIV., XLV. (Ann
of Grerstein, I. & II.) 48 Vol. Edition.

SMOLLETT'S WORKS. Vols. II. & IV. Edinburgh, 1800. 2nd Edition.

SOUTHEY'S POETICAL WORKS. Vol. III. London, 1837.

CRABBE'S WORKS. Vol. V. London, 1831.

Four letters on several subjects to persons of quality, the fourth being
an answer to the Bishop of Lincoln's book, entitled POPERY, &c., by
Peter Walsh. 1686. 8vo.

A CONFUTATION OF THE CHIEF DOCTRINES OF POPERY. A Sermon preached before
the King, 1678, by William Lloyd, D.D. 1679. 4to.

A SERMON PREACHED AT ST. MARGARET'S, WESTMINSTER, BEFORE THE HOUSE OF
COMMONS, May 29, 1685, by W. Sherlock, D.D. 4to. London, 1685.

POPE'S LITERARY CORRESPONDENCE. Vol. III. Curll. 1735.

ALMANACS, any for the year 1752.

MATTHIAS' OBSERVATIONS ON GRAY. 8vo. 1815.

SHAKSPEARE, JOHNSON, AND STEVENS, WITH REED'S ADDITIONS. 3rd Edition,
1785. Vol. V.

SWIFT'S WORKS, FAULKNER'S EDITION. 8 Vols. 12mo. Dublin, 1747. Vol. III.

SOUTHEY'S PENINSULAR WAR. Vols. V. VI. 8vo.

JOURNAL OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF DUBLIN. Vol. I. Part I. (One or
more copies.)

THE ANTIQUARY. 8vo. Edinburgh, 1816. Vols. I. and II.

HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF TWICKENHAM, being the First Part of Parochial
Collections for the County of Middlesex, begun in 1780 by E. Ironside,
Esq., London 1797. (This work forms 1 vol. of Miscell. Antiquities in
continuation of the Bib. Topographica, and is usually bound in the 10th
Volume.)

[Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage
free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186.
Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

H. N. E. _is referred to our_ 3rd Vol. p. 224. _for information on the
subject of Supporters borne by Commoners._

J. S. B. (p. 240.) _Will this correspondent say how we can forward a
letter to him?_

H. C. DE ST. CROIX _is thanked. He will see that his kind offer has been
anticipated._

QUERIST _will find the line_--

      "Music hath charms to soothe a savage breast,"

_in Congreve's_ Mourning Bride. See "NOTES AND QUERIES," Vol. i., p.
348.

C. H. B. _The reply referred to is unfortunately mislaid. It shall
appear, or be forwarded to our correspondent._

JAGER, _who inquires respecting the song of the_ "Ram of Derby," _is
referred to our_ 2nd Vol. p. 235.

M. (Deptford) _will find the information he is in search of, respecting
the ballad of the Wars in France, in our_ 1st Vol. p. 445.

_Copies of_ JOHNSON'S PRAYERS, ATHENAGORAS, _and_ THE ANTIQUARY, _have
been reported. Will those correspondents who wished for them apply to
our Publisher?_

JARLTZBERG _is assured (and we are sure he will receive the notice
kindly) that the delay has arisen from the difficulty of reading his
very peculiar handwriting. We will endeavour to avail ourselves of some
of his communications very shortly._

J. B. (Manchester). _Some of the Replies are in type. We will send him a
slip if he will furnish us with his address._

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Finger Stocks--Plaids and Tartans--Welwood's
Memorials--Stanzas in Childe Harold--Fortune Infortune--Suicides buried
in Cross Roads--Hobbes' Leviathan--Anagrams--Alterius Orbis
Papa--Lofcop--Earwig--Nightingale and Thorn--Punishment of Edward Prince
of Wales--Descendants of John of Gaunt--Moonlight--Fides
Carbonarii--Cockney--Praed's Works--Apple Offerings--The Gododin--Paring
the Nails--Legend of the Redbreast--Nolo Episcopari--Dryden
Illustrations--Royal Library--Lord E. Fitzgerald--Walpole and
Junius--Hougoumont--Dr. Wall--Aneroid Barometer--Fermilodum--Whig and
Tory._

_Copies of our Prospectus, according to the suggestion of_ T. E. H.,
_will be forwarded to any correspondent willing to assist us by
circulating them._

VOLS. I., II., _and_ III., _with very copious Indices, may still be had,
price 9s. 6d. each, neatly bound in cloth._

NOTES AND QUERIES _is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers may receive it on Saturday. The subscription for the Stamped
Edition is 10s. 2d. for Six Months, which may be paid by Post-office
Order drawn in favor of our Publisher_, MR. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet
Street; _to whose care all communications for the Editor should be
addressed._

_Erratum._--In Mr. Murray's Advertisement of Oct. 18, the price of
Layard's _Popular Account of Nineveh_ is by error stated to be 30_s._
instead of 5_s._




PROVIDENT LIFE OFFICE, 50. REGENT STREET. CITY BRANCH: 2. ROYAL EXCHANGE
BUILDINGS.

      Established 1806.
      Policy Holders' Capital, 1,192,818_l._
      Annual Income, 150,000_l._--Bonuses Declared, 743,000_l._
      Claims paid since the Establishment of the Office, 2,001,450_l._

      _President._
      The Right Honourable EARL GREY.

      _Directors._
      The Rev. James Sherman, _Chairman_.
      Henry Blencowe Churchill, Esq., _Deputy-Chairman_.
      Henry B. Alexander, Esq.
      George Dacre, Esq.
      William Judd, Esq.
      Sir Richard D. King, Bart.
      The Hon. Arthur Kinnaird
      Thomas Maugham, Esq.
      William Ostler, Esq.
      Apsley Pellatt, Esq.
      George Round, Esq.
      Frederick Squire, Esq.
      William Henry Stone, Esq.
      Capt. William John Williams.

      J. A. Beaumont, Esq., _Managing Director_.

      _Physician_--John Maclean, M.D. F.S.S., 29. Upper Montague
      Street, Montague Square.

  NINETEEN-TWENTIETHS OF THE PROFITS ARE DIVIDED AMONG THE INSURED.

  Examples of the Extinction of Premiums by the Surrender of Bonuses.

      Date of Policy. 1806
      Sum Insured. _l._2500
      Original Premium. _l._79  10  10 Extinguished
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
          _l._1222   2   0

      Date of Policy. 1811
      Sum Insured. _l._1000
      Original Premium. _l._ 33  19   2 Ditto [Extinguished]
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
           _l._231  17   8

      Date of Policy. 1818
      Sum Insured. _l._1000
      Original Premium. _l._ 34  16  10 Ditto [Extinguished]
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
           _l._114  18  10

  Examples of Bonuses added to other Policies.

       Policy No.  521
       Date. 1807
       Sum Insured.  _l._900
       Bonus added. _l._982  12  1
       Total with Additions to be further increased. _l._1882  12  1

       Policy No. 1174
       Date. 1810
       Sum Insured. _l._1200
       Bonus added. _l._1160   5  6
       Total with Additions to be further increased. _l._2360   5  6

       Policy No. 3392
       Date. 1820
       Sum Insured. _l._5000
       Bonus added. _l._3558  17  8
       Total with Additions to be further increased. _l._8558  17  8

  Prospectuses and full particulars may be obtained upon application
  to the Agents of the Office, in all the principal Towns of the
  United Kingdom, at the City Branch, and at the Head Office, No.
  50. Regent Street.


LONDON LIBRARY, 12. St. James's Square.--

  Patron--His Royal Highness Prince ALBERT.

  This Institution now offers to its members a collection of 60,000
  volumes, to which additions are constantly making, both in English
  and foreign literature. A reading room is also open for the use of
  the members, supplied with the best English and foreign
  periodicals.

  Terms of admission--entrance fee, 6_l._; annual subscription,
  2_l._; or entrance fee and life subscription, 26_l._

  By order of the Committee.

  September, 1851.

  J. G. COCHRANE, Secretary and Librarian.


THE BEST IS THE CHEAPEST.

      The Best Congou Tea                        3_s._ 8_d._ per lb.
      The Best Souchong Tea                      4_s._ 4_d._    "
      The Best Gunpowder Tea                     5_s._ 8_d._    "
      The Best Old Mocha Coffee                  1_s._ 4_d._    "
      The Best West India Coffee                 1_s._ 4_d._    "
      The Fine True Ripe Rich Rare Souchong Tea  4_s._ 0_d._    "

  40_s._ worth or upwards sent CARRIAGE FREE to any part of England by

  PHILLIPS & CO. TEA MERCHANTS,

  No. 8. King William Street, City, London.


SIR WALTER SCOTT'S WORKS AND LIFE,

      _In Complete Uniform Sets_.

  1. THE ABBOTSFORD ILLUSTRATED EDITION.

  In 17 vols. super-royal 8vo. with upwards of 2,000 Illustrations
  on Wood and Steel, 14_l._ 2_s._ 6_d._

  [Star symbol] This Edition of the WAVERLEY NOVELS cost upwards of
  40,000_l._ Of Steel Engravings alone there are 120, after Drawings
  by STANFIELD, ROBERTS, SIR DAVID WILKIE, LEITCH, CRESWICK,
  M'CULLOCH, and other distinguished Artists. Of Engravings on Wood
  there are nearly 2,000, all of them engraved with scrupulous
  regard to accuracy of drawing and beauty of finish, and many of
  them, by their characteristic expression and spirit of execution,
  imparting an additional interest to the text which they
  illustrate.

      ARRANGEMENT.
      NOVELS               12 vols.                 _l._10   0   0
      POETRY                1  vol.                      0  18   0
      PROSE                 2  vols. at 18_s._ 0_d._}
        Ditto               1  vol.  at 10_s._ 6_d._}    2   6   6
      LIFE                  1  vol.                      0  18   0
                           --                          -----------
                           17  vols.                _l._14   2   6

  2. THE CABINET LIBRARY EDITION.

  In 98 vols. fcap. 8vo. with 200 Steel Engravings, 14_l._ 14_s._
  0_d._

      ARRANGEMENT.
      NOVELS               48 vols. at 3_s._         _l._7   4   0
      POETRY               12 vols. at 3_s._             1  16   0
      PROSE                28 vols. at 3_s._             4   4   0
      LIFE                 10 vols. at 3_s._             1  10   0
                           --                           -----------
                           98 vols.                 _l._14  14   0

  3. THE PEOPLE'S EDITION.

  In 10 vols. royal 8vo. 4_l._ 16_s._ 0_d._

      ARRANGEMENT.
      NOVELS                 5 vols. at 10_s._       _l._2  10   0
      POETRY                 1 vol.                      0  10   0
      PROSE                  2 vols. at 10_s._}
        Ditto                1 vol. at 6_s._  }          1   6   0
      LIFE                   1 vol.                      0  10   0
                            --                          ----------
                            10 vols.                 _l._4  16   0

  4. THE CABINET EDITION.

  In 49 vols. fcap. 8vo. with numerous Illustrations, 9_l._ 6_s._ 0_d._

      ARRANGEMENT.
      NOVELS                25 vols. at 4_s._        _l._5   0   0
      POETRY                 6 vols. at 4_s._            1   4   0
      PROSE                  8 vols. at 4_s._            1  12   0
      LIFE                  10 vols. at 3_s._            1  10   0
                            --                         -----------
                            49 vols.                 _l._9   6   0

  This Edition is rendered complete by adopting the following
  volumes (of similar size) from the CABINET LIBRARY EDITION,
  viz.:--

      MINSTRELSY              4 vols. at 3_s._           0  12   0
      PROSE                  14 vols. at 3_s._           2   2   0
                             --                        -----------
                             67                     _l._12   0   0

  NEW ILLUSTRATED EDITIONS,

  Suitable for Christmas Presents, Prizes, as well as Every-day
  Reading, will be published early in November.

  A New Illustrated Edition of

  THE POETICAL WORKS OF SIR WALTER SCOTT, BART., including the "Lord
  of the Isles," &c., Author's Notes, and a Life of Scott. In one
  volume, fcap. 8vo., neatly bound in cloth, gilt edges, price 5_s._
  N.B. This is the only Pocket Edition containing the Lord of the
  Isles and Copyright Notes.

  A New Illustrated Edition of

  THE TALES OF A GRANDFATHER (HISTORY OF SCOTLAND). In three neat
  volumes, fcap. 8vo. cloth, price 12_s._

  A New Illustrated Edition of

  THE TALES OF A GRANDFATHER (HISTORY OF FRANCE). In one neat
  volume, fcp. 8vo. cloth, price 4_s._

  Now reduced to 10_s._ 6_d._

  THE LIFE OF SIR WALTER SCOTT, BART., (NARRATIVE PORTION). Begun by
  Himself, and continued by J. G. Lockhart., Esq. In two volumes,
  crown 8vo. neatly bound in cloth.

  Price 3_s._ 6_d._, illustrated by upwards of 60 Woodcuts, a FOURTH
  EDITION, revised and improved, of

  THE FRUIT, FLOWER AND KITCHEN GARDEN.

  By PATRICK NEILL, LL.D., F.R.S.E., Secretary to the Caledonian
  Horticultural Society.

    "One of the best modern books on Gardening extant."--_Loudon's
    Gardener's Magazine._

    "Practical gardeners and amateurs owe a debt of gratitude to him
    for his excellent work on Horticulture, which is now one of the
    standard works on the branch of science of which it
    treats."--_Professor Dunbar's Speech in the Caledonian
    Horticultural Society._

  In a thick and closely-printed volume, price 16_s._ The FOURTH
  EDITION of the

  WEALTH OF NATIONS.

  By ADAM SMITH, LL.D.

  With a Life of the Author, Notes, and Supplemental Dissertations,
  by J. R. M'CULLOCH, Esq. This edition contains elaborate Notes on
  our MONETARY SYSTEM, the REPEAL of the CORN and NAVIGATION LAWS,
  our COLONIAL POLICY, &c. The INDEX extends to fifty
  closely-printed pages, affording facilities in the consultation of
  the work which no other edition possesses to nearly so great an
  extent.

    "Adam Smith's errors, when he fell into any, are corrected; most
    of the improvements made in his science since his time are
    recorded; and the work is not only adapted to our age, but is a
    history of past aberrations, and of the progress towards truth.
    Mr. M'Culloch's great attainments are too well known to make any
    work he publishes require any other notice or recommendation than
    such a brief description as we have now given of the contents of
    this."--_Economist._

  In a handsome vol. folio, strongly half-bound in morocco, gilt
  leaves, price 2_l._ 16_s._, a NEW EDITION of

  BLACK'S GENERAL ATLAS OF THE WORLD.

  Revised and Corrected throughout, with Numerous additional Maps.
  The work is in every respect accommodated to the present advanced
  state of geographical knowledge, and whether on the ground of
  Accuracy, Beauty of Execution, or Cheapness, the Publishers invite
  a comparison with any other work of its class. The General Index,
  an addition without which no Atlas can be deemed complete,
  contains no fewer than 60,000 Names, with their Latitude and
  Longitude, and the Number of the Map in which they will be found.

    "We are now in possession of an 'Atlas' which comprehends every
    discovery of which the present century can boast. Not a village
    nor a rivulet rendered famous by victory--not a single hamlet
    jotted down in the itinerary of the adventurous traveler--not a
    single spot which theodolite or aneroid barometer could determine
    with accuracy, has been omitted in the map.... To crown the whole,
    there is a superb index, upon the most approved plan, with a
    faithful enumeration of latitudes and longitudes. This 'Atlas'
    ought at once to supersede all other works of the kind, and no
    one, either in pursuit of truth on his own account, or attempting
    to direct the inquiries of others, will hereafter have any excuse
    for going astray."--_United Service Gazette_, February 22, 1851.

  In a thick vol. 8vo., double columns, price 12_s._, the NINTH
  EDITION, enlarged, corrected and improved, of

  A DICTIONARY OF MEDICINE FOR POPULAR USE.

  Containing an Account of Diseases and their Treatment, including
  those most frequent in Warm Climates; with Directions for
  Administering Medicines; the Regulation of Diet and Regimen; and
  the Management of the Diseases of Women and Children. By ALEXANDER
  MACAULAY, M.D., Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of
  Edinburgh, and Physician Accoucheur to the New Town Dispensary.

    "Just such a work as every head of a family ought to have on his
    book-shelf."--_Brighton Herald._

    "If sterling merit might be the passport to success, this work
    will obtain the most extensive celebrity."--_Bath Herald._

    "Calculated to accomplish all that could be wished in a Popular
    System of Medicine."--_Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal._

    "We have seen nothing of the kind better adapted for
    consultation."--_Literary Gazette._

  ADAM & CHARLES BLACK, Edinburgh; LONGMAN & CO., SIMPKIN, MARSHALL,
  & CO., WHITTAKER & CO., AND HAMILTON, ADAMS, & CO., London.


THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE AND HISTORICAL REVIEW for NOVEMBER, contains
the following articles: 1. Attempt to rectify the Calendar in England,
1584-5; 2. The Yorkshire Rebellion of 1489; 3. Nell Gwyn as represented
by Lord Rochester; 4. Foss's Lives of the Judges; 5. Peter Abelard; 6.
John de Harewell, Chancellor of Acquitaine; 7. Hartwell House, Bucks
(with four Plates), and Anecdotes of the French Royal Family there; 8.
The Duke of Albemarle and Charles II.; 9. A Tour along the Roman Wall,
by C. Roach Smith, F.S.A.; 10. Correspondence of Sylvanus Urban,
including Rambles in Germany, Royal Titles of Peerage, Treatment of
Lunatics, The true Use of Heraldry, &c. &c.; With Notes of the Month,
Historical Chronicle, and Obituary, including Memoirs of Dr. Kidd, Mr.
Baker the Historian of Northamptonshire, Mr. Davy of Ufford, James
Fenimore Cooper, Rev. Robert Gutch, Rev. William Field, Mr. Benj. Gibson
the Sculptor, &c. &c. Price 2_s._ 6_d._

  NICHOLS & SON, 25. Parliament Street.


MSS., Deeds, Charters, Autographs, &c.

  MESSRS. PUTTICK & SIMPSON, Auctioneers of Literary Property, will
  sell by Auction at their Great Room, 191. Piccadilly, on SATURDAY,
  November 15, a very Important Collection of MANUSCRIPTS,
  illustrative of Family and County History, consisting of Original
  Deeds, Charters, and Miscellaneous Documents, connected with
  nearly every English County, and embracing numerous Royal, Noble,
  and other Families, from the Twelfth Century to the Seventeenth,
  and including many scarce and valuable Autographs.--Catalogues
  will be sent on application (if in the country, on receipt of two
  stamps).


ALMANACKS FOR 1852.

  WHITAKER'S CLERGYMAN'S DIARY, for 1852, will contain a Diary, with
  Table of Lessons, Collects, &c., and full directions for Public
  Worship for every day in the year, with blank spaces for
  Memoranda: A List of all the Bishops and other Dignitaries of the
  Church, arranged under the order of their respective Dioceses;
  Bishops of the Scottish and American Churches; and particulars
  respecting the Roman Catholic and Greek Churches; together with
  Statistics of the various Religious Sects in England; Particulars
  of the Societies connected with the Church; of the Universities,
  &c. Members of both Houses of Convocation, of both Houses of
  Parliament, the Government, Courts of Law, &c. With Instructions
  to Candidates for Holy Orders; and a variety of information useful
  to all Clergymen, price in cloth 3_s._, or 5_s._ as a pocket-book
  with tuck.

  THE FAMILY ALMANACK AND EDUCATIONAL REGISTER for 1852 will
  contain, in addition to the more than usual contents of an
  Almanack for Family Use, a List of the Universities of the United
  Kingdom, with the Heads of Houses, Professors, &c. A List of the
  Various Colleges connected with the Church of England, Roman
  Catholics, and various Dissenting bodies. Together with a complete
  List of all the Foundation and Grammar Schools, with an Account of
  the Scholarships and Exhibitions attached to them; to which is
  added an Appendix, containing an Account of the Committee of
  Council on Education, and of the various Training Institutions for
  Teachers; compiled from original sources.

  WHITAKER'S PENNY ALMANACK FOR CHURCHMEN. Containing thirty-six
  pages of Useful Information, including a Table of the Lessons;
  Lists of both Houses of Parliament, &c. &c., stitched in a neat
  wrapper.

  JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford and London.


Vols. I. and II. now ready.

  Elegantly bound in ultramarine cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ each.

  GIRLHOOD OF SHAKSPEARE'S HEROINES. A Series of Fifteen Tales. By
  MARY COWDEN CLARKE. Periodically, in One Shilling Books each
  containing a complete Story.

      Vol. I. Price 6_s._
      Tale I. PORTIA; THE HEIRESS OF BELMONT.
      Tale II. THE THANE'S DAUGHTER.
      Tale III. HELENA; THE PHYSICIAN'S ORPHAN.
      Tale IV. DESDEMONA; THE MAGNIFICO'S CHILD.
      Tale V. MEG AND ALICE; THE MERRY MAIDS OF WINDSOR.

      VOL. II. Price 6_s._
      Tale VI. ISABELLA; THE VOTARESS.
      Tale VII. KATHARINA AND BIANCA; THE SHREW, AND THE DEMURE.
      Tale VIII. OPHELIA; THE ROSE OF ELSINORE.
      Tale IX. ROSALIND AND CELIA; THE FRIENDS.
      Tale X. JULIET; THE WHITE DOVE OF VERONA.

      VOL. III. (In progress.)
      Tale XI. BEATRICE AND HERO; THE COUSINS.
      Tale XII. OLIVIA; THE LADY OF ILLYRIA.

  SMITH & CO., 136. Strand; and SIMPKIN & CO., Stationer's Hall Court.


LITERARY DIARIES FOR THE NEW YEAR.

  I.

  THE PRIVATE DIARY; Arranged, Printed, and Ruled for an account of
  every Day's Employment. With Index and Appendix. Post 8vo.
  strongly half-bound. 4_s._ 6_d._

  II.

  THE STUDENT'S JOURNAL; formed on the plan of the "Private Diary."
  Post 8vo. half-bound. 4_s._ 6_d._

  III.

  THE LITERARY DIARY; or Complete Common-Place Book. With an
  Explanation, and an Alphabet. Post 4to. strongly half-bound.
  12_s._

  IV.

  A POCKET COMMON-PLACE BOOK. With Locke's Index. Post 8vo. strongly
  half-bound. 8_s._ 6_d._

  London: TAYLOR, WALTON, & MABERLY, 28. Upper Gower Street; and 27.
  Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND

      ANNUITY SOCIETY,

  3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

  Founded A.D. 1812.

      _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

      _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

  _Consulting Counsel._--Sir William P. Wood, M.P.,
  Solicitor-General.

  _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

  _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age. _l._  _s._ _d._

      17    1    14    4
      22    1    18    8
      27    2     4    5
      32    2    10    8
      37    2    18    6
      42    3     8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


Cloth, One Shilling, pp. 160., by post 1_s._ 6_d._

  WELSH SKETCHES, chiefly ECCLESIASTICAL, to the Close of the
  Twelfth Century. By the Author of "Proposals for Christian Union,
  &c."

  CONTENTS:--1. Bardism. 2. The Kings of Wales. 3. The Welsh Church.
  4. Monastic Institutions. 5. Giraldus Cambrensis.

  JAMES DARLING, Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields.


On Monday next will be published, price 12_s._, 8vo. cloth, a new and
important Work on Heraldry, with upwards of 200 Illustrations on wood,
entitled

  THE PURSUIVANT OF ARMS; or, Heraldry Founded upon Facts. By J. R.
  PLANCHE, Esq., F.S.A. Also, in the press, a new Story for
  Christmas, with Illustrations by James Godwin, by the Author of "A
  Trap to Catch a Sunbeam," "The Dram Chintz," &c., to be called

  "THE HOUSE ON THE ROCK."

  W. N. WRIGHT, bookseller to the Queen, 60. Pall Mall.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, November, 8. 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-IV]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 88  | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No. 89  | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No. 90  | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No. 91  | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 92  | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No. 93  | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No. 94  | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No. 95  | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No. 96  | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov. 1, 1851       | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number
106, November 8, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NOV 8, 1851 ***

***** This file should be named 39091.txt or 39091.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/0/9/39091/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
