The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ciphers For the Little Folks, by Dorothy Crain

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ciphers For the Little Folks
       A Method of Teaching the Greatest Work of Sir Francis Bacon

Author: Dorothy Crain

Release Date: March 15, 2012 [EBook #39149]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CIPHERS FOR THE LITTLE FOLKS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









  THE DOROTHY CRAIN SERIES


  Ciphers
  For the Little Folks

  A Method of Teaching
  The Greatest Work of Sir Francis Bacon
  Baron of Verulam, Viscount St. Alban


  Designed to Stimulate Interest in Reading, Writing and Number Work,
  by Cultivating the Use of an Observant Eye


  With an
  Appendix on the Origin, History and Designing of the Alphabet
  _By_ Helen Louise Ricketts


  RIVERBANK LABORATORIES
  EDUCATIONAL DEPARTMENT
  DOROTHY CRAIN, _Director of Kindergarten_
  GENEVA, ILLINOIS




  Copyright, 1916
  GEORGE FABYAN




INTRODUCTION


These lessons are presented as suggestions with the idea that the teacher
or parent will adapt, lengthen, shorten, or remake, as the needs of the
little folk demand. Their value will depend on the way in which they are
brought before the children.

The aim is not to impose on children adult knowledge and accomplishments,
but to afford them experiences that on their own account appeal to them,
and at the same time have educational value and significance.

Children should have a great deal of handwork; they do their best thinking
when they are planning something to do with their hands. Their attention
is much more easily focused upon something they are doing with their hands
than upon something which they hear or read. Building with the blocks,
paper folding and cutting, painting and drawing, and what is known as
constructive work, are all means of self-expression.

An explanatory paragraph will accompany each lesson. In order that the
workings of the Biliteral Cipher, from which these lessons were derived,
may be more readily understood, a short explanation will follow for the
guidance of the teacher or parent, to whom it is left to choose the best
methods of explaining the Cipher to the children, step by step.

The Biliteral Cipher devised by Francis Bacon and explained in detail in
his Advancement of Learning (see Spedding's English edition of Bacon's
Works, Vol. IV, pages 444-447) is based upon the mathematical fact that
the transposition of two objects (blocks, letters, etc.) will yield 32
dissimilar combinations, of which only 24 would be necessary to represent
all the letters in our alphabet (_i_ and _j_, _u_ and _v_ being used
interchangeably in the 16th Century). Lesson I of this series shows the 24
combinations used by Bacon, and constitutes the "Code" or "Key."

By reference to Lesson I it will be seen that variations in the grouping
of _a_'s and _b_'s, five at a time, are made to represent each letter of
the alphabet, except that _i_ and _j_ and _u_ and _v_ are regarded as
interchangeable. In all the succeeding lessons, objects are chosen to
represent _a_ or _b_, and the order or succession of their grouping, when
compared with the code (Lesson I), will determine the letter they
represent.

Words in a language being made up simply of combinations of letters, it is
clear that as long as only two differences are available, words can be
built up by making the proper combinations according to the code. Any
differences will do, and to this fact are due the possibilities for the
exercise of the thinking powers, imagination, and skill on the part of
children in this work. Lesson VI, for example, combines elements of
instruction and play in an interesting manner. The transmission of words
and sentences can be accomplished even without the use of objects, for two
different motions of the fingers or hands will do; likewise two different
sounds--in fact any differences perceptible to any of the five senses can
be used. "Wig-wagging" as used by the U. S. Army Signal Service is based
upon this Cipher. Thus many games can be planned which will have an
educational value in training to a higher efficiency every faculty the
child possesses.

The lessons have been arranged in a sequence according to their increasing
order of complexity, leading up gradually to the presentation of the
possibility of sending hidden messages in an open communication without
arousing any suspicion as to the presence of anything secret. In Lesson
XIV the phrase "Biliteral Cipher" is made to contain the hidden word "Key"
by the use of a capital letter for the _a_ form and a small letter for the
_b_ form. Of course the differences between the _a_ form and the _b_ form
can be made much less apparent than the differences between capital and
small letters; in fact the differences can be made so small that they
would be imperceptible to the casual observer, but it still would be
possible to distinguish them. It is in this phase of the work that
accuracy and care in the formation of letters may be taught, not only in
script or handwriting, but also in printing, both of which are now fast
becoming lost arts. Cipher writing, if properly taught, will give practice
in penmanship that will be interesting and not onerous to children.

The adaptability of the Biliteral Cipher to the manifold uses to which it
can be put makes its pedagogical possibilities far-reaching; and the field
for the exercise of the faculties of both teacher and pupil, parent and
child, is one of the broadest, most instructive and entertaining that has
ever been opened to the little folks of primary age.

Any further information which the instructor may care to secure will be
furnished on application to the Riverbank Laboratories.

Dorothy Crain




TRAINING THE EYE TO SEE


That the faculty of sight needs training will be admitted by every
reasonable person, but how best to give the eye this advantage is a
question which has never been settled. An English hunter, the author of a
book on Norway, gives some interesting hints upon the matter:

    The reason that the different characteristics of tracks are not
    observed by the untrained eye is not because they are so very small as
    to be invisible, but because they are--to that eye--so inconspicuous
    as to escape notice. In the same way the townsman will stare straight
    at a grouse in the heather, or a trout poised above the gravel in the
    brook, and will not see them; not because they are too small, but
    because he does not know what they look like in those positions. He
    does not know, in fact, what he is looking for, and a magnifying glass
    would in no wise help him. To the man who does not know what to look
    for, the lens may be a hindrance, because it alters the proportions to
    which his mind is accustomed, and still more because its field is too
    limited.--Youth's Companion.


LESSON I

This lesson is intended to teach the code or key. Attention is called to
the mathematical regularity of its construction, which will enable the
teacher to demonstrate it in a very simple manner. First write the column
of numbers from 1 to 24. Then opposite number 1 place five red circles in
a row. Under the last one in this row, and on a line with number 2 place a
blue circle, and continue alternating red and blue down the column. Then
under the 4th red circle in the 1st row place another red one, then two
blue ones, alternating 2 reds with 2 blues down the column. In the 3rd
column the reds and blues alternate in sets of four; in the 2nd column, in
sets of eight, and in the 1st column, in sets of 16. Since only 24
combinations are necessary, the last eight of the possible 32 have been
omitted. Now opposite these 24 combinations place the letters of the
alphabet in regular order, remembering that I and J, U and V are used
interchangeably.

To facilitate the use of the code the red and the blue circles may be
designated by small _a_ and small _b_ respectively. The right hand section
of this lesson gives the code worked out on this plan and makes future
reference easy. In all the succeeding lessons one form (whether it be
blocks, beads, yarn or what not) will be called the _a_ form, and the
other will be called the _b_ form. On account of the nature of the code,
the _a_ forms always predominate; and in getting together materials for
this work, the teacher should be guided accordingly.

[Illustration:

   1  o  o  o  o  o   A  = a a a a a
   2  o  o  o  o  o   B  = a a a a b
   3  o  o  o  o  o   C  = a a a b a
   4  o  o  o  o  o   D  = a a a b b
   5  o  o  o  o  o   E  = a a b a a
   6  o  o  o  o  o   F  = a a b a b
   7  o  o  o  o  o   G  = a a b b a
   8  o  o  o  o  o   H  = a a b b b
   9  o  o  o  o  o  I-J = a b a a a
  10  o  o  o  o  o   K  = a b a a b
  11  o  o  o  o  o   L  = a b a b a
  12  o  o  o  o  o   M  = a b a b b
  13  o  o  o  o  o   N  = a b b a a
  14  o  o  o  o  o   O  = a b b a b
  15  o  o  o  o  o   P  = a b b b a
  16  o  o  o  o  o   Q  = a b b b b
  17  o  o  o  o  o   R  = b a a a a
  18  o  o  o  o  o   S  = b a a a b
  19  o  o  o  o  o   T  = b a a b a
  20  o  o  o  o  o  U-V = b a a b b
  21  o  o  o  o  o   W  = b a b a a
  22  o  o  o  o  o   X  = b a b a b
  23  o  o  o  o  o   Y  = b a b b a
  24  o  o  o  o  o   Z  = b a b b b
]


LESSON II

[Illustration]

Short lines represent the _a_ form, long lines, the _b_ form. The cipher
word is "the." Various forms of sewing cards, or yarns of different colors
may be used.


LESSON III

[Illustration]

In this weaving mat the light squares represent the _a_ form, the dark
ones, the _b_ form. The arrow marks the starting point, and the reading
proceeds from left to right in each line. The cipher message is "Mary had
a little lamb." Any sentence containing the requisite number of letters
can be inserted on the same principle.


LESSON IV

[Illustration]

This lesson embodies what may be designated as a symbolic cipher design.
This design conveys the idea of the setting sun, and hence the cipher word
contained within is "sunset." Red sticks represent the _b_ form, orange
sticks, the _a_ form. The arrow marks the starting point, and the reading
proceeds in a clockwise direction.


LESSON V

[Illustration]

This is another symbolic cipher design picturing "Humpty-Dumpty." The blue
squares represent the _a_ form, the red squares the _b_ form. The cipher
message is "sat on a wall." The blank squares can be filled by colored
crayons or blocks, and the children can thus practice the building of the
message by referring to the code in Lesson I.


LESSON VI

[Illustration]

Another symbolic cipher design in which the hens represent the _b_ form,
the chicks the _a_ form. The cipher word is "egg," reading from left to
right.

This sort of symbolic cipher designing is susceptible of endless
variation, and gives a hint of the possibility of drawing cipher pictures.

A sufficient supply is furnished so that when cut out, the hens and chicks
may be utilized to spell out various words under the direction of the
teacher.


LESSON VII--THE TIME-TEACHING CLOCK

In this clock the movable colored dots indicating the minutes are used to
spell out the time in cipher. In the working cards to be provided for the
child the colored dots are to be inserted in the holes made for the
purpose around the face of the clock. There being sixty dots, any phrase
expressive of time not exceeding twelve letters in length (that is, twelve
times five dots for each letter equals 60) is available for indicating the
time in cipher. That is to say, any phrase such as "half-past ten,"
"nine-thirty," etc., can be indicated on the clock by using five times as
many dots as there are letters in the phrase selected. Should there be
less than twelve letters in the phrase, the holes remaining are to be left
blank.

This lesson is extremely flexible in respect to the many combinations
which it makes possible. The teacher or parent should bear in mind that
the most effective use of the clock is to be attained by first choosing a
phrase designating some time of the day which is significant in the daily
experience of the child--such as the opening or closing hour of school,
the play hour, the dinner hour, or "bed-time." This phrase is converted
into cipher by having the child place the dots representing the letters of
the phrase, beginning at the figure twelve, around the clock face. After
this has been done the child should be asked to "decipher" the phrase by
naming the letter which each group of five dots stands for. When this is
accomplished, the ability to read the time becomes an unconscious
achievement, since the hands of the clock are then placed by the parent or
teacher, or by the child under her direction, in the proper position to
indicate the deciphered phrase. If, for example, the phrase "half-past
nine" is selected and the child has extracted this from the colored dot
combination, the hands of the clock are moved to nine-thirty. The child,
with the phrase fresh in his mind, learns from this the position of the
hands of the clock representing the time, since the mental image of the
clock face with the hands in the required position establishes an
association which becomes indelibly impressed on the child's mind.

The method here described is the best for young children. With children of
more advanced age and greater ability to use their own minds, the reverse
practice may be followed. The teacher may name the phrase designating the
time, and direct the child to put in place the colored dots representing
the letters of the phrase by referring for each letter to the code. This
requires an intelligence of a higher order than the method first
described.

[Illustration]

By reference to the code the arrangement of the dots on the clock will be
found to spell the time indicated by the hands, i. e., "five past four."
The red dots represent the _a_, the blues the _b_.


LESSON VIII

[Illustration]

On this cipher necklace the square beads represent the _a_ form, the round
beads the _b_ form. The cipher words are "Yankee Doodle." For working this
or any other appropriate phrase, the child should string the beads on one
of the laces provided.


LESSON IX

[Illustration]

This is similar to the preceding lesson except that in this case the blue
beads represent the _a_ form, the orange beads, the _b_ form. The cipher
words are "A Cipher Chain."


LESSON X

[Illustration]

This cipher necklace combines both Lessons VIII and IX, and shows how two
ciphers may be infolded at once. Reading the beads first as regards their
shape and using the same system as in Lesson VIII, the necklace still
spells out the word "Yankee Doodle." Then reading the beads as regards
color, the words "A Cipher Chain" are deciphered, as in Lesson IX. This
lesson gives a hint of the possibility of enfolding three, four, or five
cipher messages at once.


LESSON XI

[Illustration]

In this lesson comes the first step in showing how a cipher message may be
hidden within an ordinary architectural example. The red circles represent
the _a_ form, the blue ones the _b_ form; the reading proceeds in exactly
the same way in which the figure is written. The cipher phrase is "United
States." Any figures can be selected for the children to form, provided,
when formed, they contain the requisite number of circles of each color.


LESSON XII

[Illustration]

The cipher word is "pasture," the red circles being the _a_ form, the blue
ones the _b_ form.


LESSON XIII

[Illustration]

The cipher word is "Barking," the red circles being the _a_ form, the blue
ones the _b_ form.


LESSON XIV

[Illustration]

The word "CIPHER" contains the hidden name "Sir Francis Bacon," the red
circles being the _a_ form, the blue ones, the _b_ form. The reading
proceeds in the same manner as the strokes of the letters would be made by
the hand. The design in the margin contains a double cipher, similar in
construction to the necklace in Lesson X. The red and blue pieces still
represent the _a_ and the _b_ forms respectively, as before, and the
cipher word is "alphabet." This constitutes the first cipher. The second
cipher is based upon the difference in shape of these pieces, the long
ones being the _a_ form, the circles, the _b_ form. The cipher word is
"decipher."


LESSON XV

[Illustration]

The phrase "Biliteral Cipher" is made to contain the hidden word "key" by
the use of a capital letter for the _a_ form, and a small letter for the
_b_ form. The borders to the lines contain the cipher word "letter," the
blue sticks being the _a_ form, the red ones the _b_ form. The reading
proceeds from left to right in each line, beginning with the line at the
top. The children may be directed to cut out any set of letters of
appropriate size to form any desired phrase, using capital and small
letters on the same principle as in the example.


LESSON XVI

[Illustration: Design for Peacock Lodge. For Col. George Fabyan.]

  CIPHER CODE

  a a a a a =  A
  a a a a b =  B
  a a a b a =  C
  a a a b b =  D
  a a b a a =  E
  a a b a b =  F
  a a b b a =  G
  a a b b b =  H
  a b a a a = I-J
  a b a a b =  K
  a b a b a =  L
  a b a b b =  M
  a b b a a =  N
  a b b a b =  O
  a b b b a =  P
  a b b b b =  Q
  b a a a a =  R
  b a a a b =  S
  b a a b a =  T
  b a a b b = U-V
  b a b a a =  W
  b a b a b =  X
  b a b b a =  Y
  b a b b b =  Z

Explanation

This architect's sketch presents an interesting method of making use of
the Biliteral Cipher. The white bricks are supposed to represent the _a_
form letters, the shaded bricks the _b_ form. Begin with the top of the
wall, at the left-hand, below the tower, read the lines from left to
right, and assign an _a_ or _b_ to each brick on that principle, dividing
off the resultant _a_'s and _b_'s into groups of five. Then refer to the
accompanying cipher code which will show you for which letter of the
alphabet each group stands. The result will be amusing as well as
interesting and instructive.




The Origin, History and Designing of the Alphabet

By HELEN LOUISE RICKETTS




THE STORY OF THE ALPHABET




CHAPTER I


I want to tell you a story about something you use every day, something
you could not get along without, and yet that you never think about or are
glad to have. I do not believe that even after I tell you several things
about it you can guess what it is.

It is one of the oldest things in the world, so old that no one knows when
it was first used.

It is a more wonderful thing, a great many people think, than the
invention of steamboats and steamcars, or of airships and submarines.

It is so important that you could not have any books without it, and if
there were no books, you would not go to school, and then how could you
learn all the things you want to know?

It is so common that you see it and hear it and use it almost every minute
of the day.

It is made of twenty-six different parts. You can make me know what these
are with a pencil or crayon. With them you speak and write and read. There
are machines which hold these parts separately or form them in groups, and
then leaving their likeness on paper give us books and stories to read.

Now I am afraid that I have told you too much! Have you guessed what these
twenty-six little tools are called? We call them, and so did your
grandfather and greatgrandfather and all the people that lived hundreds
and hundreds of years ago--the _Alphabet_.

You never knew before that the Alphabet was such a wonderful thing, did
you? Would you like now to hear the story about it?

Long, long ago in a country called Egypt, which is far across the sea (you
may find it on your map, and that will make it more interesting for you)
they had a very curious way of writing. They had no letters like our A, B,
C's, but did what we call picture writing; that is, they drew pictures
instead of writing letters and words as we do today. Their writing looked
like this--

[Illustration]

That does not look much like writing, does it? You do not know what it
means, either, do you? Yet the people at that time could read their
picture writing just as easily as we can the Alphabet writing. This is the
way they sent messages to each other and wrote down the things they wanted
to remember. Do you know that they did not have any paper in those days
long ago, either? What do you think they used? They cut their pictures on
stone, on walls of buildings, and sometimes on wood and the bark of trees.
They also had a material called papyrus, which was made from reeds growing
in the swamps of Egypt. Think what a long time it must have taken them to
write in this way, and how much easier and quicker it is for you and me
today!

To the north of Egypt there is a small country called Phoenicia. If you
will look on your map you will find that the sea comes to the very shores
of this country. In Phoenicia there were many beautiful things that
people in other countries wanted to buy. So the Phoenicians built big
ships and filled them full of the beautiful things and sailed away. Across
the water they came to a land by the name of Greece, the country you know
about where Hercules and Ulysses lived, and here they unloaded their
ships. Of course the Phoenicians brought the picture writing they had
learned from the Egyptians with them. By this time they were beginning to
think pictures took too long to draw, and they gradually changed the
pictures into signs so that they could write easier and quicker. So the
writing they brought to Greece was quite different from the picture
writing they had learned from the Egyptians. It looked like this--

[Illustration]

We cannot understand this either, can we? But you can see it is much
better than the way they wrote before.

The Greek people were very happy that the Phoenicians brought such a
wonderful way of writing with them and soon began to copy it, and use it
in their country, too. When the Phoenicians went back to their own
country the Greeks continued to use the sign writing, but changed it and
made it more beautiful. They gave it a name, too, and called it by the
names of the first two signs, _Alpha_ which means "ox," and _Beta_ which
means "house." If you put these two words, _Alpha_ and _Beta_, together,
what do you have? ALPHA-BET--the word we use today.

Now the Greeks were an adventurous people, and one day they set sail in
their ships, and went to the land of the Romans, which is now called
Italy. They liked this new country, and some of them settled there. Like
the Phoenicians long ago, they brought their new Alphabet with them. The
Romans were a great and wonderful people, but they did not know the easy
way of writing by signs that the Greeks used. They saw right away what a
fine thing this Alphabet was, and began to use it for their writing, too.
At first they wrote the signs exactly the way the Greeks did, but soon
they changed them, and made them simpler and better.




CHAPTER II


You know the story of the Alphabet from its beginning so long ago in far
Egypt to the time when it came to the Romans and how it changed from
pictures to signs and from signs at last to the letters of the Alphabet.
You know, too, how hard it was for the people to write in those days when
they had no better material than papyrus, wood and stone. That was a long,
long time ago. Would you like to hear a story about what has happened to
writing since the time of the Romans and the changes that have taken place
in the Alphabet in its travels through the countries of Europe?

The first great thing of importance was the discovery of a new material to
write on. What do you think it was?--the skins of sheep and calves! That
seems strange to us and we like the paper we use today better, but think
what a great improvement this discovery was then and how much easier
writing could be done on the smooth surface of the skin with a pen and
ink. In all of the countries except Italy this change of writing material
brought about a change in the style of lettering too. The Romans alone
kept to the simple form of lettering they had always used and did not
change it when writing on the skins. The other European countries
gradually came to vary this style and make the letters more pointed,
heavier and blacker and in some cases more elaborate. This style of
lettering was called the Gothic. Do you see the difference between these
two alphabets?

[Illustration]

The Alphabet had not been in these countries long enough yet for all the
people to have learned to write. Only a very few knew the letters, and as
all the writing was done by hand, it took a long time to write a whole
book. The few books that were written were so precious that they were
chained in the churches and monasteries and the people were only allowed
to read them there. At last in the country of Germany a man by the name
of Gutenberg thought of a way to make more books and make them faster. And
this way was by printing. Just as the Alphabet spread to the different
countries so this new way of writing spread, until all of the people of
Europe were using printing machines and making many books.

In Germany the Gothic lettering had been used when the writing was done by
hand and Gutenberg copied this style in printing the first book. When the
art of printing spread to the different countries the Gothic alphabet, of
course, came with it and was accepted as the correct style of letter. The
Romans, however, still believed their Alphabet to be the better and cut
their printing type after the Roman model. So a great quarrel sprang up
between the different countries as to which Alphabet should be used, the
Roman or the Gothic. In Italy a man called Manutius tried to settle the
quarrel by making a letter which all the printers would use and he called
his style of lettering the Italic. The printers who used the Gothic and
Roman letters also used these Italic letters, but were not willing to give
up their own style and use the Italic entirely.

We are so used to seeing and using the Alphabet today that we never ask
ourselves how the letters came to look the way they do now. Look at Plate
I, which shows a beautiful Alphabet of Gothic letters made by a famous
German artist, Albert Duerer. There are twenty-nine of them, all entirely
different, but still you can see that they are all brothers and sisters in
one big family. Do you wonder how this came about? Look at Plate II and
you will learn. The first letter _i_ is made by putting together a number
of small squares in a certain way. Can you see the way the other letters
are made from this letter _i_?--the _n_ is made by putting two _i_'s
together; the _m_, three _i_'s, and the _r_, one _i_ and an extra square
at the top. Go through the rest of the Alphabet and see if you can find
out the way it is made.

Now look at Plates III, IV, V, VI, and VII showing another Alphabet by the
same artist, which he patterned after the Roman letters. He found that
they were made according to a certain rule and proportion, and it was
these he worked out in making his Alphabet. Here you see the pattern is a
large square, and the letters are drawn very carefully in them. Did you
know before there was as much figuring and measuring done in the making of
the Alphabet as there is in building a house? Look at the letter _E_, for
example, and all the circles and squares that have been measured and drawn
to make it. You will find that every letter is made just as carefully.

Here are the three _A_'s that you see in Plate III. You will find that
they are not exactly alike. Can you see the difference between them?--_A_,
1, is cut off in a curve at the top, _A_, 2, goes straight up in a sharp
point, and _A_, 3, is cut off flat. Do you notice, too, the difference in
the thickness of the letters?

[Illustration]

Look at the other letters in this Alphabet (Plates III, IV, V, VI, and
VII) and see if you can tell me about them in the way I have told you
about the _A_'s.

For many, many years, the printers in the different countries used
Alphabets the artists had made for them, without being able to decide
which they liked the best, the Roman, Gothic or Italic. On Plate VIII you
will find a little poem by Shakespeare printed in these three Alphabets.
Which one do you like the best? I am sure you will choose the one that is
the simplest, the easiest to read and at the same time the most
beautiful--the Roman. In the quarrel which had been going on for so many
years, the Roman alphabet won the victory, and that is how it came about
that the Roman is used in printing all our newspapers and books today. At
last after so many hundreds of years it has traveled through the other
countries to us. Many times you cannot recognize the letters, and they
look very different from the Roman models from which they were patterned,
but that is because we are not as careful with the measurements and
proportions as were Albert Duerer and the other Masters in that time long
ago.




CHAPTER III


You know now the beginning of the Alphabet, the careful way it was planned
and made, and how finally after so many years it has come to be used in
the form in which we have it today. Do you remember that when Albert Duerer
made his Alphabet of Roman letters he made more than one form of each
letter--there were three _A_'s, for example. Would you like to know why he
did this? Plate IX shows you two other kinds of Alphabets made long ago by
a Spanish artist, Francisco Lucas. Look at the Italic capital letters in
the upper part of this Plate. You can easily see that there are two
different forms of the same letters, can you not? But now look at the
small letters. You still see that there are two examples of each letter,
but they are so much alike that you will have to look very carefully to
see the difference between the two forms. Why do you suppose this artist
went to the trouble to make these letters so much alike, and yet
different? Do you not think that this would be a very strange thing to do
unless there was a good reason for it? Look at the lower part of the Plate
and you will see that there are two different forms of the small Roman
letters also. Now turn back to Lesson XV. You see that by using a capital
letter for the _a_ form and a small letter for the _b_ form you were able
to hide within the phrase "_Biliteral Cipher_" the word, "_key_." You can
easily see that this would not be a good way to hide a secret, for the
difference between the large and small letters is not only easy to see,
but looks so strange that it is the first thing you notice. Now suppose
that instead of using a capital letter for the _a_ form and a small letter
for the _b_ form you use for each letter of the Alphabet, both capital and
small, two forms which were very much alike but still were different. In
the following line--

[Illustration]

you see the same phrase "_Biliteral Cipher_," but it does not look strange
to you, does it? Still, if you will study it carefully you will see that
the first _i_ is different from the second, and that the first _l_ in
"_Biliteral_" is different from the second _l_. You have guessed by this
time that the phrase "_Biliteral Cipher_," as it stands here, also
contains a hidden word. The word is "_the_." This phrase was made to
contain the word "_the_" by using the two forms of letters which you see
in the upper part of Plate IX and which were called "_doubles_" by the
printers who used them several hundred years ago. Now do you begin to see
how important these two forms are?

Look again at the little Shakespeare poem in the Italic alphabet on Plate
VIII. Now that you know about _doubles_ you can see, if you have learned
to use your eyes, that we have hidden a secret within this poem too. Would
you like to know what it is? We will help you to work it out by giving you
what is called a _Classifier_ which will make it easy to _decipher_ the
verse. On this Classifier, which you will find on Plate X, the very same
Italic letters that you saw in Plate IX have been arranged so that all the
_a_ form letters are above the shaded part and all the _b_ form letters
below. Now if you will tear out this whole page and carefully cut out
these shaded parts you can place this page over the lines of the poem in
italic letters. This will help you to decide to which form the letters of
the poem belong. Place the Classifier over the poem so that the first
letter, the capital =H= of _Have_, is between the _a_ form and the _b_
form capital =H= on the Classifier. You will see that this capital =H= of
_Have_ is the _a_ form. Now below the Classifier has been placed something
which will help you still more. All the words of the poem have been
divided and have been placed into groups of five letters. As we decided
that the =H= of _Have_ belongs to the _a_ form, we have placed an _a_
beneath the =H= in the first group of five letters. Now move the
Classifier so that the =a= in _Have_ comes between the _a_ form =a= and
the _b_ form =a= on the Classifier. You will see that this letter also
belongs to the _a_ form. If you will do the same to the rest of the
letters of this first group you will find that they are all _a_ form
letters. Now what letter of the Alphabet does a group of five _a_'s stand
for?--=A=, does it not? So the first letter in our secret is =A=. Now
place the Classifier over the rest of the letters of the poem and see to
what form they belong, just as we have done for you in the first group. If
you do your work carefully you will find the hidden secret.

If we can hide one word in "_Biliteral Cipher_" and a sentence in a short
poem, do you not see how a whole story could be hidden so carefully within
a book that it might not be discovered for many, many years?

Helen Louise Ricketts




[Illustration: PLATE I

ALPHABET by ALBERT DUeRER (A. D. 1525)]


[Illustration: PLATE II

CONSTRUCTION OF ALPHABET]


[Illustration: PLATE III

ALPHABET, with construction: A. DUeRER (A. D. 1525)]


[Illustration: PLATE IV

ALPHABET, with construction: A. DUeRER (A. D. 1525)]


[Illustration: PLATE V

ALPHABET, with construction: A. DUeRER (A. D. 1525)]


[Illustration: PLATE VI

ALPHABET, with construction: A. DUeRER (A. D. 1525)]


[Illustration: PLATE VII

ALPHABET, with construction: A. DUeRER (A. D. 1525)]


[Illustration: PLATE VIII

  Have more than thou showest,
  Speak less than thou knowest,
  Lend less than thou owest,
  Learn more than thou trowest,
  Set less than thou throwest.
                    --SHAKESPEARE.
]


[Illustration: PLATE IX

ITALIC ALPHABET, BY FRANCISCO LUCAS

ROMAN ALPHABET, BY FRANCISCO LUCAS]


[Illustration: PLATE X

THE BI-FORMED ALPHABET CLASSIFIER

For Use with the Lucas Alphabets, 1577

_a_ forms above the shaded parts, _b_ forms below

COPYRIGHTED, 1916. GEORGE FABYAN

CUT OUT SHADED PART WITH SHARP KNIFE


TRANSCRIPTION

  Havem oreth antho ushow estSp eakle sstha nthou knowe
  aaaaa
    A

  stLen dless thant houow estLe arnmo retha nthou trowe

  stSet lesst hanth outhr owest Shake spear e]




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Passages in bold are indicated by =bold=.






End of Project Gutenberg's Ciphers For the Little Folks, by Dorothy Crain

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CIPHERS FOR THE LITTLE FOLKS ***

***** This file should be named 39149.txt or 39149.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/1/4/39149/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
