The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pictures and Stories, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Pictures and Stories

Author: Unknown

Release Date: March 16, 2012 [EBook #39169]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PICTURES AND STORIES ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






CHILDREN'S BOOK COLLECTION

LIBRARY OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
LOS ANGELES


[Illustration: THE CHINESE.]

[Illustration: BOAT SAILING.]


PICTURES AND STORIES.

[Illustration]

PROVIDENCE:

Published by
GEO. P. DANIELS.
1847.





[Illustration]

The Bird let loose.


One morning Susan had promised to give her little bird his liberty. When
she had opened the door of the cage, she ran to her Mamma, and they both
watched him. He flew down and warbled the sweetest song Susan ever
heard. When he had flown away, she watched him until her eyes pained
her, and the tears rolled down her cheeks. She felt sorry to part with
him, but she knew it was wrong to deprive him of his liberty.




[Illustration]

The Poor Little Girl.


This little girl is the daughter of a poor woman, who lives in the
cottage just beyond the bridge over which you see she is passing. In her
basket she is carrying some radishes, which she sells to her more
wealthy neighbors. They all know her; and though poor, she is respected
and treated kindly by them. She has improved very much at school, though
she cannot attend as regularly as those who do not have to work for a
living.




[Illustration]

The Crying Girl.


I wonder what this little girl is crying about? O! I have found out.
John has taken the kittens from the old cat, and has drowned them in the
pond; and she is ready to call him a heartless creature for doing so. Do
you think he is? O, no. It would be cruel, indeed, to torment the
kittens as some children do; but John was told to drown them for the
convenience of the family; so dry up your tears, Miss Lucy.




[Illustration]

Good Manners.


I hope every child who reads this book will take notice of the manner in
which this little boy comes into the room where his elders are. He does
not run with all his might, neither does he forget he had a hat on. But
with his hat in his hand, and with cautious looks and becoming modesty,
he approaches to make known his errand. Many children grow up without
restraint. When they go abroad, their actions excite laughter, instead
of respect.




[Illustration]

The Little Party.


Ellen Carter was a good girl. She always loved to obey her mamma. Unlike
many naughty children, she did not stop to inquire whether it would be
agreeable to herself; but did what she was bid cheerfully and promptly.
For this reason, her mamma loved her. One fine afternoon, she permitted
her to receive a visit from two of her schoolmates, whom you see with
her, regaling themselves at the table. They behave so prettily that I
cannot think they will indulge themselves with eating to excess.




[Illustration]

Leap Frog.


This is a pretty game, and it affords proper exercise to the body; but
how often have I seen little boys after playing a while, get in a rage
with each other. They are apt to be too rough when it comes their turn
to leap, and of course the others do not like to be hurt, so the play is
soon broken up. Boys who easily fall into the habit of quarreling, had
better give up this game and indulge in others less exciting. Good
children, however, can play at any harmless game, and always preserve
their temper.




[Illustration]

The Country School Boy.


This little boy's parents live in the country, and when they wish any
thing from the town, they are obliged to go, or send a great distance
for it. He is going to town to buy some books for himself to study in at
school. His mother and sister have come out with him so far, and now
they are talking about his errand. I hope he will get the books and
arrive safe home again; and the next time we meet him he will no doubt
be a better scholar.




[Illustration]

Taking a Walk.


It is early in the morning, and little George Hervy is taking a walk
with his Papa. He arose before the sun, and having said his prayers and
washed his face, here he is skipping along by the side of his Papa, with
a bunch of flowers in his hand. What a delightful scene is spread out
before him. His little heart swells with emotions of gratitude to his
Maker, for having opened his eyes on so lovely a morning.




[Illustration]

The Kite and Ball.


These little boys are talking about their Kite and Ball. I wonder if
they have learned their lessons. Children should not neglect to learn
for the sake of playing with their toys; but when their task is done it
affords their teachers pleasure to see them join in the innocent
amusements of their playmates.--These give vigor to their bodies, and
prepare them to renew their studies with cheerfulness.




[Illustration]

The New Doll.


Miss Charlotte is well pleased with the Doll her aunt gave her. She has
already made several new dresses for it. See how delighted she appears
as she holds it up.

Are not its clothes pretty? She now knows why she learned at school to
use her needle. She can occupy her time when she is not studying, in
making up the silks and other nice articles, which her Mamma gives her
to adorn her little Doll.




[Illustration]

Little Flora.


Flora loves to walk in the garden with her Mamma when all the flowers
look so beautiful, and scent the air so sweetly. Do you see that seat?
When the mornings are fresh and lovely in spring, Flora often takes her
book and retires to it to study by herself.--And many times before other
little girls have left their pillows, she has her lesson ready to
recite.




[Illustration]

Sailing a Vessel.


Be careful, Charles; do not go too near the water; it would be a sad
affair to fall in and wet your clothes. Take care, too, not to drop the
string and let your little vessel sail out beyond your reach. It would
be a pity, indeed, to lose the fruits of so much labor as she has cost,
in so careless a manner. Now she sits beautifully on the smooth water;
the light breeze fills her sails, and her streamers are flying gaily.




[Illustration]

Henry and Emma.


What a fine horse Miss Emma has got.--I have no doubt she can manage him
better than she could the one her papa drives.--Take care Henry; do not
stumble and fall down. Take care Emma; do not use the whip. A whip for a
plaything, is quite harmless; but if used as though you were driving a
real horse, it would be quite another thing. Brother is very kind, to
take the place of a dumb animal. It would be cruel to repay his kindness
with blows. Do Henry and Emma never hurt those, who treat them kindly?




[Illustration]

Calling Names.


Do you see that little boy crying? What do you think is the cause of it?
Why, his playmate who is pointing his finger at him, called him hard
names. It is a naughty trick for children to excite each other's
passions in this way. They had much better use each other kindly. The
little girl you see, is trying to soothe him by persuasion. He should
not cry; but ought to show by his conduct, that he is above such petty
feelings. If he should do so, his companion would soon turn away with
shame.




[Illustration]

Swinging.


Mary delighted in swinging, and she had a brother who was fond of her,
and who did all that he could to please her. You see him here indulging
her with her favorite play. It is to his skill, she is indebted for this
beautiful swing, which you see he has put up in a pleasant part in the
garden. How much more agreeable it is, to behold children thus uniting
to make each other happy, than it would be to see them always jealous of
each other's enjoyment.




[Illustration: THE SQUIRREL.]

[Illustration: CALLING NAMES.]





[Illustration]


GEO. P. DANIELS,

BOOKSELLER,

No. 2 South Main Street,

PROVIDENCE, R. I.


Is extensively engaged in the publication of JUVENILE and TOY BOOKS, of
different sizes and prices. His little Books are all got up with great
taste, and illustrated with beautiful cuts. Very great care has been
taken, both in the original and selected matter, that not a word should
be introduced into them, which the most judicious parent would object to
place in the hands of his children.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pictures and Stories, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PICTURES AND STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 39169.txt or 39169.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/1/6/39169/

Produced by Jason Isbell, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
