The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Snowball, by Stanley J. Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Snowball

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Release Date: March 20, 2012 [EBook #39216]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SNOWBALL ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (New York Public Library)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/snowball00weymgoog
      (New York Public Library)






[Illustration: FLUNG A SNOWBALL AT ME. _Page 11_.]






                             THE SNOWBALL




                                  BY

                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN

              AUTHOR OF "A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE," "UNDER
                   THE RED ROBE," "MY LADY ROTHA,"
                              ETC. ETC.




                             ILLUSTRATED






                               NEW YORK
                         THE MERRIAM COMPANY
                           67 Fifth Avenue






                         Copyright, 1895, by
                         THE MERRIAM COMPANY






                        LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                              *   *   *


   Flung a snowball at me. _Frontispiece_.

   He dropped his napkin.

   "Your scribe might do for me."

   She sprang forward.

   It was the king.

   "Are you coming out there?"






                              MERRIAM'S

                            VIOLET SERIES.

                              *   *   *

                Illustrated, Square 32mo, Cloth, 40c.

                              *   *   *


     No. 6

      I.--A Man and His Model. By Anthony Hope.

     II.--The Body-Snatcher. By Robert Louis Stevenson.

    III.--The Silence of the Maharajah. By Marie Corelli.

     IV.--Some Good Intentions and a Blunder.

      V.--After To-Morrow. By the Author of "The Green Carnation."

     VI.--The Snowball. By Stanley J. Weyman.


                              *   *   *
                    OTHER VOLUMES IN PREPARATION.
                              *   *   *

       _For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent post-paid
                      upon receipt of price by_

                         THE MERRIAM COMPANY

                     _Publishers and Booksellers_

              67 FIFTH AVENUE                   NEW YORK






                            THE SNOWBALL.


The slight indisposition from which the Queen suffered in the spring
of 1602, and which was occasioned by a cold caught during her
lying-in, by diverting the King's attention from matters of State, had
the effect of doubling the burden cast on my shoulders. Though the
main threads of M. de Biron's conspiracy were in our hands as early as
the month of November of the preceding year, and steps had been
immediately taken to sound the chief associates by summoning them to
court, an interval necessarily followed during which we had everything
to fear; and this not only from the despair of the guilty, but from
the timidity of the innocent who, in a court filled with cabals and
rumors of intrigues, might see no way to clear themselves. Even the
shows and interludes which followed the Dauphin's birth, and made that
Christmas remarkable, served only to amuse the idle; they could not
disperse the cloud which hung over the Louvre, nor divert those who,
on the one side or the other, had aught to fear.

In connection with this period of suspense I recall an episode, both
characteristic in itself, and worthy, I think, by reason of its
oddity, to be set down here; where it may serve for a preface to those
more serious events, attending the trial and execution of M. de Biron,
which I shall have presently to relate.

I had occasion, about the end of the month of January, to see M. du
Hallot. The weather was cold, and partly for that reason, partly from
a desire to keep my visit, which had to do with La Fin's disclosures,
from the general eye, I chose to go on foot. For the same reason I
took with me only two armed servants, and a confidential page, the son
of my friend Arnaud. M. du Hallot, who lived at this time in a house
in the Faubourg St. Germain, not far from the College of France,
detained me long, and when I rose to leave insisted that I should take
his coach, as snow had begun to fall and already lay an inch deep in
the streets. At first I was unwilling to do this, but reflecting that
such small services are highly appreciated by those who render them,
and attach men more surely and subtly than the greatest bribes, I
finally consented, and, taking my place with some becoming
expressions, bade young Arnaud find his way home on foot.

The coach had nearly reached the south end of the Pont au Change, when
a number of youths ran by me, pelting one another with snowballs, and
shouting so lustily that I was at a loss which to admire more--the
silence of their feet or the loudness of their voices. Aware that lads
of that age are small respecters of persons, I was not surprised to
see two or three of them rush on to the bridge before us, and even
continue their Parthian warfare under the very feet of the horses. The
result was, however, that the latter presently took fright at that
part of the bridge where the houses encroach most boldly on the
roadway; and, but for the care of the running footman, who hastened to
their heads, might have done some harm either to the coach or the
passersby.

As it was, we were brought to a stop while one of the wheels was
extricated from the kennel, into which it had become wedged. Smiling
to think what the King--for he, strangely warned by Providence, was
all his life long timid in a coach--would have said to this, I went to
open the curtains, and had just effected this to a certain extent,
when one of a crowd of idlers who stood on the raised pavement beside
us deliberately lifted up his arm and flung a snowball at me.

The missile flew wide of its mark by an inch or two only. That I was
amazed at such audacity goes without saying, but in my doubt of what
it might be the prelude--for the breakdown of the coach in that narrow
place, the haunt of the rufflers and vagrants of every kind, might be
a part of a concerted plan--I fell back into my place. The coach, as
it happened, moved on with a jerk at the same moment; and before I had
well digested the matter, or had time to mark the demeanor of the
crowd, we were clear of the bridge and rolling past the Chatelet.

A smaller man might have stopped to revenge, and to cook a sprat have
passed all Paris through the net. But remembering my own youthful
days, when I attended the College of Burgundy, I set down the freak to
the insolence of some young student, and, shrugging my shoulders,
dismissed it from my thoughts. An instant later, however, observing
that the fragments of the snowball were melting on the seat by my side
and wetting the cushion, I raised my hand to brush them away. In the
act I saw, to my surprise, a piece of paper lying among the _debris_.

"Ho, ho!" said I to myself. "This is a strange snowball! I have heard
that the apprentices put stones in theirs. But paper! Let me see what
this means."

The morsel, though moistened by contact with the snow, remained
intact. Unfolding it with the greatest care--for already I began to
discern that here was something out of the common--I found written on
the inner side, in a clear, clerkly hand, the words, "_Beware of
Nicholas!_"

It will be remembered that Simon Nicholas was at this time secretary
to the King, and so high in his favor as to be admitted to the
knowledge of all but his most private affairs. Gay, and of a very
jovial wit, he was able to commend himself to Henry by amusing him;
while his years, for he was over sixty, seemed some warranty for his
discretion, and at the same time gave younger sinners a feeling of
superior worth, since they might repent and he had not. Often in
contact with him, I had always found him equal to his duties, and
though too fond of the table and of all the good things of this life,
neither given to babbling nor boasting. In a word, one for whom I had
more liking than respect.

A man in his position, however, possesses such stupendous
opportunities for evil that, as I read the warning so cunningly
conveyed to me, I sat aghast. His office gave him at all times that
ready access to the King's person which is the aim of conspirators
against the lives of sovereigns; and, short of this supreme treachery,
he was master of secrets which Biron's associates would give all to
gain. When I add that I knew Nicholas to be a man of extravagant
habits and careless life, and one, moreover, who, if rumor did not
wrong him, had lost much in that rearrangement of the finances which I
had lately effected without even the King's privity, it will be seen
that those words, "Beware of Nicholas," were calculated to occasion me
the most profound thought.

Of the person who had conveyed the missive to me I had unfortunately
seen nothing; though I believed him to be a man, and young. But the
circumstances, which seemed to indicate the extreme need of secrecy,
gave me a hint as to my own conduct. Accordingly, I smoothed my brow,
and on the coach stopping at the Arsenal descended with my usual face
of preoccupation.

At the foot of the staircase my _maitre-d'-hotel_ met me.

"M. Nicholas, the King's secretary, is here," he said. "He has been
waiting your return an hour and more, Monseigneur."

"Lay another cover," I answered, repressing the surprise I could not
but feel on hearing of this visit, so strangely _a propos_. "Doubtless
he has come to dine with me."

Barely staying to take off my cloak, I went upstairs with an air as
gay as possible, and, making my visitor a hundred apologies for the
inconvenience I had caused him, insisted he should sit down with me.
This he was nothing loth to do; though, as presently appeared, his
errand was only to submit to me some papers connected with the new tax
of a penny in the shilling, which it was his duty to lay before me.

I scolded him gayly for the long period which had elapsed since his
last visit, and succeeded so well in setting him at his ease that he
presently began to rally me on my slackness; for I could touch nothing
but a little game and a glass of water. Excusing myself as well as I
could, I encouraged him to continue the attack; and certainly, if a
good conscience waits on appetite, I had soon abundant evidence on his
behalf. He grew merry and talkative, and, telling me some free tales,
bore himself altogether so naturally that I had begun to deem my
suspicions baseless, when a chance word gave me new grounds for
entertaining them.

I was on the subject of my morning's employment. Knowing how easily
confidence begets confidence, and that in his position the matter
could not be long kept from him, I told him as a secret where I had
been.

"I do not wish all the world to know, my friend," I said; "but you are
a discreet man, and it will go no farther. I am just from Du
Hallot's."


[Illustration: HE DROPPED HIS NAPKIN. _Page 20_.]


He dropped his napkin and stooped to pick it up again with a gesture
so hasty that it caught my attention and led me to watch him.
Moreover, although my words seemed to call for an answer, he did not
speak until he had taken a deep draught of wine; and then he said
only, "Indeed!" in a tone of such indifference as might at another
time have deceived me, but now was perfectly patent.

"Yes," I replied, affecting to be engaged with my own plate (we were
eating nuts). "Doubtless you will be able to guess on what subject."

"I?" he said, as quick to answer as he had before been slow. "No, I
think not."

"La Fin," I said; "and his statements respecting M. de Biron's
friends."

"Ah!" he replied, shrugging his shoulders. He had contrived to regain
his composure, but I noticed that his hand shook, and I saw him put a
nut into his mouth with so much salt upon it that he had no choice but
to make a grimace. "They tell me he accuses everybody," he grumbled,
his eyes on his plate. "Even the King is scarcely safe from him. But I
have heard no particulars."

"They will be known by and by," I answered prudently. And after that I
did not think it wise to speak farther, lest I should give more than I
got; but as soon as he had finished, and we had washed our hands, I
led him to the closet looking on the river, where I was in the habit
of working with my secretaries. I sent them away and sat down with him
to his accounts; but in the position in which I found myself, between
suspicion and perplexity, I could so little command my attention that
I gathered nothing from their items; and had I found another doing the
King's service as negligently I had certainly sent him about his
business. Nevertheless I made some show of auditing them, and had
reached the last roll when something in the fairly written summary,
which closed the account, caught my eye. I bent more closely over it,
and presently making an occasion to carry the parchment into the next
room, compared it with the handwriting on the scrap of paper I had
found in the snowball. A brief scrutiny showed me that they were the
work of the same person!


[Illustration: "YOUR SCRIBE MIGHT DO FOR ME." _Page 23_.]


I went back to M. Nicholas, and after attesting the accounts, and
making one or two notes, remarked in a careless way on the clearness
of the hand. "I am badly in need of a fourth secretary," I added.
"Your scribe might do for me."

It did not escape me that once again M. Nicholas looked uncomfortable,
his red face taking a deeper tinge and his hand going nervously to his
pointed gray beard, "I do not think he would do for you," he answered.

"What is his name?" I asked, purposely bending over the papers and
avoiding his eyes.

"I have dismissed him," he rejoined curtly. "I do not know where he
could now be found."

"That is a pity--he writes well," I answered, as if it were nothing
but a whim that led me to pursue the subject. "And good clerks are
scarce. What was his name?"

"Felix," he said reluctantly.

I had now all I wanted. Accordingly I spoke of another matter and
shortly afterward Nicholas rose and went. But he left me in a fever of
doubt and suspicion; so that for nearly half an hour I walked up and
down the room, unable to decide whether I should treat the warning of
the snowball with contempt, as the work of a discharged servant, or on
that very account attach the more credit to it. By and by I remembered
that the last sheet of the roll I had audited bore date the previous
day; whence it was clear that Felix had been dismissed within the last
twenty-four hours, and perhaps after the delivery of his note to me.
Such a coincidence, which seemed no less pertinent than strange,
opened a wide field for conjecture; and the possibility that Nicholas
had really called on me to sound me and learn what I knew presently
occurring to my mind, brought me to a final determination to seek out
this Felix, and without the delay of an hour sift the matter to the
bottom.

Doubtless I shall seem to some to have acted precipitately, and built
much on small foundations. I answer that I had the life of the King my
master to guard, and in that cause dared neglect no precaution,
however trivial, nor any indication, however remote. Would that all my
care and vigilance had longer sufficed to preserve for France the life
of that great man! But God willed otherwise.

I sent word at once to La Font, my _valet-de-chambre_, the same who
advised me at the time of my first marriage, to come to me; and
directing him to make instant and secret inquiry where Felix, a clerk
in the Chamber of Accounts, lodged, bade him report to me on my return
from the Great Hall, where, it will be remembered, it was my custom to
give audience after dinner to all who had business with me. As it
happened, I was detained long that day, and found him awaiting me.
Being a man of few words, he said, as soon as the door was shut, "At
the 'Three Half Moons,' in the Faubourg St. Honore, Monseigneur."

"That is near the Louvre," I answered. "Get me my cloak, and your own
also; and bring your pistols. I am going for a walk. You will
accompany me."

He was a good man, La Font, and devoted to my interests. "It will be
night in half an hour, Monseigneur," he answered respectfully. "You
will take some of the Swiss?"

"In one word, no!" I rejoined. "We will go out by the stable entrance.
In the mean time, and until we return, I will bid Maignan keep the
door, and admit no one."

The crowd of those who daily left the Arsenal before nightfall
happened to be augmented on this occasion by a troop of my clients
from Mantes; tenants on the lands of Rosny, who had lingered after the
hour of audience to see the courts and garden. By mingling with these
we had no difficulty in passing out unobserved; nor, once in the
streets, where a thaw had set in, that filled the kennel with water
and the pavement with slush, was La Font long in bringing me to the
house I sought. It stood on the outskirts of the St. Honore Faubourg,
in a quarter sufficiently respectable, and a street marked neither by
extreme squalor nor extravagant ostentation--from one or other of
which all desperate enterprises, in my opinion, take their rise. The
house, which was high and narrow, presented only two windows to the
street, but the staircase was sweet and clean, and it was impossible
to cross the threshold without feeling a prepossession in Felix's
favor. Already I began to think I had come on a fool's errand.

"Which floor?" I asked La Font.

"The highest. Monsieur," he answered.

I went up softly and he followed me. Under the tiles I found a door,
and heard some one moving beyond it. Bidding La Font remain on guard
outside, and come to my aid only if I called him, I knocked boldly. A
gentle voice bade me enter, and I did so.

There was only one person in the room, a young woman with fair, waving
hair, a pale face, and blue eyes, who, seeing a cloaked stranger
instead of the friend or neighbor she anticipated, stared at me in the
utmost wonder and some alarm. The room, though poorly furnished, was
particularly neat and clean; which, taken with the woman's complexion,
left me in no doubt as to her native province. On the floor near the
fire stood a cradle; and in the window a cage with a singing bird
completed the homely and pleasant aspect of this interior, which was
such as, if I could, I would multiply by thousands in every town of
France.

A small lamp, which the woman was in the act of lighting, enabled me
to see those details, and also discovered me to her. I asked politely
if I spoke to Madame Felix, the wife of M. Felix of the Chamber of
Accounts.

"I am Madame Felix," she answered, advancing slowly toward me. "My
husband is late. Do you come from him? It is not bad news, Monsieur?"

The tone of anxiety in which she uttered her last question, and the
quickness with which she raised her lamp to scan my face, went to my
heart, already softened by this young mother in her home. I hastened
to answer that I had no bad news, and wished merely to see her husband
on business connected with his employment.

"He is very late," she said, a shade of perplexity crossing her face.
"I have never known him so late before. Monsieur is unfortunate."

I replied that with her leave I would wait; on which she very readily
placed a stool for me, and sat down herself by the cradle, I ventured
to remark that perhaps M. Nicholas had detained her husband: she
answered simply that it might be so, but that she had never known it
happen before.

"M. Felix has evening employment?" I asked after a moment's
reflection.

She looked at me in some wonder. "No," she said. "He spends his
evenings with me, Monsieur. It is not much, for he is at work all
day."

I bowed, and was preparing another question, when the sound of
footsteps ascending the stairs in haste reached my ears, and led me to
pause. Madame heard the noise at the same moment and rose. "It is my
husband," she said, looking toward the door with such a light in
her eyes as betrayed the sweetheart lingering in the wife. "I was
afraid--I do not know what I feared," she muttered to herself.


[Illustration: SHE SPRANG FORWARD. _Page 37_.]


Proposing to myself the advantage of seeing Felix before he saw me, I
pushed back my stool into the shadow, contriving to do this so
discreetly that the young woman noticed nothing. A moment later it
appeared I might have spared my pains; for at sight of her husband, a
comely young man who came in with lack-lustre eye and drooping head,
she sprang forward with a cry of dismay, and, utterly forgetting my
presence, appealed to him to know what was the matter.

He threw himself on to a stool, the first he reached, and, leaning his
elbows on the table in an attitude of extreme dejection, covered his
face with his hands. "What is it?" he said in a hollow tone. "We are
ruined, Margot. I have no more work. I am dismissed."

"Dismissed?" she ejaculated.

He nodded. "Nicholas discharged me this morning," he said, almost in a
whisper. He dared not speak louder, for he could not command his
voice.

"Why?" she asked gently, as she leant over him. "What had you done?"

"Nothing!" he answered with bitterness. "He said clerks were
plentiful, and the King or I must starve."

Hitherto I had witnessed the scene in silence, a prey to emotions so
various I will not attempt to describe them. But hearing the King's
name thus prostituted and put to base uses, I started forward with a
violence which in a moment made my presence known. Felix, confounded
by the sight of a stranger at his elbow, rose hurriedly from his seat,
and retreating before me with vivid alarm painted on his countenance,
asked with a faltering tongue who I was.

I replied in as soothing a manner as possible, that I was a friend,
anxious to assist him. Nevertheless, seeing that I kept my cloak about
my face--for I was not willing to be recognized--he continued to look
at me with distrust and terror. "What do you want?" he said, raising
the lamp much as his wife had done, to see me the better.

"The answers to one or two questions," I replied firmly. "Answer them
truly, and I promise you your troubles are at an end." So saying, I
drew from my pouch the scrap of paper which had come to me so
strangely. "When did you write this, my friend?" I continued, placing
it before him.

He drew a deep breath at sight of it, and a look of comprehension and
dismay crossed his face. For a moment he hesitated. Then in a hurried
manner he said that he had never seen the paper.

"Come," I rejoined sternly, "look at it again. Let there be no
mistake. When did you write that, and why?"

But still he shook his head; and, though I pressed him hard, continued
so stubborn in his denial that, but for the look I had seen on his
face when I first produced the paper, and the strange coincidence of
his dismissal, I might have believed him. As it was, I saw nothing for
it but to have him arrested and brought to my house, where I did not
doubt he would tell the truth; and I was about to retire to give the
necessary orders, when something in the sidelong glance I saw him cast
at his wife caught my eye and furnished me with a new idea. Acting on
this, I affected to be satisfied. I apologized for my intrusion on the
ground of mistake, and gradually withdrawing to the door asked him at
the last moment to light me downstairs.

Complying with a shaking hand, he went out before me, and had nearly
reached the foot of the staircase when I touched him on the shoulder.

"Now," I said bluntly, fixing him with my eyes, "your wife is no
longer listening, and you can tell me the truth. Who employed you to
write these words?"

Trembling so violently he had to lean on the balustrade for support,
he answered me.

"Madame Nicholas," he whispered.

"What?" I cried, recoiling. I had no doubt he was telling me the truth
now.

"The secretary's wife, do you mean? Be careful, man."

He nodded.

"When?" I asked suspiciously.

"Yesterday," he answered. "She is an old cat!" he continued, almost
fiercely. "I hate her! But my wife is jealous."

"And did you throw it into my coach," I said, "on the Pont du Change,
to-day?"

"God forbid!" he replied, shrinking into himself again. "I wrote it
for her, and she took it away. She said it was a jest she was playing.
That is all I know."

I saw it was, and after a few more words was content to dismiss him,
bidding him keep silence on the matter, and remain at home in case I
needed him. At the last, he plucked up spirit to ask me who I was; but
preferring to keep that discovery for a day still to come, when I
might appear as the benefactor of this little family, I told him
sharply that I was one of the King's servants, and so left him.

It will be believed, however, that I found the information I had
received little to my mind. The longer I dwelt on it, the more serious
seemed the matter. While I could scarcely conceive any circumstances
in which a woman would be likely to inform against her husband without
cause, I could recall more than one dangerous conspiracy which had
been frustrated by informers of that class--sometimes out of regard
for the very persons against whom they informed. Viewed in this light
only, the warning seemed to my mind sufficiently alarming, but when I
came also to consider the secrecy with which Madame Nicholas had both
prepared it--so that her hand might not be known--and conveyed it to
me, the aspect of the case grew yet more formidable. In the result, I
had not passed through two streets before my mind was made up to lay
the case before the King, and the sagacity and penetration which were
never wanting to my gracious master.

An unexpected rencontre which awaited me on my return to the Arsenal
both confirmed me in this resolution and enabled me to carry it into
effect. We succeeded in slipping in without difficulty, and duly found
Maignan on guard at the door of my apartments. But a single glance at
his face sufficed to show that something was wrong; nor did it need
the look of penitence which he assumed on seeing us--a look so piteous
that at another time it must have diverted me--to convince me that he
had infringed my orders.

"How now, sirrah?" I said angrily, without waiting for him to speak.
"What have you been doing?"

"They would take no refusal, Monseigneur," he answered plaintively,
waving his hand toward the door.

"What!" I cried sternly, astonished; for this was an instance of such
direct disobedience as I could scarce understand. "Did I not give you
the strictest orders to deny me to everybody?"

"They would take no refusal, Monseigneur," he answered penitently,
edging away from me as he spoke.

"Who are they?" I asked sternly, leaving the question of his
punishment for another season. "Speak, rascal, though it shall not
save you."

"There are M. le Marquis de la Varenne, and M. de Vitry," he said
slowly, "and M. de Vic, and M. Erard, the engineer, and M. de
Fontange, and----"

"_Pardieu!_" I cried, cutting him short in a rage; for he was going on
counting on his fingers in a manner the most provoking. "Have you let
in all Paris, dolt? Grace! that I should be served by a fool! Open the
door, and let me see them!"

With that I was about to enter; when the door, which I had not
perceived to be ajar, was suddenly thrown open, and a laughing face
thrust out. It was the King's.


[Illustration: IT WAS THE KING. _Page 48_.]


"Ha, ha! Grand-master!" he cried, vastly diverted by the success of
his jest and the abrupt change which doubtless came over my
countenance. "Never was such graceful hospitality, I'll be sworn! But
come, pardon this varlet. And now embrace me, and tell me where you
have been playing truant."

Saying these words with the charm which never failed him, and in his
time won to his side more foes than his sword ever conquered, the King
drew me into my room, where I found De Vic, Vitry, Roquelaure, and the
rest. They all laughed heartily at my surprise, nor was Maignan, who
had a pretty fancy, and was the author, it will be remembered, of that
whimsical procession to Rosny after the battle of Ivry, which I have
elsewhere described, far behind them; the rascal knowing well that the
king's presence covered all, and that in my gratification at the honor
done me I should be certain to overlook his impertinence.

Perceiving that this impromptu visit had no other object than to
divert Henry--though he was kind enough to say that he felt uneasy
when he did not see me often--I begged to know if he would honor me by
staying to sup; but this he would not do, though he consented to drink
a cup of my Arbois wine, and praised it highly. I thought I saw by and
by that he was willing to be alone with me; and as I had every reason
to desire this myself, I made an opportunity. Sending for Arnaud and
some of my gentlemen, I committed my other guests to their care, and
led the King into my closet, where, after requesting his leave to
speak on business, I proceeded to unfold to him the adventure of the
snowball, with all the particulars which I have here set down.

He listened very attentively, drumming on the table with his fingers;
nor did he move or speak when I had done but still continued in the
same attitude of deep thought. At last: "Grand-master," he said,
touching with his hand the mark of the wound which still remained on
his lip, "how long is it since Chalet's attempt--when I got this?"

"Seven years last Christmas, Sire," I answered.

"And Barriere's?"

"That was the year before. Avenious' plot was that year too."

"And the Italian, from Milan, of whom the Capuchin Honorio warned us?"

"That was two years ago, Sire."

"And how many more attempts have there been against my person?" he
went on, much moved. Then falling into a tone of extreme sadness, he
continued, "Rosny, my friend, they must succeed at last. No man can
fight against his fate. The end is sure, notwithstanding all your
fidelity and vigilance, and the love you bear me, for which I love you
too. But Nicholas? Nicholas? Yet he has been careless and distraught
of late. I have noticed it; and a month back I refused to give him an
appointment, of which he wished to have the sale."

I did not dare to speak, and for a time Henry, too, remained silent.
At length he rose with an air of resolution.

"We will clear this matter up within the hour!" he said firmly. "I
will send my people back to the Louvre, and do you, Grand-master,
order half-a-dozen Swiss to be ready to conduct us to this woman's
house. When we have heard her we shall know what to do."

I tried my utmost to dissuade him, pleading that his presence could
not be necessary, and might prove a hindrance; besides exposing his
person to a certain amount of risk. But he would not listen. When I
saw, therefore, that his mind was made up to go, and that as his
spirits rose he was inclined to welcome this little expedition as a
relief from the _ennui_ which at times troubled him, I reluctantly
withdrew my opposition and gave the necessary orders. The King
dismissed his suite with a few kind words, and in a very short space
we were on our way, under cover of darkness, to the secretary's house.

He lived at this time in a court off the Rue St. Jacques, not far from
the church of that name; and the house being remote from the eyes and
observations of the street, seemed not unfit for secret and desperate
uses.

Although we found lights shining behind several of the barred windows,
the wintry night, the darkness of the court, and perhaps the errand on
which we came, imparted so gloomy an aspect to the place that the King
hitched his sword forward, while I begged him to permit the Swiss who
accompanied us to go on with us. This, however, he would not allow,
and accordingly they were left at the entrance to the court with
orders to follow at a given signal.

On the steps, the King, who, to disguise himself the better, had
borrowed one of my cloaks, stumbled and almost fell. This threw him
into a fit of laughter; for no sooner was he engaged in an adventure
which promised to be dangerous than his spirits invariably rose to
such a degree as to make him the most charming companion in peril man
ever had. He was still shaking, and pulling me to and fro in one of
those boyish frolics which sometimes swayed him, when a sudden outcry
inside the house startled us into sobriety, and reminded us all too
soon of the business which brought us thither.

Wondering what it might mean, I was about to rap on the door with my
hilt when the King put me aside, and, by a happy instinct, tried the
latch. The door yielded to his hands, and, slowly opening, gave us
admittance.

We found ourselves in a gloomy hall, ill-lit, and hung with patched
arras. In one corner stood a group of servants. Of these some looked
scared and some amused, but all were so much taken up with the
movements of a harsh-faced woman, who was pacing the opposite side of
the hall, that they did not heed our entrance. A momentary glance at
this strange state of things showed me that the woman was Madame
Nicholas; but I was still at a loss to guess what she was doing or
what was happening in the house.

I stood a moment, but finding she still took no notice of us, I
beckoned to one of the servants, and bade him tell his mistress a
gentleman would speak with her. The man went with the message; but she
sent him off with a flea in his ear, and screamed at him so violently
that for a moment I thought she was mad. Then it appeared that the
object of her attention was a door at the side of the hall; for,
stopping suddenly in her walk, she went up to it, and struck it
passionately with her hands.

"Come out!" she cried. "Come out, you villain!"

Restraining the King, I went forward myself, and, saluting her
politely, begged a word with her apart, thinking she would recognize
me.

Her answer, however, showed that she did not. "No!" she cried, waving
me off, in the utmost excitement. "No; you will not get me away--I
know you. You are as bad one as the other." Then turning again to the
door, she continued, "Come out! Do you hear! Come out! I'll have no
more of your intrigues and your Hallots!"

I pricked up my ears at the name "But, Madame," I said, "one moment."

"Begone!" she retorted, turning on me so wrathfully that I fairly
recoiled before her. "I shall stay here till I drop; but I will have
him out and expose him. There shall be an end of his precious plots
and his Hallots if I have to go to the King!"

Words so curiously _a propos_ could not but recall to my mind the
confusion into which my mention of Du Hallot had thrown the secretary
earlier in the day. And since they seemed also to be consistent with
the warning conveyed to me, and indeed to explain it, they should have
corroborated my worst suspicions. But a sense of something unreal and
fantastic, with which I could not grapple, continued to puzzle me in
the presence of this angry woman; and it was with no great assurance
that I said, "Do I understand then, Madame, that M. du Hallot is in
that room?"


[Illustration: "ARE YOU COMING OUT THERE?" _Page 61_.]


"M. du Hallot?" she replied, in a tone that was almost a scream. "No;
but he would be if he had taken the hint I sent him! He would be! I
will have no more secrecy, however, and no more plots. I have suffered
enough already, and now Madame shall suffer if she has not forgotten
how to blush. Are you coming out there?" she continued, once more
applying herself to the door, her face inflamed with passion. "I shall
stay! Oh, I shall stay, I assure you. Until morning if necessary!"

"But, Madame," I said, beginning to see daylight, and finding words
with difficulty--for I already heard in fancy the King's laughter and
could conjure up the endless quips and cranks with which he would
pursue me--"your warning did not perhaps reach M. du Hallot!"

"It reached his coach, at any rate," the scold retorted. "Another time
I will have no half-measures. But as for that," she continued, turning
on me suddenly with her arms akimbo, and the fiercest of airs, "I
would like to know what business it is of yours, Monsieur, whether it
reached him or not! I know you--you are in league with my husband! You
are here to shelter him, and this Madame du Hallot! But----"

At that moment, however, the door at last opened; and M. Nicholas,
wearing an aspect so meek and crestfallen that I hardly knew him, came
out. He was followed by a young woman plainly dressed, and looking
almost as much frightened as himself; in whom I had no difficulty in
recognizing Felix's wife.

"Why!" Madame Nicholas cried, her face falling. "This is not--who is
this? Who--" with increased vehemence--"is this baggage, I would like
to know?"

"My dear," the secretary protested earnestly, spreading out his
hands--fortunately he had eyes only for his wife, and did not see
us--"this is one of your ridiculous mistakes! It is, I assure you.
This is the wife of a clerk whom I dismissed to-day, and she has been
with me begging me to reinstate her husband. That is all. That is all,
my dear. You have made this----"

I heard no more, for, taking advantage of the obscurity of the hall,
and the preoccupation of the couple, I made hurriedly for the door,
and passing out into the darkness, found myself at once in the embrace
of the King, who, seizing me round the neck, laughed on my shoulder
till he cried, continually adjuring me to laugh also, and ejaculating
between the paroxysms, "Poor Du Hallot! Poor Du Hallot!" with many
things of the same nature, which any one acquainted with court life
may supply for himself.

I confess I did not on my part find it so easy to laugh: partly
because I am not of so gay a disposition as that great prince, and
partly because I cannot always see the ludicrous side of events in
which I myself take part. But on the King at last assuring me that he
would not betray the secret even to La Varenne, I took comfort and
gradually reconciled myself to an episode which, unlike the more
serious events it now becomes my duty to relate, had only one result,
and that unimportant; I mean the introduction to my service of the
clerk Felix, who, proving worthy of confidence, remained with me after
the lamentable death of the King my master, and is to-day one of those
to whom I entrust the preparation of these Memoirs.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Snowball, by Stanley J. Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SNOWBALL ***

***** This file should be named 39216.txt or 39216.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/1/39216/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (New York Public Library)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
