The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fredericksburg and Its Many Points of
Interest, by R. A. Kishpaugh

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fredericksburg and Its Many Points of Interest

Author: R. A. Kishpaugh

Release Date: March 25, 2012 [EBook #39258]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FREDERICKSBURG, POINTS OF INTEREST ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)









  FREDERICKSBURG AND ITS MANY POINTS OF INTEREST


  "Proud of the marks and monuments it bears to
  testify that its association with the country
  is such that her history may not be written
  without the name of Fredericksburg."


  R. A. KISHPAUGH, Publisher
  FREDERICKSBURG. VIRGINIA


  Copyrighted 1912




[Illustration: BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF FREDERICKSBURG FROM STAFFORD HEIGHTS]




FREDERICKSBURG.


Historical Sketch.

The visitor to Fredericksburg to-day finds, instead of the easy going town
of ante-bellum days, an entirely new place risen from the ruins of war and
time, new buildings, up-to-date streets and other improvements making a
modern city of the present generation. The object of this little book is
to furnish to the traveler, facts in the history of Fredericksburg, its
many places of interest as well as an up-to-date guide to the city, and to
extend to all a "welcome to Fredericksburg."

The exact time the site of what is now Fredericksburg was visited by white
men is not known, but the general impression is that the first trip was in
1608 (one year after the landing at Jamestown). Capt. John Smith, the true
founder and father of Virginia, with a crew of twelve men and an indian of
a Potomac tribe for a guide, came to the falls of the Rappahannock just
above where Fredericksburg was afterward located, and had a severe fight
with the Rappahannocks, whom he described as the most courageous and
formidable savages he had yet encountered.

The early history of Fredericksburg is full of events[1] along the general
history of the country, it being a centre of trade, the river being wider
and deeper than the present day, and that ocean going barges and
schooners, laden with cargoes from the West Indies, Liverpool and other
ports came to Fredericksburg, and took on for their return voyage
consignments of tobacco and wheat to English and Scotch merchants. A fort
was maintained near the falls of the Rappahannock, and with 250 men the
town was legally founded in 1727 and was named for Frederick, son of
George the Second.

    [1] See Quinn's History of Fredericksburg.

Before the introduction of railroads, trade was carried on by what was
known as "Road Wagons." These wagons were of huge dimensions, their curved
bodies being, before and behind, at least twelve feet from the ground.
They had canvas covers and were drawn by four and often six horses. During
the period from 1800 to the civil war, as many as three hundred was often
seen on the streets and in the wagon yards of Fredericksburg at one time.
The country, to the Blue Ridge mountains, even to counties in the Valley
of Virginia, was thus supplied from Fredericksburg.

The part which Fredericksburg played in the civil war is so well known,
that we will be content with a brief reference. As soon as the Confederate
capitol was removed to Richmond, it became at once, and continued during
the entire war, the objective point of the Federal invasion of the South.
It was apparent, therefore, from an inspection of the map, that
Fredericksburg would necessarily witness a bloody act in that direful
drama; for she was situated half-way on the direct route between
Washington and Richmond.

If ever anywhere grim-visaged war showed his horrid front, it was at this
foredoomed, devoted town. She was the immediate theatre of one of the
bloodiest battles of the war, on December 13, 1862. In the cannonade that
ushered in that battle, a hundred and eighty guns, some of them seige
pieces, carrying seventy pound projectiles, for ten mortal hours poured a
pitiless storm of shot and shell upon the helpless town. No such
cannonade, save that which preceded Pickett's charge at Gettysburg, was
ever heard upon this continent; nay, ever heard upon this earth. Four and
a half months after that bloody baptism, the town witnessed the desperate,
but unsuccessful, endeavor of Gen Sedgwick to march his corps of thirty
thousand men to the relief of Hooker, at Chancellorsville; and she was the
hospital for fifteen thousand wounded men from Grant's army in the
Wilderness campaign of May, 1864.

If lines be drawn from Fredericksburg to Chancellorsville; from
Chancellorsville to the Wilderness battlefields; from the Wilderness
battlefield to the Bloody Angle, near Spotsylvania Court-House; and from
there to the starting point at Fredericksburg, these lines will include a
space that is smaller in area than the District of Columbia. On this area
more blood was shed, and more men killed, than upon any area of equal
dimensions, in the world.

Early in December, 1862, Burnside, urged by the clamor of the Northern
press and populace, resolved to cross the Rappahannock, and despite the
near approach of winter to assume the offensive. At this time the attempt
of Federal gun boats to pass up the river to Fredericksburg had been
frustrated by Stuart and some field batteries.

On December 13, 1862, Burnside started to cross the Rappahannock. Never
did a general or army await the attack of a more numerous enemy with
greater confidence than did Lee and the Confederates at Fredericksburg.

[Illustration: BROMPTON (THE OLD MARYE MANSION) Now the Residence of Capt.
M. B. Rowe.]

When the two pre-arranged signal guns announced that the shelling of the
town was about to begin, long streams of carriages and wagons, bearing
fugitive women and children, and long processions on foot of those who
could not procure vehicles, all seeking temporary shelter in the woods and
wilderness, passed the camp fires of the Confederate soldiers in the rear
of the town.

[Illustration: FREDERICKSBURG IN 1862 Just Before the Bombardment, and
After the Car Bridge was Burnt by the Confederate Army]

[Illustration: SUNKEN ROAD--SHOWING COBB MONUMENT]

Shortly after nine o'clock the sun shining out with almost Indian Summer
warmth quickly dispelled the mists which hid the opposing armies, and as
the white folds dissolved, Jackson's men beheld the plains beneath them
dark with a moving mass of more than 40,000 foes, and from the array of
batteries upon the Stafford Heights a storm of shot and shell burst upon
the Confederate lines. The Federal army advanced within 800 yards of the
foot of the opposing ridge when suddenly the silent woods awoke to life
and the flash and thunder of more than sixty guns revealed to the Federals
the magnitude of the task they had undertaken. Column after column
advanced only to be repulsed with terrible loss, until about 12 o'clock
the Irish Brigade, under General Meagher, advanced at the spot on the
Sunken Road which is now marked by the monument to General Cobb, he having
fallen earlier in the day, and boldly charging across the shot-swept
plains, opposed to it were men as fearless and as staunch; behind that
rude stone breastworks, those who were "bone of their bone and flesh of
their flesh," as some of the soldiers of Cobb's Brigade were Irish like
themselves. On the morning of battle General Meagher had bade his men deck
their caps with sprigs of evergreen "to remind them," he said "of the land
of their birth." The symbol was recognized by their countrymen, and "Oh,
God, what a pity! Here comes Meagher's fellows," was the cry in the
Confederate ranks. The rapidly thinning line now was within a hundred
yards of their goal, suddenly a sheet of flame leaped from the parapet, to
their glory be it told, though scores be swept away, falling in their
tracks, like corn before the sicle, the ever thinning ranks dashed on. Of
the 1,200 officers and men in this gallant charge, 937 had fallen; one
body, that of an officer, was found within fifteen feet of the parapet.

[Illustration: CHANCELLORSVILLE HOUSE AS IT APPEARED DURING THE WAR]

It is due to the truth of history to say that not in all the annals of
war, neither in the "charge of the six hundred" at Balaklava, nor in
Pickett's charge at Gettysburg was there ever displayed a more signal
instance of dauntless courage than was exhibited by the men who made these
hopeless attempts to carry Marye's Heights.

Under the cover of darkness and storm the Federals withdrew across the
river two days later and resumed their position on the Stafford heights.

[Illustration: SALEM CHURCH]

[Illustration: "STONEWALL" JACKSON MONUMENT]

Fredericksburg played an important part in the battle of Chancellorsville,
on the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th of May, 1863. When General Hooker marched
ninety thousand men across the Rapidan at Germania and Ely's Ford and
entrenched them behind breast-works in the impenetrable jungle of stunted
growth that screened and protected the plateau in front of the
Chancellorsville House, he left thirty thousand men, under General
Sedgwick, on the Stafford heights, opposite Fredericksburg. General Lee
left Early with 8,500 muskets (a part of Jackson's corps) to hold back
Sedgwick, while he marched with the main body of Jackson's corps and two
divisions of Longstreet's corps to confront Hooker at Chancellorsville.
These two divisions of Longstreet's corps were those of Anderson and
McLaws. Longstreet, himself, with the other two divisions of his corps,
was down on the Blackwater, below Richmond, and did not participate in the
battle of Chancellorsville. Jackson was mortally wounded at nightfall on
Saturday, the 2nd of May, after routing and driving back in wild panic,
the right wing of Hooker's army. The next morning (Sunday) a union was
effected between Jackson's divisions and the two divisions of Longstreet's
corps, and a combined, impetuous assault carried the Federal position in
front of Chancellorsville, and the beaten enemy retreated to their second
line of breastworks. Just as General Lee was preparing (on Sunday, at
noon) to renew the assault, word reached him that Sedgwick had crossed the
river and carried the Marye Heights, and was marching on Chancellorsville
to join Hooker. The Confederate commander, in the exercise of what a great
critic of the art of war, has characterized as the highest display of
military genius, paused in his pursuit of Hooker, and, leaving Stuart in
command of Jackson's corps, in front of the disheartened Federal troops at
Chancellorsville, led the two divisions of Longstreet down the
Fredericksburg road, to unite with Early in frustrating the purpose of
Sedgwick to join his forces with those of Hooker. This was accomplished on
Monday, the 4th of May, when Sedgwick was driven across the Rappahannock,
at Bank's Ford. There was a severe engagement that raged around the "Salem
Church," four miles out from Fredericksburg, upon the old turnpike road.
Captain Featherstone, who brought a splendid Alabama company to Virginia,
at the outbreak of the war, occupied the church with his company, and did
excellent work in holding back Sedgwick until Lee arrived.

[Illustration: SEDGWICK MONUMENT]

Gen. R. E. Lee, in speaking of the privations and sacrifices incurred by
the citizens of Fredericksburg, said: "History presents no instance of a
people exhibiting a purer and more unselfish patriotism, or a higher
spirit of fortitude and courage than was evinced by the people of
Fredericksburg. They cheerfully incurred great hardships and privations,
and surrendered their homes and property to destruction, rather than yield
them in the hands of the enemies of their country."

[Illustration: MONUMENT TO GEN. HUGH MERCER]

Since the close of the Civil War, and the equally distressing war of the
reconstruction, Fredericksburg has entered upon a career of commercial and
industrial prosperity, far exceeding any ever experienced in her
ante-bellum days. Her population has largely increased. Situated half way
between Richmond and Washington. Five trunk lines with twenty-six trains
daily, run through the city, thus giving prompt and easy access to all the
large eastern and northern cities, while the water transportation puts
this section in cheap reach of the markets of the eastern seaboard. A
splendid water-power with the present capacity of 4,000 hydro-electric
horsepower with an ultimate development of 35,000 horse power, furnishes
cheap power to manufacturing plants located in the city. Mr. Frank J.
Gould, the owner of this immense power, has completed a survey for an
electric line from Richmond, Va., to Washington, D. C. This line will give
Fredericksburg direct communication by electric railway, with Washington,
D. C., Richmond, Va., and Petersburg, Va. Fifteen miles of this line north
of Richmond is now in operation.

[Illustration: NEW POSTOFFICE]

The United States government has erected a handsome Government postoffice.

The State of Virginia has established at Fredericksburg a State Normal and
Industrial School for Women, this consists of two handsome buildings
situated on part of the historic Marye's Heights.

A good High School with new modern school building, the Fredericksburg
College and two libraries furnish educational opportunities for the youths
of both sexes.

[Illustration: R. F. & P. R. R. PASSENGER DEPOT]

Four banks, a silk mill, pants factory, flour mills, foundry and machine
works, sumac mills, pickle factory, buggy, wagon and wood-working plants,
cigar factories, extract works, plow manufactories, brick yards, ice
factories, bark mills, bone mills, granite works, mattress factory,
excelsior mills, two daily and two tri-weekly newspapers, telegraph, mail,
express and freight facilities unexcelled, all help to make Fredericksburg
an industrial center of the present generation.

Good roads to Fredericksburg through the various adjoining counties open
up a larger territory for trade than ever before, and with the completion
of the National Highway from Quebec to Miami, Florida, which passes
through Fredericksburg, its many points of interest will be opened up to
the tourist.

The city is amply supplied with water, pumped from the river into a
reservoir higher than any of the houses, while the water from the old
"Poplar Spring" is also used. The city owns and operates Electric and Gas
Plants, and there is also an Incandescent Light Plant, owned by a private
corporation, for lighting houses.

The town offers inducements to enterprising capitalists, and to those who
are seeking homes in the genial climate of the South.




POINTS OF INTEREST.


Chatham

One of the most interesting points of historical interest to all who visit
Fredericksburg is the magnificent old Colonial estate of Chatham,
residence of A. Randolph Howard, Esq., beautifully situated upon Stafford
Heights overlooking the town.

[Illustration]

The house was built in 1730 by William Fitzhugh, upon a small grant of a
few hundred thousand acres from King George of England.

The architect is believed to have been the famous Sir Christopher Wrenn,
to whom is due the adaptation of the English renaissance of the Grecian
period to our Southland needs, and which has resulted in the type now
known as Colonial. Chatham is conceded to be the purest and most beautiful
specimen of the Georgian Colonial architecture in America.

Through its lordly halls have trod the beauty and chivalry of generations
of the most famous families of Virginia.

Upon its famous race-track such horses as Boston, Lexington, Timoleon, Sir
Archy, Sir Charles and hundreds of others fought out their races, while
their owners were guests of Colonel Fitzhugh.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO NATIONAL CEMETERY Showing Monument Erected by
Gen. Daniel Butterfield to 5th Corps, Army of Potomac]

At Chatham General Washington paid his addresses to the widow Curtis,
General Robert E. Lee whispered sweet words of love to a niece of Mrs.
Fitzhugh, and the immortal Lincoln reviewed the Army of the Potomac before
the battle of Fredericksburg.

General Burnside established his headquarters at Chatham, and at the foot
of its terraced lawns one of the pontoon bridges were thrown across the
river over which many a brave man passed never to return.


The National Cemetery

Located on Willis Hill, a part of the historic Marye's Heights,
overlooking Fredericksburg and the beautiful Rappahannock Valley, the
Union soldiers who were killed in the various battles around
Fredericksburg and those who died in camp are interred. This cemetery has
the largest number of interments of any in the country, there being
15,295, of these about 2,500 are known and their names, regiment and state
are registered in a book in the superintendent's office.

Just to the left entering the cemetery General Daniel Butterfield has
erected a beautiful monument to the valor of the Fifth Army Corps, which
he commanded.

To the right at the top of the hill is a monument to the 127th Regiment,
Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry, Colonel W. W. Jennings, Commanding.

In the center of the cemetery the State of Pennsylvania has erected a
monument to commemorate the charge of General Humphrey's Division, Fifth
Corps, in the battle of Fredericksburg, 1862.


The "Sentry Box"

On lower Main street was the residence of General George Weedon of
Revolutionary fame, and afterwards occupied by Colonel Hugh Mercer, a son
of General Hugh Mercer, who was killed at the battle of Princeton.

The name "Sentry Box" being applied on account of the unobstructed view
for some distance. It being used during the Revolutionary, War of 1812 and
Civil war, as a place to watch and give the alarm of the approach of the
enemy.


Rising Sun Tavern

One of the oldest buildings in Fredericksburg. General George Weeden,
years before the Revolutionary war, kept hotel in this house and was the
stopping place of Washington, LaFayette and other Colonial dignitaries.

[Illustration]

The Rising Sun Tavern is now owned by the Society for the Preservation of
Virginia Antiquities, who have renovated the building, but retaining in
every way the old style of architecture used in wooden buildings used in
the eighteenth century.


The Washington Farm

Looking directly across the river from the "Sentry Box" can be seen the
Washington Farm. This is where Geo. Washington was raised to manhood, and
it is said where he threw the silver dollar across the Rappahannock, also
where he chopped the famous cherry tree. One of the pontoon bridges used
in 1862 was built from this farm.


Kenmore

"Kenmore" was built in 1740 by Colonel Fielding Lewis, an officer who
commanded a division at the siege of Yorktown where Cornwallis
surrendered. It is said the bricks used to build this house were brought
from England, but this cannot be confirmed, but the interior stucco work
of this colonial mansion has stood for over a century and is supposed to
have been done by expert Englishmen.

[Illustration]

It was to Kenmore that Colonel Fielding Lewis took Bettie Washington,
(George's sister) as a bride.

[Illustration: VIEW IN CONFEDERATE CEMETERY]


The Mercer Monument

General Hugh Mercer, killed at the battle of Princeton, 1777, while
leading his men against the British. Over one hundred years after an
appropriation had been made by Congress, it evidently being overlooked, in
1906 the United States government erected this monument to his memory.

Situated in the center of Washington Avenue in the attitude of a patriot,
drawn sword in hand, he stands on a pedestal, ready to strike in defense
of his country. (See page 12 for illustration.)

General Mercer conducted a drug store in the building now standing, corner
Main and Amelia Streets, and lived at the "Sentry Box" with George Weeden,
until the beginning of the Revolutionary War.


Confederate Cemetery

The first Ladies Memorial Association was organized at Fredericksburg in
1865, and in response to liberal contributions the present cemetery was
laid out, and the Confederate dead who were buried at various places were
gathered together and each grave marked.

In 1874 the corner stone was laid of the monument erected on a mound in
the center of the space. This monument is about 6 feet high made of gray
granite, and on top has a life size statue of a Confederate soldier at
dress parade. On the front of the monument is the inscription "To the
Confederate Dead."

About 2,500 are buried here, of which about 600 are unknown.


[Illustration: MONUMENT TO MARY THE MOTHER OF WASHINGTON]

Mary Washington Monument

About a stone throw from Kenmore, Mary, the mother of Washington is
buried. This spot was selected by herself, declaring it to be preferable
to any location, as it could never be cultivated, being near a rocky crag,
a part of the original Kenmore land.

[Illustration: MONUMENT ERECTED IN 1833]

After the remains of the venerable matron had lain for forty-four years, a
monument was partially erected to her memory by Silas E. Burrows, a
wealthy New York merchant. The corner-stone was laid with imposing pomp on
May 7, 1833. Andrew Jackson, President of the U. S., several members of
his Cabinet, numbers of distinguished citizens from Washington, the Marine
Band and military came to swell the pageant. This monument of white
Italian marble was never finished, and for more than sixty years laid a
prey to the relic hunters and ravishes of time.

In 1889, the nation was startled with the announcement that the grave and
unfinished monument to Mary Washington would be sold at public auction
from the steps of the Capitol at Washington, indignant meetings were held
and the sale abandoned by its originators. The women of America organized
to erect a monument to the memory of their fellow countrywoman, which they
did; unveiling May 10, 1894, a monument fifty feet high, and comprising a
monolith of forty feet, standing on bases eleven feet square and ten feet
high. The whole shaft is of Barre granite and of the finest workmanship.
President Cleveland, many of his Cabinet, the Governor of Virginia, the
Marine Band, companies of military and thousands of people witnessed the
ceremony.

Just back of the monument is a ledge of rocks known as "Meditation Rock,"
where she used often to resort for private reading, meditation and prayer,
under the shade of the beautiful grove of Oak trees.


Mary Washington House

This plain, old-fashioned dwelling on the corner of Charles and Lewis
streets was the home of Mary the mother of Washington until her death in
1789.

[Illustration]

Up to the death of her husband she lived just across the river, opposite
Fredericksburg, at the "Washington Farm" and it was in these two homes the
illustrious George was raised to manhood.

This building is owned by the society for the Preservation of Virginia
Antiquities, who have put the same in thorough condition, all of the
original features of architecture and general appearance being preserved.

The front room in which she died is furnished as used by her in her
lifetime. This building is open to visitors for a small sum.


The Masonic Lodge

[Illustration]

The Masonic Lodge, in which George Washington received his first degree as
a Mason, November 4, 1752, has a cabinet of some rare and valuable relics.
Some of which are the Bible that Geo. Washington was obligated on (printed
1668), a lock of his hair, autograph passes given by him during the
Revolutionary War, the old minute book giving his initiation, passing and
raising, an oil portrait of George Washington, painted by Gilbert Stuart,
the old parlor chairs of his mother, Mary Washington, and many others,
which can be seen free of charge by applying to the Master of the Lodge.


Other Places of Interest

PRESIDENT MONROE HOUSE--Situated on Princess Anne Street one block above
the passenger depot is the old story and a half frame house to which
President James Monroe held a pocket deed to qualify him for his seat in
the House of Burgesses.

PAUL JONES HOUSE--The only home in America of John Paul Jones, on Main
Street near the depot.

[Illustration: INSIDE THE NATIONAL CEMETERY Showing Monument to
Commemorate the Charge of General Humphrey's Division 1862]

FEDERAL HILL--on Hanover street. In the latter part of the eighteenth
century the home of Thomas Reade Roots, a distinguished lawyer of that
time.

PLANTER'S HOTEL--Used before and during the Civil war as a hotel, at the
corner of Commerce and Charles Streets. In front of this hotel is a stone
block, placed there many years before the Civil war, used for the sale and
annual hire of slaves.

HOME OF GEN. DANIEL D. WHEELER--of the U. S. Army on the east side of
lower Main street. Built about 1765. Was the home of Dr. Charles Mortimer
who was physician to Mary Washington also the first Mayor of
Fredericksburg.

STEVENS HOUSE--Situated on "Sunken Road" the Confederate line of battle
1862-63 in front of fence. General Thos. R. R. Cobb, killed just inside of
yard.

ST. GEORGE'S BURYING GROUND--Colonel John Dandridge, the father of Martha
Washington was buried here in 1756. Wm. Paul, a brother of John Paul Jones
buried 1773. It is said that Fielding Lewis is buried under the steps of
the church. A number of remarkable tombstones can be found in the yard,
the inscription of one of which has puzzled all who have seen it, "Charles
M. Rathrock, departed this life Sept. 29th, 1084, aged three years."

CITY HALL--Built 1813--Used in 1824 for a grand ball and reception to
General Lafayette.

OLD EXCHANGE HOTEL (Now known as Hotel Frederick) built in 1837, part
destroyed by fire 1850, rebuilt but not used as a hotel until after the
Civil war. During the war was used as a hospital.

MASONIC GRAVEYARD--On corner of George and Charles Streets. General Lewis
Littleton was buried here in 1802.

[Illustration: Methodist Church, Baptist Church, Presbyterian Church, St.
George's Episcopal Church]

MARY WASHINGTON HOSPITAL--Erected by the ladies of Fredericksburg. Corner
stone was laid April 14th, 1899, a day to commemorate George Washington's
last visit to Fredericksburg and his dying mother. The corner-stone is a
portion of the old Mary Washington monument begun in 1833. Situated
overlooking the river and directly opposite Chatham. One of the pontoon
bridges of 1862 was directly in front of the hospital.

GUNNERY SPRING--The legend of Gunnery Spring is that all that drink of the
water will return to drink again some day. A visit to Fredericksburg is
not complete without a visit to this old spring.


Fredericksburg Churches

St. George's Episcopal Church--corner Princess Anne and George Streets, R.
J. McBryde, Rector.

Trinity Episcopal Church--corner Prince Edward and Hanover streets, Dr. H.
H. Barber, Rector.

The Presbyterian Church--corner Princess Anne and George streets, Rev. J.
H. Henderlite, Pastor.

The Baptist Church--corner Princess Anne and Amelia streets, Rev. R. A.
Williams, Pastor.

The Methodist Church--on Hanover street, Rev. J. R. Jacobs, Pastor.

St. Mary's Catholic Church--on Princess Anne street, Father Perrig,
Pastor.

[Illustration: The Will of Mary Washington is on exhibition at the Clerk's
office of the Corporation Court. This is in a good state of preservation.]




Some Interesting Facts

The first resolution declaring American Independence was passed in
Fredericksburg, April 27th, 1775, twenty-one days before the next earlier.

Seven presidents and three of the greatest military leaders was born at
Fredericksburg or within a short distance.

It was John Paul Jones, a Fredericksburg man, who raised the first flag
over our infant navy, in 1775.

At Fredericksburg and within fifteen miles, more great armies manoeuvered,
more great battles were fought, more men were engaged in mortal combat and
more officers and privates were killed and wounded than in any similar
territory in the world.

The tallest and most imposing monument erected to a woman is erected at
Fredericksburg to the memory of Mary Washington.

James Monroe, for many years a citizen of Fredericksburg, announced the
American principal known as the Monroe Doctrine.

James Madison, born near Fredericksburg, gave to the country the
Constitution of the United States.

It was Fredericksburg that gave to the country the head of the Armies in
the Great War for Independence and the first president, in the person of
the peerless Washington.


Close Driving Distance

  Sedgwick Monument                         12 miles
  "Stonewall" Jackson Monument              11   "
  Massachusetts Monument                    10   "
  Hays Monument                             10   "
  Spotsylvania C. H.                        12   "
  Salem Church                               3   "
  Chancellorsville                          10   "
  Wilderness                                15   "
  Bloody Angle                              12   "
  Hamilton's Crossing                        4   "
  Falmouth                                   1 mile
  Lacy House (Burnside Headquarters)       1/2   "
  Phillips House (Sumner's Headquarters)     1   "


Losses on the Six Battlefields

               FREDERICKSBURG-HAMILTON'S CROSSING

                                          Fed.    Con.     Total

  Fred'sburg, Dec. 13, '62, May 3-4 '63} 12,653   5,377    18,030
  Hamilton s Crossing, Dec. 13, 1862   }

                 CHANCELLORSVILLE-SALEM CHURCH

  Chancellorsville, May 1-3, 1863}        17,287  12,463    29,750
  Salem Church, May 3-4, 1863    }

                          WILDERNESS

  Wilderness, May 5-6, 1864              17,666  10,641    28,307

                         SPOTSYLVANIA

  Spotsylvania, May 8-21, 1864           15,577  11,578    27,155
                                         ------  ------    ------
                   Total                 63,183  40,059   103,242




[Illustration: FREDERICKSBURG AND ITS POINTS OF INTEREST]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fredericksburg and Its Many Points of
Interest, by R. A. Kishpaugh

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FREDERICKSBURG, POINTS OF INTEREST ***

***** This file should be named 39258.txt or 39258.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/5/39258/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
