The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 105
October 7, 1893, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 105 October 7, 1893

Author: Various

Release Date: April 1, 2012 [EBook #39332]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





       *       *       *       *       *

Punch, or the London Charivari

Volume 105, October 7th 1893

_edited by Sir Francis Burnand_

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

"DUE SOUTH!"

_On Shore in Lulworth Cove._--Odd names on this Southern coast. The
"Tilly Winn Caves,?" for example; likewise "Durdle Dhor," or "Durdle
Door." Who was MATILDA WINN; familiarly styled "TILLY"? An old
fisherman mending his nets,--he is evidently "_The_ Cove of Lulworth
Cove,"--gives me the following tale, which I set down as the

LEGEND OF TILLY WINN AND DURDLE D'OR.

  The winsome Lady MATILDA WINN,
  Was a-ris-to-crati-cal-ly thin,
    With dove-like eyes. Her golden hair
    Was circled with gems so rich and rare.
  White and pink was the healthy skin
  Of the winsome Lady MATILDA WINN.

  The Lord of LULWORTH, a somnolent Earl,
  Gave his moustache an extra curl
    As he woke in the morn, and ope'd his eye,
    A passing fair lady was passing by!
  Then he swore to himself, "Through thick and thin,
  I'll win the Lady MATILDA WINN."

  The Lord of LULWORTH, that somnolent peer,
  Gained the young lady's father's ear,
    Who said, "My TILLY must me obey.
    One week to-morrow shall be the day
  When Lulworth's Earl shall become our kin,
  By wedding my daughter! my TILLY WINN!"

  MATILDA WINN made signs from shore
  To her pirate lover, bold DURDLE D'OR.
    Who came at night with ladder of rope,
    For TILDA WINN had agreed to elope.
  "We're privately married, so 'tis no sin,"
  Quoth the beautiful Lady MATILDA WINN.

  But the somnolent Earl and the testy Lord
  Pursued and caught, ere they got aboard
    The pirate vessel, the lovers twain,
    Who leapt from the boat! And ne'er again,
  When past and gone was the tempest's din,
  Were seen DURDLE D'OR and his TILLY WINN.

There is as pleasant a little hostelrie in Lulworth Cove as is to be
found anywhere in a quiet sort of way, with lunch made and provided,
ready for all comers, be they never so plentiful. Mind always on this
coast command the lobster, he is _toujours a vos ordres_. Those who
can be content with the minimum of variety in the way of amusement,
and with the maximum of health will assuredly find it here, where they
can live the life of a sort of luxurious _Robinson Crusoe_--bathing,
fishing, walking--five or six miles from the nearest railway station,
and visited occasionally by steamboats, which cannot come in quite
close to shore, bringing passengers, from whom tidings may be obtained
of what is going on in the outer world.

_Note--Of music on board._--Almost every steamboat is accompanied by a
couple of instrumentalists--a harpist and a violinist. These duettists
do uncommonly well pecuniarily, and musically too, considering
the difficulties presented by the sea passages. One of their more
favourite performances is the _intermezzo_ from the _Rusticana_.
Returning from Swanage the wind rather interferes with the strings by
attempting to unfasten the music paper. But the violinist, well on
the alert, has foreseen the probability arising of there being "three
sheets to the wind," and has nailed his colours to the mast, that is,
has tied the music-paper firmly on to the stand. Still, in order to
grapple with rude Boreas, he has to drop a few bars of his part in the
_intermezzo_, a proceeding that causes no sort of inconvenience to the
harpist, who ingeniously "slows off," and adapts time and tune to the
exceptional situation, until the wind, being out of breath with its
mischievous exertions, allows the fiddle-strings to resume their
part in the concert, and kindly permits the two musicians to finish
triumphantly. Their gallant efforts are well rewarded, and the musical
pilgrims collect _largesse_ in a scallop-shell. Back again to P'm'th.

       *       *       *       *       *

THEN AND NOW.

MR. PUNCH'S REPLY TO THE PREMIER.

    ["There is a popular periodical which, whenever it can,
    manifests the Liberal sentiments by which it has been guided
    from the first--I mean the periodical _Punch_. At that time I
    had the honour of figuring, if I remember right, in a Cartoon
    of _Punch_, in connection with the rejection of the Paper
    Duty, and a clever Cartoon it was, for I was represented as
    a little lad in school, sitting (it was _standing_, Sir--_Mr.
    P._) upon a small stool, and Lord DERBY--the Lord DERBY of
    that day, who led the House of Lords--was standing over me
    with an immense sheet of paper, made into a fool's-cap, which
    he planted on my head."--_Mr. Gladstone at Edinburgh, Sept.
    27, 1893._]

    _See Cartoon, "The Paper Cap," in Punch_ (p. 223, vol.
    xxxviii.), _June 2, 1860_.

  THIRTY-THREE years ago, my WILLIAM, thirty-three
            years ago,
  Yet you, as of yore, are well to the fore, and _Punch_, too is
            in front also;
  And that paper cap was a popular crown, as _Punch_ at the time
            suggested;
  With the real fool's-cap, by a singular hap, "the Lord DERBY"
            himself was invested.

  _Punch_ "advised his friend GLADSTONE to look out for
            squalls, and likewise look out his umbrella."
  (_Prophetic_ that, but then _Mister P._ was always that
            sort of a fella!)
  You have used a good many "umbrellas" since then, both Old and New
            (Castle) "brollies,"
  As you needed a stout one in DERBY'S storm, so you will, my
            dear WILLIAM, in SOLLY'S.

  You have "had the honour of figuring," Sir, many times since then in
            my pages;
  As I hope, my dear WILLIAM, with all my heart, you'll continue
            to do--oh! for ages!
  The same great designer of "clever cartoons" ("our Sir JOHN")
            is as lively as ever,
  And if _you_'ll give him suitable subjects, dear boy, _he_'ll
            still furnish cartoons quite as clever.

  "Liberal sentiments"--"manifest still"--"whenever I can," you say?
            Well, Sir!
  _My_ sentiments, WILLIAM, are liberal _always_--but
            with a small _non-party_ l, Sir!
  "Liberal souls devise liberal things"--_you_ know the authority
            grand, Sir!--
  If your Liberal things are "liberal," always, by liberal things you
            shall stand, Sir.

  There! _Verb. sap._, my long-honoured old chap! May a real
            fool's-cap crown you never,
  But a Crown of Honour be yours at the end--which we'd wish to
            postpone, Sir, for ever!
  Thanks very much for your genial touch. We have pleasant joint
            memories, many,
  Since you fought the good fight on the Paper Duty and a Press at
            the Popular Penny!

       *       *       *       *       *

Colourable.

    ["The banners of most of the Dutch regiments have hitherto
    been those captured from the French at Waterloo in 1815, since
    when they have never been renewed."--_Daily News, September
    22._]

  The Dutch have had second-hand flags to fight under;
  And so if "Dutch courage" mean borrowed, what wonder?

       *       *       *       *       *

HISS-TRIONIC QUERY.--Where exists the theatrical manager who, utterly
disregardless of tradition and reckless as to the omen of "the Bird,"
would have produced a new piece for the first time _last Friday
night_, which was _Michaelmas Day_, the day sacred to the Goose? We
know of only one manager likely to be so bold, and he would not be so
audacious as to defy the combined omens of ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ichabod!

    (_As it generally seems now in Sculling Matches on the Thames._)

  Row, brothers, row! But you don't row fast!
  It's foreigner first, and Britisher last!
  JOHN no longer can sing now, "I says the Bull"
  (As in _Poor Cock Robin_), "_because I can pull!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

COAL AND DRAMA.--Mr. JOHN HOLLINGSHEAD says that the Princess's Pit,
which has been closed for a long time, will be at once re-opened. The
price has been generally accepted.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEWS OF THE MATABELE.--The "Impi" are "suffering from want of
supplies." They are impi-cunious.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MOST GRATUITOUS FORM OF VICE.--Ad-vice!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE REIGN OF RINGLETS.

    ["It is announced that ringlets are to be worn again by
    ladies, and that side whiskers are coming in for fashionable
    men."--_Daily News._]

[Illustration]

  Oh prospect Elysian! It called back a vision
    Of youth, and those girls of JOHN LEECH'S, JOHN LEECH'S,
  Of "corkscrews" that "doddle" all round a fair noddle,
    Blue eyes and flushed cheeks like ripe peaches, ripe peaches.
  I think of sweet NELLY, whose curls, like a jelly,
    Shook soft as she "spooned" me at croquet, at croquet.
  But then came lawn tennis old fashion to menace,
    And croquet and curls were dubbed "pokey," dubbed "pokey."

  But ringlets! O rapture! One spiral to capture
    Of NELL'S many hundreds and snip it, and snip it,
  Was simply delightful. She'd swear she  "looked frightful"
    As into my bosom I'd slip it, I'd slip it.
  But one among dozens, on heads like my cousin's,
    Love-larceny was, and not robbery, robbery.
  If now I dared sever from "tousle-mops" clever
    One tress, there would be a rare bobbery, bobbery.

  Ah me! how times alter! My scissors would falter
    In trying a _Rape of the Lock to-day, Lock_ to-day.
  NELL'S trim buxom body, with curls thick and "doddy,"
    Would strike the aesthete with a shock to-day, shock to-day.
  You only see ringlets on some "poor old thing." Let's
    Be kind to the _passe_, but primness, but primness,
  With "winkle" curls shaking, is _not_ very taking,
    When linked with old-spinster-like slimness,--like slimness.

  I know an "old Biddy"--her name is Miss TWIDDY--
    Who revels in ringlets curled carefully, carefully.
  Oh how they doddle around her old noddle!
    She's "songful," a taste which I share fully, share fully.
  But when she will warble of Halls--they're of Marble,--
    Or Meetings by Moonlight, I'm sorry, I'm sorry
  To see curls, and passion, so out of the fashion,
    Made mock of by "Up-to-date" FLORRY, -date FLORRY.

  But ringlets reviving? Miss TWIDDY'S long striving
    For "Passion's Response" mayn't be hopeless, be hopeless.
  In "Days of Pomatum" (for that's how I date 'em)
    They used more Macassar, and soap less, and soap less!
  Inopportune rain then put things out of train then,
    NELL'S mop, how a shower would spoil it, would spoil it!
  Curl-papers, concealing--but there, I'm revealing
    The mysteries dark of the toilet, the toilet.

  But ringletted friskers, and mutton-chop whiskers,
    For "buns" and blue gills closely shaven, -ly shaven!
  'Tis sheer revolution! High Art's contribution
    Will be first to croak _a la_ raven, _la_ raven.
  Will girls then all giggle with ringlets a-wriggle,
    As most of the maids of my youth did, my youth did?
  Will male "mutton-chopper," scowl pompously proper,
    Like _Dombey_--as _our_ sires in sooth did, in sooth did?
       *       *       *       *       *

LIFE (AND DEATH) IN SOUTH AMERICA.

    (_Diary of the week's doings, from our own Correspondent on
    the Spot._)

_Monday._--Matters are still very unsettled, and it will take some
time before public confidence is entirely restored. The policy of the
President in defending the Tramways Extension Bill from the citadel
with grape-shot is condemned as an unwise stretch of the provisions of
the Constitution. It has caused a reorganisation in the Cabinet,
the Secretary for the Interior having resigned, taking with him six
regiments of cavalry, four battalions of infantry, and three brigades
of artillery. This desertion has naturally lessened the chance of the
Employers' Liability Amendment Bill passing this session except at
the point of the bayonet. The division on the first reading of the
Telegraph State Construction Bill was Ayes, 50 killed, 3 wounded;
Noes, 12 killed, 172 wounded. Should this measure pass its second
reading it will be opposed from barricades in committee.

_Tuesday._--Trade shows some signs of revival, but the continual
bombardment of the Stock Exchange by the opposition fleet in the
offing causes considerable confusion and annoyance. The Minister of
War has retired into a parliamentary cave accompanied by the militia.
It is considered not improbable that this member of the ministry may
throw his ammunition into the scale against his colleagues. The Pauper
Property Insurance Bill has not much chance of passing during the
present year, unless its supporters can bombard the capital. The
second reading of the Lunacy Acts Consolidation Bill was passed with
the assistance of three ironclads and a torpedo catcher. In spite
of the pacific turn that events are now taking, some of the older
inhabitants express considerable uneasiness.

_Wednesday._--The British Consul has given notice that he will hold
the ministry responsible for the damage done to his residence. On
account of the bombardment he and his family have been forced to
reside in a distant greenhouse. The remainder of the consulate is
razed to the ground. This being the President's birthday, the hall of
the _bureau_ has been crowded with infernal machines sent as presents.
The loud ticking of the concealed machinery has caused several
complaints to be made to the _concierge_. The President and his family
have returned to the seaside. They are being hotly pursued by a large
body of cavalry, infantry, and artillery. However, on the whole the
outlook is brighter, and the trains and omnibuses have recommenced
running.

_Thursday._--The President has returned to the capital, as the
lodgings he had taken at the seaside were discovered by the rebel
fleet, and bombarded. The business of the session progresses slowly
but surely. The Minister for War, with the assistance of the Militia,
has secured the passing of the vote dealing with his department. He
led the charge in person that carried the "Ayes" Division Lobby. If it
were not for the constant bombardment of all the principal buildings,
and the occasional slaughter of Members of Parliament, things would be
almost normal. There is no doubt that the outlook is peaceful.

_Friday._.--Things still quieting down. Traffic in the main
thoroughfares is suspended, because the roads are required for charges
of cavalry, and the squares are now used for shell practice. The
fleet have approached closer. This, of course, causes some additional
damage; but as the populace can now hear the bands of the various
ships during the pauses in the bombardment, the arrangement is rather
popular than otherwise. The Government have apologised to the British
Consul for having blown up his house and stables. The incident
consequently is at an end. Several Members of the Cabinet have
accepted the Consul's invitation to lunch.

_Saturday._.--The Revolution is practically at an end. The fleet are
still bombarding the forts, and the military charge every ten minutes
the populace. The Judges, too, find cause for annoyance in the
constant invasion of the judicial bench by armed artisans. Most of
the fashionable part of the city is in flames, but this is a detail.
However, taking all things into consideration, peace and tranquillity
may be said to be now restored. Of course they are not exactly
the peace and tranquillity of Europe, but they are what people
are accustomed to over here. Should anything of further importance
transpire it shall be wired immediately; but to all appearance the
insurrection is at an end.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HOW TO SPEND A PLEASANT EVENING!

["For the purposes of this production the orchestra has been enlarged,
so that some of the instrumentalists have to sit among the audience in
the stalls." _Daily Paper._]]

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE CONTESTANTS IN THE COAL WAR.

  Oh, stint your rage, abate your rash insanity!
    Fight not like fiends, as brother men agree;
  And be "the sweet, sad music of humanity,"
          Played in the _miner_ key!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE IDEAL CONVERSATION.

    [Miss EMILY FAITHFULL, in the _Ladies' Pictorial_, suggests
    that girls should always learn up some contribution to make to
    the family conversation at table.]

  Miss FAITHFULL, let me send a line
    Of most sincere congratulation
  On your magnificent design
    To raise the tone of conversation;
  The plan you kindly recommend
    Rejoices many a careful mother,
  And, for the future, we intend,
    As runs the phrase, "To use no other."

  At breakfast-time we used to talk
    On topics commonplace together,
  Designed a picnic, planned a walk,
    And even criticised the weather;
  We gossiped in an idle way,
    And made in turn our several guesses
  About the age of Mrs. A.,
    The price of Lady X.'s dresses.

  But now, according to your scheme,
    Each carefully-instructed maiden
  Discourses on a worthy theme,
    And comes with fact and figures laden;
  To-day, for instance, MURIEL gave
    Some gems from CICERO'S orations,
  While MAUD reviewed, in language grave,
    The Lower Tertiary Formations.

  And KATE--the mischief-making KATE
    Who formerly would merely prattle--
  Described, in accents most sedate,
    The use of cavalry in battle.
  In fact, by this most noble plan,
    Which on your kind advice we're using,
  Our conversation never can
    Deserve your censure as amusing!

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FOOL WITH A GUN.

    (_To the Tune of the "Temptation of St. Antony."_)

  There are many fools that worry this world,
    Fools old, and fools who're young;
  Fools with fortunes, and fools without,
  Fools who dogmatise, fools who doubt,
  Fools who snigger, and fools who shout,
  Fools who never know what they're about,
    And fools all cheek and tongue;
  Fools who're gentlemen, fools who're cads,
  Fools who're greybeards, and fools who're lads;
  Fools with manias, fools with fads,
  Fools with cameras, fools with tracts,
  Fools who deny the stubbornest facts,
  Fools in theories, fools in acts;
    Fools who write Theosophist books,
    Fools who believe in Mahatmas and spooks;
  Fools who prophesy--races and Tophets--
  Bigger fools who believe in prophets;
  Fools who quarrel, and fools who quack;
  In fact, there are all sorts of fools in the pack,
    Fools fat, thin, short, and tall;
  But of all sorts of fools, the Fool with a Gun
  (Who points it at someone--of course, "in fun"--
  And fools around till chance murder is done)
    Is the worsest fool of them all!

       *       *       *       *       *

"BEING AT CHARGES."--A subject for companion picture to the well-known
"_The Last Charge at Waterloo_" would be "_The Last Charge of the
Archbishop of Canterbury_." For ourselves, in preference to either the
ecclesiastical or the military view of a charge, we like to hear
the Lord Mayor's toast-master call out, "Gentlemen! _Charge_--your
glasses!!"

       *       *       *       *       *

UNDER THE ROSE.

(_A Story in Scenes._)

SCENE VI.--_The Breakfast-room at Hornbeam Lodge._

TIME--8.40 A.M. _on Saturday morning_. Mrs. TOOVEY _is alone_, _making
the tea_.

_Mrs. Toovey_ (_to herself_). I cannot think what has come to
THEOPHILUS. He has come down late for prayers every morning this week.
Such a bad example for any household, and Cook is beginning to notice
it--I could see it in her eye as she came in. He is so strange in his
manner, too; if I did not know he was absolutely incapable of--but
_why_ did he secrete that abominable programme of CHARLES'S? He _said_
he kept it with a view to making inquiries, but I have heard nothing
about them since. (_Aloud_, _to_ PH[OE]BE, _who brings in dishes
and two letters_.) Oh, the post, PH[OE]BE? it's late this morning.
(PH[OE]BE _goes out_.) One for Pa, and one for me--from ALTHEA--it was
certainly time she wrote. (_Reading her letter._) "Delightful visit
... the MERRIDEWS so kind ... so much to see and do ... back on Monday
... no time for more at present." Not a word of where she's been or
what she's seen--not at _all_ the letter a girl should write to her
mother! I wonder whom Pa's letter is from? (_She turns it over._)
What's this? "Eldorado Palace of Varieties" printed on the flap! Why,
that's CHARLES'S music-hall! Then Pa _has_ been making inquiries after
all. As CHARLES'S aunt I have a right to---- (_She is about to open
the envelope._) No, I'd better not, I hear Pa's hum--he will be sure
to tell me what they say.

_Mr. Toovey enters_ (_humming, to give himself a countenance_). Ha, so
you've had prayers without me? Quite right--quite right.

_Mrs. Toov._ (_severely_). Anything _but_ right, Pa. You ought to have
been down long ago. I heard you brushing your hair as I went out.

_Mr. Toov._ (_feebly_). It was very tiresome, my love, but my
collar-stud got under the wardrobe, and I couldn't get it out for ever
so long.

_Mrs. Toov._ Your things have taken to behave in a very extraordinary
manner, Pa. Yesterday it was your braces!

_Mr. Toov._ I--I believe it _was_ my braces yesterday. Ah well, we
must bear with these little vexations--bear with them! (_To himself._)
A letter for me? From the Eldorado! It's the box! I--I hoped Mr.
CURPHEW had forgotten.

[_He thrusts it into his pocket unopened, in a flurry._

_Mrs. Toov._ Is there any reason why you shouldn't read your letter,
Pa? It may be of importance.

_Mr. Toov._ I--I don't think it is, my love--particularly. It--it will
keep till after breakfast. What is this--kedgeree? Ha! I've come down
with quite an appetite--quite a famous appetite!

    [_He pecks at his kedgeree ostentatiously._

_Mrs. Toov._ Perhaps I'd better ring and have two more eggs boiled if
you're so hungry as all that, Pa?

_Mr. Toov._ (_in terror at this suggestion_). Not for me, my love, not
for me. I--I've made an excellent breakfast!

_Mrs. Toov._ Then now, Pa, perhaps you will be at leisure to read your
letter. I am curious to know what correspondence you can possibly have
with an Eldorado Palace.

_Mr. Toov._ (_to himself_). Oh, dear me, she's seen the flap! Why
do they put the name outside--so thoughtless of them! (_He opens
the letter._) Yes, it _is_ the order. I _can't_ show it to CORNELIA!
(_Aloud._) I--I told you I was making inquiries.

_Mrs. Toov._ About CHARLES'S habits? So you've written to the Manager,
without consulting me! Well--what does he say?

_Mr. Toov._ (_to himself_). I don't like these deceptions--but I
_must_ consider poor CHARLES. (_Aloud._) Oh--hum--very little, my
love, very little indeed, but satisfactory--most satisfactory--he's no
complaint to make of CHARLES--none whatever!

_Mrs. Toov._ As if it was likely you would get the truth from such a
tainted source! Let me see his letter.

_Mr. Toov._ (_pocketing the letter again, hastily_). No, my dear
love, you must excuse me--but this is a private and confidential
communication, and--and, in common fairness to CHARLES--I'll trouble
you for another cup of tea. (_To himself._) It's for this very night.
I've a great mind not to go. How am I to make an excuse for getting
away? (_Aloud._) I've half a mind to run up some time, and--and look
in on CHARLES.

_Mrs. Toov._ (_to herself_). If CHARLES is misconducting himself, I
ought to know--and I _will_, sooner or later. I'm sure THEOPHILUS is
keeping something from me. (_Aloud._) I've only put in one lump, Pa.
You may find him at home if you went up this afternoon.

_Mr. Toov._ (_relieved_). An excellent suggestion, my love. I _will_
go this afternoon. He--he might ask me to stay and dine with him; so
if--if I don't come back, you'll know where I am--eh? You won't be
anxious?

_Mrs. Toov._ (_to herself_). He's trying to spare me, but I can see
he's _most_ uneasy about CHARLES. (_Aloud._) Well, Pa, I don't like
the idea of your dining out without me--it will be the first time for
years--but still, I shall have to be away myself this evening;
there's a special meeting of the Zenana Mission Committee, and Mrs.
CUMBERBATCH made such a point of my attending--so, if you feel you
really _ought_ to see CHARLES----

_Mr. Toov._ Oh. I _do_, my dear. He--he wants looking after. And
perhaps, if I could have a little quiet, serious talk with him, after
dinner--or over a game of draughts. (_To himself._) What a dissembler
I've become; but I _do_ mean to look in on CHARLES, before I go to
this Eldorado place, and there _may_ be time for a game of draughts!

_Mrs. Toov._ You would learn more, THEOPHILUS, by putting a few
questions to his landlady. But remember, when you come back, I shall
insist on being told everything--_everything_, mind!

_Mr. Toov._ Oh, of course, my love, of course. (_To himself._) If my
visit proves satisfactory, I--I might tell her. It will depend on how
I feel--entirely on how I feel.

END OF SCENE VI.


    SCENE VII.--_The Drawing-room. It is after luncheon._ Mrs.
    TOOVEY _is sitting knitting_.

_Mr. Toovey_ (_entering, in a frock-coat, carrying a tall hat_).
Er--CORNELIA, my love, you don't happen to know where the--the
latchkey is kept, do you?

_Mrs. Toovey._ The latchkey, THEOPHILUS! One has never been required
in this house _yet_. What can you possibly want with a latchkey?

_Mr. Toov._ (_to himself_). These performances go on till a somewhat
advanced hour, I've no doubt, and I might feel it my duty to stay
as long as---- (_Aloud._) I--I only thought it would save PH[OE]BE
sitting up for me, my dear.

_Mrs. Toov._ You need not trouble yourself about that, THEOPHILUS. I
will sit up for you, if necessary.

_Mr. Toov._ (_quaking_). But you forget your Zenana Mission, my love;
you will be out yourself this evening!

_Mrs. Toov._ (_severely_). I shall be back by a reasonable hour,
Pa,--and so will _you_, I should hope.

_Mr. Toov._ I hope so, my love, I'm sure, but--but I may have a good
deal to say to CHARLES, you know.

_Mrs. Toov._ (_to herself_). There's some mystery about that wretched
boy, I'm certain. If I could only find out what was in that letter. I
wonder if it's in Pa's pocket--I'll soon see. (_Aloud._) Turn round,
Pa. Ah, I _thought_ as much; one of your coat-tail buttons is as
nearly off as it can be!

_Mr. Toov._ (_innocently_). Dear me! My Sunday coat, too. I never
observed it. Could you just fasten it on a little more securely?

[Illustration: "Eldorado Palace of Varieties. Admit Mr. Toovey and
Party to Box C. This portion to be retained."]

_Mrs. Toov._ If you take off your coat. I can't do it with you
prancing about in front of me, Pa. (_Mr. T. takes off his coat._)
Now, I can't have you in my drawing-room in your shirtsleeves--suppose
somebody called! Go into your study and wait there till I've done.
(_Mr. T. departs submissively._) Now if the letter isn't in one of
these pockets, it must be in---- (_She discovers the envelope._) There
it is. _Now_ I shall know what CHARLES---- I'm sure his poor dear
mother would wish to be informed. (_She opens the letter._) "Eldorado
Palace of Varieties. Admit Mr. TOOVEY and party to Box C. This portion
to be retained." (_She tears off a perforated slip._) I _will_ retain
it! So THEOPHILUS has been deceiving me--_this_ is his business with
CHARLES! _This_ is why he kept that programme! And he's allowing
himself to be misled by his own nephew! They're going to this
music-hall to-night, together! He shall _not_ go--never while I--stop,
let me think--yes, he _shall_ go--he shall fill up the measure of his
iniquity, little dreaming that I have the clear proof of his deceit!
(_She thrusts the slip she has torn off into her workbox, and replaces
the envelope with the remainder of the order in the pocket._) There.
He won't notice that anything is missing. He's coming back. I must
control myself, or he will be on his guard.

    [_She pretends to secure the button with unsteady fingers._

_Mr. Toov._ (_entering_). CORNELIA, my love, don't trouble to do more
than is absolutely necessary to keep the button secure--because I'm
rather in a hurry. It doesn't matter, so long as it looks respectable!

_Mrs. Toov._ (_with an effort to restrain her feelings_). I daresay it
is quite respectable enough, Pa, for where you are going.

_Mr. Toov._ Quite, indeed, my dear. But it would never have done to go
and call on CHARLES with a button off the back of my coat--no, no. It
was fortunate you noticed it in time, my love.

_Mrs. Toov._ I hope it will prove so, THEOPHILUS. (_To herself._) And
this monster of duplicity is Pa! Oh, I wish I could tell him what I
thought of him, but not yet--we will have our reckoning later!

_Mr. Toov._ (_after putting on his coat_). Then I think I must be
going. Any message I can take to CHARLES?

_Mrs. Toov._ Yes, tell him that I trust he will profit by his good
Uncle's example, and that I expect him to dinner on Monday. I may
require to have a serious talk with him myself, if your account of
this evening is not perfectly satisfactory.

_Mr. Toov._ I'll tell him, my love, but there's no reason to make
yourself uneasy about CHARLES--he'll behave himself--he'll behave
himself. (_To himself, as he goes out._) I must go and see CHARLES
now. Oh dear, I do feel so apprehensive about this visit to the
Eldorado.--If I could put it off.--But I can't continue to hold those
shares without some knowledge---- And Mr. CURPHEW made such a point of
my going. No, I must go. I--I don't see how I can get out of it!

_Mrs. Toov._ (_alone_). There he goes, looking so meek and lamblike!
Who would suspect, to see him, that that black coat of his was
buttoned round a whited sepulchre? Oh, Pa, Pa! That after all these
years of blameless life you should suddenly be seized with a
depraved desire for unhallowed amusement like this! While I am at
the CUMBERBATCHES, engaged in discussing the affairs of the Zenana
Mission, you and CHARLES will be---- Stop. How do I know he is going
with CHARLES at all? If he is capable of deceiving me in one respect,
why not in all? (_She takes out the slip and looks at it._) Mr. TOOVEY
and party! _What_ party? May not Pa have been leading a--a double life
all these years for anything I can tell? He is going to the Eldorado
to-night with _somebody_--that's clear. Who is it? I shall never be
easy till I know. And why should I not? There's the meeting, though.
I might have a headache. Yes, that will do. (_She goes to her
writing-table._) No, I won't write. I can make some excuse to ELIZA
when I see her. And instead of going to the CUMBERBATCHES this
evening, I can easily slip up to Waterloo and ask my way to this
place. There will be no difficulty in that. Yes, I will go, whatever
it costs me. And when Pa goes into this Box C of his, he will find his
"party" is larger than he expected!

END OF SCENE VII.

       *       *       *       *       *

PLAYING THE DEUCE AT THE HAYMARKET.

Of course, to speak with theological accuracy, _The Tempter_, being
the "very devil incarnate," ought to be "damned." That this has
not been his fate at the Haymarket is owing to Mr. BEERBOHM TREE
primarily, to his company secondarily, and to the author remotely. To
treat in any fresh dramatic form the story of _Faust and Marguerite_,
a dramatist must be the subject of a special and peculiar inspiration.
Now what this play lacks is inspiration.

What in this piece ENRY HAUTHOR JONES mistook for the "divine
afflatus" is mere long-windedness. His _Tempter_ may be an entertainer
assuming various disguises, and more and more like himself on every
occasion, but a real devil he is not, except so far as Mr. TREE with
wonderful art makes him; and, even then, the question is forced
upon us, would any devil with any sort of self-respect, pick up a
cross-handled dagger just as if it were an ordinary walking-stick, and
politely return it to its owner? This is the first time that a
devil on the stage hasn't shuddered and grovelled at the sight of
a cross-handle. Again, how far more effective would some of the
supernatural movements of this irreclaimably wicked personage have
been had they been performed by means of some clever arrangement
of "wires," such as that with which Mlle. AENEA used to astonish the
public? Where are the stage mechanists who assisted GEORGE CONQUEST,
that unique representative of sprites and gnomes, who achieved success
by "leaps and bounds?"

Fortunately the piece does not depend for its success on mere
mechanism, but on the acting of Mr. TREE, which is in all respects
admirable in its diabolical variety; much depends, too, on Mrs.
TREE, who is charming and sympathetic in a small part. Mr. TERRY,
who occasionally, in tone and look, reminds me of HENRY IRVING,
contributes his share towards the general histrionic excellence, as
also does Miss JULIA NEILSON, who in tone and action frequently
makes me wish that once and for ever she would give up attempting
an imitation of ELLEN TERRY. But be it said that the acting of this
couple is remarkably good in the love scene, as it is also in the very
trying death scene, which could have been so easily and so utterly
ruined.

[Illustration: "Arbor in Arbore." A Wood Engraving.]

The author is at his best in his curt, cynical sentences. Epigrams are
few and far between in the play, but what there are go to the devil,
that is, are given to the "Old Gentleman," with the best possible
result. ENRY HAUTHOR is at his worst in the long speeches, not one
of which, no matter to whom it may fall, but would be the better for
cutting. Of course, suggestions for abbreviating the _Tempter_'s
part would not be favourably entertained by the principal actor,
as, naturally enough, any Tree objects to being cut down: and as his
personal success is too decided for him to be "cut up," the Tree will
have to remain, though lopping and pruning would be advantageous to
the growth and strength of this Tree now that it has assumed these
proportions. And the moral? Well, GOETHE, I think, in the poem was a
trifle hazy about the ultimate fate of his lovers; but in the opera
there is no doubt about it. With _Marguerite_ it was "Here we go up,
up, up," and with _Faust_ it was just the reverse: but the operatic
_Faust_ will always "go down" when sung and played as it was this
season at Covent Garden. I forget what BOITO does with his erring
couple, but where Mr. JONES'S demon resembles BOITO'S, and also
BYRON'S, Satan, is in his monologues addressed directly to the Supreme
Being. But those Satans were Fallen Archangels of Heaven; this of
'ENRY HAUTHOR'S is a Fallen Angel of Islington. This illogical demon
sneers at one of the characters for not using language sufficiently
strong to express his feelings; yet when his own turn comes his
blasphemy is vulgar, and so mild that not the sternest magistrate
would like to fine him for it. And strange to say, in one passage
(which most persons would have deemed objectionable, did it not
come to them on the authority of the Lord Chamberlain's Theatrical
Licensing office), the Prince of Darkness shows himself a gentleman
curiously ignorant of such elementary Christian theology as he could
have picked up from a penny catechism. How Mr. TREE was ever in-deuced
to attempt the _Tempter_ by ENRY HAUTHOR, will remain a mystery to the
end of the run, and if that should be in the far distant future,
the mystery will be Tree-mendous, and absolutely impenetrable. The
costumes are artistic and superb, the scenery effective, though the
majestic proportions of Canterbury Cathedral are rather dwarfed by the
imposing figure of the Very Deuce, who is "all over the place."

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning Thought.

    (_By a chilly Autumn Guest at a Country House._)

  _GR-R-R-R!_ No fire in the grate--for our hostess is thrifty--
  Although the thermometer stands below fifty!
        Well, I wish to be courteous and sober;
  But the _biggest_ of pests is that pig of a host--
  In a climate like ours, too!--who makes it his boast
        That "he _never_ starts fires till October!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A GOOD KICK-OFF.--The "Rugby" decision against "professional"
football. Let us hope it will be followed by an equally energetic
"kick-out" of the growing "rowdy" element in this popular, if somewhat
over-praised, "National game." All good sportsmen long to see a
"penalty kick" administered to blackguardism in the football field.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE PERSONAL EQUATION.

_Ducal Butler_ (_showing Art Treasures of Stilton Castle_). "THE THREE
GRACES--AFTER CANOVA!"

_Mrs. Ramsbotham._ "HOW INTERESTING! AND PRAY, WHICH IS THE _PRESENT_
DUCHESS?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

ALEXANDER AND DIOGENES.

(_Modern Teutonic Version._)

    ["My complaint being of a nervous character, I share the
    opinion of my doctor that, if I pass the winter in the midst
    of my accustomed surroundings and occupations, it will be
    the most likely means of promoting my recovery."--_Prince
    Bismarck's reply to the German Emperor's Letter._]

_Diogenes_ (_of Kissingen_) loquitur:--

  _Only to leave me to my tub!_ Ha! had him _there_ I flatter me!
  Too late, my ALEXANDER, now to butter or to batter me!
  You "Dropped the Pilot"--with that youthful confidence that some adore--
  The "whirligig of time" has turned; the "Pilot" drops the "Commodore."

  A _fico_ for Imperial "Pots," and their young princely progenies.
  Belated condescension won't conciliate DIOGENES.
  Cynic and Conqueror exchange compliments Ciceronian,
  But--there's a sting in some smooth words, for a mouthing Macedonian.

  Mine are not _sanitary_ "tubs," the Varzin, or the other one
  At Friedrichsruh, you hint. Oh get away, and do not bother one!
  I've got a "nervous system" now, and noisy, young, despotical,
  "Shock-headed Peters" worry one, when aged and neurotical.

  Your castles, and your palaces, and things, in Central Germany,
  I "trample on"--like Plato's pride. Ha! does that make you squirm any?
  Confer with your Court Marshal, if you like; I only promise I'll
  Transfer my Tub--to Friedrichsruh, when up to change of domicile.

  "How to command men" is my skill, as 'twas of him of Pontus, Sire,
  _You_ can't command such men as I just when you chance to want us, Sire!
  As soon as Doctor SCHWENINGER says he has no objection, Sire,
  I'll travel to another Tub--but not of your selection, Sire.

  _Sings_--

  'Midst castles and palaces though I _might_ roam,
  Be it ever so humble there's no place like home.
  The charm of the Tub seems to hallow me there,
  Which all Central Germany's castles can't share.
    Home! home! Sweet, sweet home!
    Though 'tis only a Tub, there is no place like home!

  An exile from court, castles dazzle in vain.
  Oh! give me my Tub and I'll gladly remain.
  A proud ALEXANDER I'm sorry (!) to snub,
  But--keep your fine castles, leave me to my Tub!
    Home! home! Sweet, sweet home!
    Though you mayn't like its "climate," there's no place like home!

    [_Left curled up in it._

       *       *       *       *       *


"PAS MEME ACADEMICIEN!"

    [ALBERT MOORE, the exquisite decorative painter, died on
    September 25, at the age of fifty-two, "without Academic
    honour."]

  "LOVE is enough." Beauty, it seems, is not.
    And yet upon our land's artistic fame,
  It seems--does it not, Sirs?--a bitter blot
    That the official roll lacks this great name!
  No matter! The R. A., with tight-closed door,
  Hath less--of honour; English Art hath MOORE.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Did you hear PADEREWSKI the pianist?" asked someone of our old friend
Mrs. R. "Oh, yes," she replied; "I was most fortunate. He played for
several hours at a friend's house, and he gave us the whole of his
Repartee."

       *       *       *       *       *

RIDDLE BY 'ARRY.--"Look 'ere, if you're speakin' of a young unmarried
lady bein' rather 'uffy, what well-known river would you name?--Why,
_'Miss is 'ippy'_, o' course."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ALEXANDER AND DIOGENES.

ALEXANDER. "IS THERE ANYTHING I CAN DO FOR YOU? CASTLE? OR ANYTHING OF
THAT SORT?" DIOGENES. "NO--ONLY TO LEAVE ME TO MY TUB!!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GUESTS TO BE AVOIDED.

"HULLO, OLD MAN! HOW'S IT YOU'RE DINING AT THE CLUB? THOUGHT YOUR WIFE
TOLD ME SHE HAD THE BROWNS AND SMITHS TO DINNER THIS EVENING?"

"NO--THAT WAS YESTERDAY. THIS EVENING SHE HAS THE ODDS AND ENDS!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

RIFLEMEN--"FORM!"

(_A new Volunteer Song, "in vulgar parlance," Brought up to date,
after Lord Tennyson_.)

    ["It is not going too far to say that thousands of men best
    fitted, physically and morally, to serve as officers or in the
    ranks, hold aloof from the Volunteers, because they are keenly
    alive to inefficiency of the average Volunteer. In vulgar
    parlance they look upon Volunteering as 'bad form.'"--_The
    Times._]

  There is a sound that must terribly jar
    On the ears of the West in our finical day;
  'Tisn't a sound of battle and war,
    But of something much worse in its "vulgar" way.
  Storm's warm about Volunteer "form,"
  Ready, be ready against that storm!
  "Form!" "Form!" Riflemen, "Form!"

  Be not deaf to the sound that warns!
    What? "Bad form!"--that's a prig's last plea.
  Are figs of thistles? or grapes of thorns?
    How can W. feel with E. C.?
  "Form!" "Form!" Riflemen, "Form!"
  Ready to meet "Sassiety's" storm!
  Riflemen, Riflemen, shun "bad form!"

  Reform your "form"! Abide nothing "low"!
    Look to yon butts, and take good aims!
  But better a miss, or a magpie or so,
    Than that bad, bad form which "Sassiety" shames.
  Storm's warm about Volunteer "form,"
  Ready, be ready against that storm!
  Riflemen, Riflemen, Riflemen--"Form!!!"

  For "form" be ready to do or die
    "Form," in "Sassiety's" name, and the QUEEN'S!
  "In vulgar parlance" "good form"'s the cry--
    Though only a fribble knows what it means.
  But "Form!" "Form!" Riflemen, "Form!"
  Ready, be ready to meet the storm
  Against the Riflemen's "shocking bad form!"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LONDON SCHOOL BOARD VADE MECUM.

_Question._ What are the functions of the School Board?

_Answer._ To protest against the conduct of the Educational
Department.

_Q._ In this protest has the Board the sympathy of the public?

_A._ Unquestionably; because the conduct of the Educational Department
is calculated to send up rates.

_Q._ But does not the Department look after the sanitary side of the
matter?

_A._ Perhaps so; but sanitation is too expensive a matter to be
treated without the maturest consideration.

_Q._ Are the recommendations of the Department unreasonable?

_A._ Very. The Board is required to make the most costly alterations
in buildings that have already eaten up a large sum of money, and
should not consume a penny more.

_Q._ But are not the suggested improvements ones that would be
accepted nowadays in any new design?

_A._ Certainly, but then their adoption would be the cause of little
or no expense.

_Q._ Then should science stop still until the rates become abated?

_A._ That would be the practical course for science to pursue.

_Q._ But leaving grievances out of the question, what can be said
about education?

_A._ That is a matter of secondary importance, when compared with the
latest sanitary developments.

_Q._ But how about the children? Have they been educated? What can be
said about them?

_A._ Nothing. So far as the School Board is concerned, the question of
education in general is absolutely of secondary importance.

_Q._ Then the career of a child need not be considered nor watched?

_A._ Of course not. The sole means suggested for teaching a child
is to squabble with the Government and to more or less ignore the
requirements of the schoolmaster.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "ON THE CHANCE."

_Young Mamma._ "WHAT HAVE YOU GOT THERE, MY GOOD MAN?"

_The "Good Man" (seeing she is not a Potato Customer)_. "ONLY BOILING
WATER, MA'AM. YOU SEE, THIS TIME O' YEAR, THE SEA GETS RATHER
COLD, AND SOME OF THE LADIES ARE SO PARTICULAR ABOUT THEIR LITTLE
TODDLEKINS, BLESS 'EM!"

_Young Mamma (struck with the idea)_. "OH, THEN, PLEASE BE HERE
TO-MORROW MORNING AT EIGHT O'CLOCK, AND BRING TWO CANS!"

[_At once tenders him a Shilling. Needless to say Our Artist was not
up in time to see if appointment was kept punctually._]

       *       *       *       *       *


BISHOP BOBADIL.

    ["As to the course which the English Government should take
    in this matter, he was in favour of their acting on the
    principles enunciated in the Sermon on the Mount; but when it
    was found that a contrary course was necessary, then they must
    drop the sermon and have recourse to the sword."--The
    Bishop of DERRY, in Westminster Abbey, on the subject of
    Mashonaland.]

  Of old the bully swaggered free,
    He recked not how the fight arose;
  He wore his warlike panoply,
    A hireling and a man of blows.

  He knew no mercy, was not meek
    (The meek are blessed, said the Lord);
  If one should smite him on the cheek,
    He turned, but turned to draw his sword.

  He trod the weaker in the mire,
    Nor stayed from blood his mailed hand,
  And tramped in fury and in fire
    Through many a devastated land.

  I blame him not, it was his trade;
    Though small his care for wrong or right,
  At least he fought himself, nor stayed
    At home to bid the others fight.

  Long since we've placed him on the shelf;
    Behold instead, his crosier drawn,
  Within the sacred Minster's self
    A bully blustering in lawn.

  A broad-brimmed stirrer up of strife,
    "I hold," he cries, "of small account
  His sense who stoops to base his life
    Upon the Sermon on the Mount.

  "That is, if unprepared to strike.
    Some help that Sermon _may_ afford.
  You suit yourselves, and, when you like,
    You drop it and you draw the sword."

  Go to, you loud and foolish priest,
    Nor scorn the precepts you should keep.
  Still is it true that, west or east,
    The wolves are sometimes clothed like sheep.

  And here ('twas thus in ancient days)
    False prophets shame the Master still.
  And congregations chant the praise
    Of blatant Bishop BOBADIL.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOODMEN, SPARE THOSE TREES!

_New (New Forest) Version._

[Mr. AUBERON HERBERT says "the rapacious and spendthrift" woodmen of
the Crown have recently felled two hundred oaks in the New Forest.]

  Woodmen, spare those trees!
    You're playing up rare jokes
  In felling, at your ease,
    Hundreds of British oaks.
  We'd ax you stay your axe.
    Come! no official rot!
  Or _Punch_'s wrath may wax,
    And then--you'll get it hot.

  Those old familiar trees
    Are glory and renown.
  Don't think your business, _please_,
    Is just to hew them down!
  We _ask_ you, for the nonce.
    If such appeal is vain,
  We'll bid you, sharp, at once,
    "Cut"--and _don't_ come again!

       *       *       *       *       *


"GOOD SIR JOHN!"

(_To Sir John Gilbert, R.A., on his receiving the Freedom of the City._

_By an Old Boy._)


    Good Black (and White) Knight,
    Our youth's joint delight,
  With that other Black Knight, dear Sir WALTER'S
    (Whom you pictured well),
    Ancient memories swell,
  Till language, in praising you, falters.
    You drew, with such dash,
    _All_ our heroes; they flash
  On our memories. Ah, we thanked _you_ so
    For Dons, Rosinantes,
    And Sanchos (CERVANTES!)
  "Leather-Stocking," and Robinson Crusoe.
    Our fancies still carry
    Your (SHAKSPEARE'S) King Harry,
  We know our own boyhood's sound slumbers
    Were haunted by Pucks,
    Robin Hoods, Friar Tucks,
  And scenes from your brave Christmas Numbers.
    God bless you, Sir JOHN,
    For your Knight and your Don,
  Who moved our youth's fervour and pity!
    Sure every Old Boy
    Hopes you long may enjoy
  The freedom (and health) of our City!

       *       *       *       *       *


RIDDLE FOR THE GREAT REALIST.


_Q._ When is a sailor like a French journalist?

_A._ When he has to "sign articles."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WHO WOULD NOT BE A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT?]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A NEAT WAY OF PUTTING IT.

_Cabby_ (_to Clergyman, who has paid the legal fare_). "WON'T LEAVE ME
MUCH FOR THE HOFFERTORY NEXT SUNDAY, SIR, WILL IT?"]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ADVENTURES OF PICKLOCK HOLES.

(_By Cunnin Toil._)

No. V.--THE HUNGARIAN DIAMOND.

Everybody must remember the apparently causeless panic that seized
the various European governments only a few years ago. It was the dead
season. Members of Parliament were all disporting themselves on the
various grouse-moors which are specially reserved for that august
legislative body in order that there may be no lack of accuracy in the
articles of those who imagine that the 12th of August brings to
every M.P. a yearning for the scent of heather and the sound of
breech-loading guns. Suddenly, and without any warning, a great fear
spread through Europe. Nobody seemed able to state precisely how
it began. There were, of course, some who attributed it to an
after-dinner speech made by the German Emperor at the annual banquet
of the Blue Boesewitzers, the famous Cuirassier regiment of which the
Grand Duke of SCHNUPFTUCHSTEIN is the honorary commanding officer.
Others again saw in it the influence of M. PAUL DEROULEDE, while yet a
third party attributed it with an equal assumption of certainty to the
fact that Austria had recently forbidden the import of Servian pigs.
They were all wrong. The time has come when the truth must be known.
The story I am about to tell will show my extraordinary friend,
PICKLOCK HOLES, on an even higher pinnacle of unmatchable acumen than
that which fame has hitherto assigned to him. He may be vexed when
he reads my narrative of his triumphs, for he is as modest as he is
inductive; but I am determined that, at whatever cost, the story shall
be made public.

It was on one of those delightful evenings for which our English
summer is famous, that HOLES and I were as usual sitting together and
conversing as to the best methods of inferring an Archbishop from
a hat-band and a Commander-in-Chief from a penny-whistle. I had put
forward several plans which appeared to me to be satisfactory, but
HOLES had scouted them one after another with a cold impassivity which
had not failed to impress me, accustomed though I was to the great
man's exhibition of it.

"Here," said HOLES, eventually, "are the necessary steps. Hat-band,
band-master, master-mind, mind-your-eye, eye-ball, ball-bearing,
bear-leader, Leda and the Swan, swan-bill, bill-post, post-cart,
cart-road, roadway, Weybridge, bridge-arch, arch-bishop. The inference
of a Commander-in-Chief is even easier. You have only to assume that a
penny-whistle has been found lying on the Horse-Guards' Parade by the
Colonel of the Scots Guards, and carried by him to the office of the
Secretary of State for War. Thereupon you subdivide the number of
drummer-boys in a regiment of Goorkhas by the capital value of a
sergeant's retiring pension, and----"

But the rest of this marvellous piece of concise reasoning must remain
for ever a secret, for at this moment a bugle-call disturbed the
stillness of the summer night, and HOLES immediately paused.

"What can that mean?" I asked, in some alarm, for Camberwell (our
meeting place) is an essentially unmilitary district, and I could not
account for this strange and awe-inspiring musical demonstration.

"Hush," said HOLES, with perfect composure; "it is the agreed signal.
Listen. The great Samovar diamond, the most brilliant jewel in the
turquoise crown of Hungary, has been lost. The Emperor of AUSTRIA is
in despair. Next week he is due at Pesth, but he cannot appear before
the fierce and haughty Magyars in a crown deprived of the decoration
that all Hungary looks upon as symbolical of the national existence.
A riot in Pesth at this moment would shake the Austro-Hungarian empire
to its foundations. With it the Triple Alliance would crumble into
dust, and the peace of Europe would not be worth an hour's purchase.
It is, therefore, imperative that before the dawn of next Monday the
diamond should be restored to its wonted setting."

"My dear HOLES," I said, "this is more terrible than I thought.
Have they appealed to you, as usual, after exhausting all the native
talent?"

"My dear POTSON," replied my friend, "you ask too much. Let it suffice
that I have been consulted, and that the determination of the question
of peace or war lies in these hands." And with these words the
arch-detective spread before my eyes those long, sinewy, and
meditative fingers which had so often excited my admiration.

Our preparations for departure to Hungary were soon made. I hardly
know why I accompanied HOLES. It seemed somehow to be the usual thing
that I should be present at all his feats. I thought he looked for
my company, and though his undemonstrative nature would never have
suffered him to betray any annoyance had I remained absent, I judged
it best not to disturb the even current of his investigations by
departing from established precedent. I therefore departed from
London--my only alternative. Just as we were setting out, HOLES
stopped me with a warning gesture.

"Have you brought the clue with you?" he asked.

"What clue?"

"Oh," he answered, rather testily, "any clue you like, so long as it's
a clue. A torn scrap of paper with writing on it, a foot-print in the
mud, a broken chair, a soiled overcoat--it really doesn't matter what
it is, but a clue of some kind we must have."

"Of course, of course," I said, in soothing tones. "How stupid of me
to forget it. Will this do?" I continued, picking up a piece of faded
green ribbon which happened to be lying on the pavement.

"The very thing," said HOLES, pocketing it, and so we started. Our
first visit on arriving at Pesth was to the Emperor-King, who was
living _incognito_ in a small back alley of the Hungarian capital. We
cheered the monarch's heart, and proceeded to call on the leader of
the Opposition in the Hungarian Diet. He was a stern man of some fifty
summers, dressed in the national costume. We found him at supper.
HOLES was the first to speak. "Sir," he said, "resistance is useless.
Your schemes have been discovered. All that is left for you is to
throw yourself upon the mercy of your King."

The rage of the Magyar was fearful to witness. HOLES continued,
inexorably:--"This piece of green ribbon matches the colour of your
Sunday tunic. Can you swear it has not been torn from the lining? You
cannot. I thought so. Know then that wrapped in this ribbon was found
the great Samovar diamond, and that you, you alone, were concerned in
the robbery."

At this moment the police broke into the room.

"Remove his Excellency," said HOLES, "and let him forthwith expiate
his crimes upon the scaffold."

"But," I ventured to interpose, "where is the diamond? Unless you
restore that----"

"POTSON," whispered HOLES, almost fiercely, "do not be a fool."

As he said this, the door once again opened, and the Emperor-King
entered the room, bearing on his head the turquoise crown, in the
centre of which sparkled the great Samovar, "the moon of brilliancy,"
as the Hungarian poets love to call it. The Emperor approached the
marvellous detective. "Pardon me," he said, "for troubling you. I have
just found the missing stone under my pillow."

"Where," said HOLES, "I was about to tell your Majesty that you would
find it."

"Thank you," said his Majesty, "for restoring to me a valued
possession and ridding me of a knave about whom I have long had my
suspicions." The conclusion of this speech was greeted with loud
"_Eljens_," the Hungarian national shout, in the midst of which we
took our leave. That is the true story of how the peace of Europe was
preserved by my wonderful friend.

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note:

Sundry damaged or missing punctuation has been repaired.

Page 165: 'then' corrected to 'than'.

"But better a miss, or a magpie or so,
  Than that bad, bad form which "Sassiety" shames."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol.
105 October 7, 1893, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 39332.txt or 39332.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/3/3/39332/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
