The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jester's Sword, by Annie Fellows Johnston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Jester's Sword
       How Aldebaran, the King's Son Wore the Sheathed Sword of Conquest

Author: Annie Fellows Johnston

Release Date: April 6, 2012 [EBook #39385]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JESTER'S SWORD ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net












THE JESTER'S SWORD

[Illustration]

BY ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON




_The JESTER'S SWORD_




The Johnston Jewel Series

BY ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON


Each, small 16mo, cloth, decorated cover and frontispiece, with
decorative text borders _75c._

       *       *       *       *       *

LIST OF TITLES

      THE RESCUE OF THE PRINCESS WINSOME: A Fairy Play for
          Old and Young.

      KEEPING TRYST: A Tale of King Arthur's Time.

      *IN THE DESERT OF WAITING: The Legend of Camelback
          Mountain.

      *THE THREE WEAVERS: A Fairy Tale for Fathers and
          Mothers as Well as for Their Daughters.

      THE LEGEND OF THE BLEEDING HEART.

      *THE JESTER'S SWORD.

*Also bound in full flexible leather, with special tooling in gold,
boxed

_$2.00_

       *       *       *       *       *

    THE PAGE COMPANY
    53 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.

[Illustration]




_THE JESTER'S SWORD_

       *       *       *       *       *

How Aldebaran, the King's Son, Wore the Sheathed Sword of Conquest

       *       *       *       *       *

BY ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON

_Author of "The Little Colonel Series," "Big Brother," "Joel: A Boy of
Galilee," "In the Desert of Waiting," etc._

[Illustration]

    BOSTON
    _THE PAGE COMPANY_
    Publishers




    _Copyright, 1908_
    BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    (INCORPORATED)

    _Copyright, 1909_
    BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    (INCORPORATED)

    _All rights reserved_

    First Impression, June, 1909
    Second Impression, August, 1909
    Third Impression, October, 1910
    Fourth Impression, November, 1911
    Fifth Impression, November, 1912
    Sixth Impression, January, 1916
    Seventh Impression, August, 1917
    Eighth Impression, April, 1920




    TO
    John




      "_To renounce when that shall be necessary and not be
      embittered._"                     R. L. STEVENSON.




_The Jester's Sword_


BECAUSE he was born in Mars' month, which is ruled by that red war-god,
they gave him the name of a red star--Aldebaran; the red star that is
the eye of Taurus. And because he was born in Mars' month, the
bloodstone became his signet, sure token that undaunted courage would
be the jewel of his soul.

Now all his brothers were as stalwart and as straight of limb as he, and
each one's horoscope held signs foretelling valorous deeds. But
Aldebaran's so far out-blazed them all, with comet's trail and planets
in most favourable conjunction, that from his first year it was known
the Sword of Conquest should be his. This sword had passed from sire to
son all down a line of kings. Not to the oldest one always, as did the
throne, though now and then the lot fell so, but to the one to whom the
signs all pointed as being worthiest to wield it.

So from the cradle it was destined for Aldebaran, and from the cradle it
was his greatest teacher. His old nurse fed him with such tales of it,
that even in his play the thought of such an heritage urged him to
greater ventures than his mates dared take. Many a night he knelt beside
his casement, gazing through the darkness at the red eye of Taurus,
whispering to himself the words the old astrologers had written, "_As
Aldebaran the star shines in the heavens, Aldebaran the man shall shine
among his fellows._"

Day after day the great ambition grew within him, bone of his bone and
strength of his sinew, until it was as much a part of him as the strong
heart beating in his breast. But only to one did he give voice to it, to
the maiden Vesta, who had always shared his play. Now it chanced that
she, too, bore the name of a star, and when he told her what the
astrologers had written, she repeated the words of her own destiny:

"_As Vesta the star keeps watch in the heavens above the hearths of
mortals, so Vesta the maiden shall keep eternal vigil beside the heart
of him who of all men is the bravest._"

When Aldebaran heard that he swore by the bloodstone on his finger that
when the time was ripe for him to wield the sword he would show the
world a far greater courage than it had ever known before. And Vesta
smiling, promised by that same token to keep vigil by one fire only, the
fire that she had kindled in his heart.

One by one his elder brothers grew up and went out into the world to
win their fortunes, and like a restless steed that frets against the
rein, impatient to be off, he chafed against delay and longed to follow.
For now the ambition that had grown with his growth had come to be more
than bone of his bone and strength of his sinew. It was an all-consuming
desire which coursed through him even as his heart's blood; for with
the years had come an added reason for the keeping of his youthful vow.
Only in that way could Vesta's destiny be linked with his.

When the great day came at last for the Sword to be put into his hands,
with a blare of trumpets the castle gates flew open, and a long
procession of nobles filed through. To the sound of cheers and ringing
of bells, Aldebaran fared forth on his quest. The old king, his father,
stepped down in the morning sun, and with bared head Aldebaran knelt to
receive his blessing. With his hand on the Sword he swore that he would
not come home again, until he had made a braver conquest than had ever
been made with it before, and by the bloodstone on his finger the old
king knew that Aldebaran would fail not in the keeping of that oath.

With the godspeed of the villagers ringing in his ears, he rode away.
Only once he paused to look back, when a white hand fluttered at a
casement, and Vesta's sorrowful face shone down on him like a star.
Then she, too, saw the bloodstone on his finger as he waved her a
farewell, and she, too, knew by that token he would fail not in the
keeping of his oath.

'Twas passing wonderful how soon Aldebaran began to taste the sweets of
great achievement. His name was on the tongue of every troubadour, his
deeds in every minstrel's song. And though he travelled far to alien
lands, scarce known by hearsay even to the folk at home, his fame was
carried back, far over seas again, and in his father's court his name
was spoken daily in proud tones, as they recounted all his honours.

Young, strong, with the impetuous blood begotten of success tingling
through all his veins, he had no thought that dire mishap could seize
on _him_; that pain or malady or mortal weakness could pierce _his_
armour, which youth and health had girt about him. From place to place
he went, wherever there was need of some brave champion to espouse a
weak ones cause. It mattered not who was arrayed against him, whether a
tyrant king, a dragon breathing fire, or some hideous scaly monster
that preyed upon the villages. His Sword of Conquest was unsheathed for
each; and as his courage grew with every added victory, he thirsted for
some greater foe to vanquish, remembering his youthful vow.

And as he journeyed on he pictured often to himself the day of his
returning, the day on which his vow should find fulfilment. How wide
the gates would be thrown open for his welcome! How loud would swell the
cheers of those who thronged to do him honour! His dreams were always of
that triumphal entrance, and of Vesta's approving smile. Never once the
shadow of a thought stole through his mind that it might be far
otherwise. Was not he born for conquest? Did not the very stars
foretell success?

One night, belated in a mountain pass, he sought the shelter of a
shelving rock, and with his mantle wrapped about him lay down to sleep.
Upon the morrow he would sally forth and beard the Province Terror in
his stronghold; would challenge him to combat, and after long and
glorious battle would rid the country of its dreaded foe. Already
tasting victory, he fell asleep, a smile upon his lips.

But in the night a storm swept down the mountain pass with sudden fury,
uprooting trees a century old, and rending mighty rocks with sword
thrusts of its lightning. And when it passed Aldebaran lay prone upon
the earth borne down by rocks and fallen trees. Lay as if dead until two
passing goat-herds found him and bore him down in pity to their hut.

Long weeks went by before the fever craze and pains began to leave him,
and when at last he crawled out in the sun, he found himself a poor
misshapen thing, all maimed and marred, with twisted back and face all
drawn awry and foot that dragged. One hand hung nerveless by his side.
Never more would it be strong enough to use the Sword. He could not even
draw it from its scabbard.

As in a daze he looked upon himself, thinking some hideous nightmare had
him in its hold. "That is not _I_!" he cried, in horror at the thought.
Then as the truth began to pierce his soul, he sat with starting eyes
and lips that gibbered in cold fear, the while they still persisted in
their fierce denial. "This is not _I_!"

Again he said it and again as if his frenzied words could work a miracle
and make him as he was before. Then when the sickening sense of his
calamity swept over him like a flood in all its fulness, he cast
himself upon the earth and prayed to die. Despair had seized him. But
Death comes not at such a call; kind Death, who waits that one may have
a chance to rise again and grapple with the foe that downed him, and
conquering, wipe the stigma coward from his soul.

So with Aldebaran. At first it seemed that he could not endure to face
the round of useless days now stretching out before him. An eagle,
broken winged and drooping in a cage, he sat within the goat-herd's hut
and gloomed upon his lot, and cursed the vital force within that would
not let him die.

To fall asleep with all the world within one's grasp and waken
empty-handed--that is small bane to one who may spring up again, and by
sheer might wrest all his treasures back from Fortune. But to wake
helpless as well as empty-handed, the strength for ever gone from arms
that were invincible; to crawl, a poor crushed worm, the mark for all
men's pity, where one had thought to win the meed of all men's praise,
ah, then to live is agony! Each breath becomes a venomed adder's sting.

Most of all Aldebaran thought of Vesta. The stroke that marred his
comeliness and took his strength had robbed him of all power to win his
happiness. It was written "by the hearth of him who is the bravest she
shall keep eternal vigil." As yet he had not risen above the level of
his forbears' bravery, only up to it. Now 'twas impossible to show the
world a greater courage, shorn as he was of strength. And even had her
horoscope willed otherwise, and she should come to him all filled with
maiden pity to share his ruined hearth, he could not say her yea. His
man's pride rose up in him, rebellious at the thought of pity from one
in whose sight he fain would be all that is strong and comely. Looking
down upon his twisted limbs, the pain that racked him was greater
torture than mere flesh can feel. Although 'twas casting heaven from
him, he drew his mantle closer, hiding his disfigured form, and prayed
with groans and writhings that she might never look on him again. So
days went by.

There came a time when, even through his all-absorbing thought of self,
there pierced the consciousness that he no longer could impose upon the
goat-herds' bounty. Food was scarce within the hut, and even though he
groaned to die, the dawns brought hunger. So at the close of day he
dragged him down the mountainside, thinking that under cover of the dusk
he would steal into the village and seek a chance to earn his bread.

But as he neared the little town and the sound of evening bells broke on
his ear, and lighted windows marked the homes where welcome waited other
men, he winced as from a blow. This was the village he had thought to
enter in the midst of loud acclaims, its brave deliverer from the
Province Terror. Then every window in the hamlet would have blazed for
him. Then every door would have been set wide to welcome Aldebaran, the
royal son of kings, fittest to bear the Sword of Conquest. And now
Aldebaran was but the crippled makeshift of a man, who could not even
draw that Sword from out its scabbard; at whose wry features all must
turn away in loathing, and some perchance might even set the dogs to
snarling at his heels, in haste to have him gone.

"In all the world," he cried in bitterness, "there breathes no other man
whom Faith hath used so cruelly! Emptied of hope, robbed of my all, life
doth become a prison-house that dooms me to its lowest dungeon! Why
struggle any longer 'gainst my lot? Why not lie here and starve, and
thus force Death to turn the key, and break the manacles which bind me
to my misery?"

While he thus mused, footsteps came up the mountainside, a lusty voice
was raised in song, and before he could draw back into cover, a head in
a fantastic cap appeared above the bushes. It was the village Jester
capering along the path as if the world were thistledown and every day a
holiday. But when he saw Aldebaran he stopped agape and crossed
himself. Then he pushed nearer.

Now those who saw the Jester only on a market day or at the country fair
plying his trade of merriment for all 'twas worth knew not a sage was
hid behind that motley or that his sympathies were tender as a saint's.
Yet so it was. The motto written deep across his heart was this: "_To
ease the burden of the world!_" It was beyond belief how wise he'd grown
in wheedling men to think no load lay on their shoulders. Now he stood
and gazed upon the prostrate man who turned away his face and would not
answer his low-spoken words: "What ails thee, brother?"

It boots not in this tale what wiles he used to gain Aldebaran's ear
and tongue. Another man most surely must have failed, because he shrank
from pity as from salt rubbed in a wound, and felt that none could hear
his woeful history and not bestow that pity. But if the Jester felt its
throbs he gave no sign. Seated beside him on the grass he talked in the
light tone that served his trade, as if Aldebaran's woes were but a
flight of swallows 'cross a summer sky, and would as soon be gone. And
when between his quirks he'd drawn the piteous tale entirely from him,
he doubled up with laughter and smote his sides.

"And I'm the fool and thou'rt the sage!" he gasped between his peals of
mirth. "Gadzooks! Methinks it is the other way around. Why, look ye,
man! Here thou dost go a-junketing through all the earth to find a
chance to show unequalled courage, and when kind Fate doth shove it
underneath thy very nose, thou turn'st away, lamenting. I've heard of
those who know not beans although the bag be opened, and now I laugh to
see one of that very kind before me."

Then dropping his unseemly mirth and all his wanton raillery, he stood
up with his face a-shine, and spake as if he were the heaven-sent
messenger of hope.

"Rise up!" he cried. "_Knowest thou not it takes a thousandfold more
courage to sheathe the sword when one is all on fire for action than to
go forth against the greatest foe?_ Here is thy chance to show the
world the kingliest spirit it has ever known! Here is a phalanx thou
mayst meet all single-handed--a daily struggle with a host of hurts that
cut thee to the quick. This sheathed sword upon thy side will stab thee
hourly with deeper thrusts than any adversary can give. 'Twill be a
daily 'minder of thy thwarted hopes. For foiled ambition is the
hydra-headed monster of the Lerna marsh. Two heads will rise for every
one thou severest. 'Twill be a fight till death. Art brave enough to
lift the gauntlet that Despair flings down and wage this warfare to thy
very grave?'"

Such call to arms seemed mockery as Aldebaran looked down upon his
twisted limbs, but as the bloodstone on his finger met his sight his
kingly soul leapt up. "I'll keep the oath!" he cried, and struggling to
his feet laid hand upon the jewelled hilt that decked his side.

"By sheathed sword, since blade is now denied me," he swore. "I'll win
the future that my stars foretold!"

In that exalted moment all things seemed possible, and though his body
limped as haltingly he followed on behind his new-found friend, his
spirit walked erect, and faced his future for the time, undaunted.

His merry-Andrew of a host made festival when they at last came to his
dwelling; lit a great fire upon the hearth, brewed him a drink that
warmed him to the core, brought wheaten loaves and set a bit of savoury
meat to turning on the spit.

"Ho, ho!" he laughed. "They say it is an ill wind that blows good to
none. Now thou dost prove the proverb. The tempest that didst blow thee
from thy course mayhap may send me on my way rejoicing. I long have
wished to leave this land and seek the distant province where my
kindred dwell, but there was never one to take my place. And when I
spake of going, my townsmen said me nay. 'Twas quite as bad, they vowed,
as if the priest should suddenly desert his parish, with none to
shepherd his abandoned flock. 'Who'll cheer us in our doldrums?' they
demanded. 'Who'll help us bear our troubles by making us forget them?
Thou canst not leave us, Piper, until some other merry soul comes by to
set our feet a-dancing.' Now thou art come."

"Yes, _I_! A merry soul indeed!" Aldebaran cried in bitterness.

"Well, maybe not quite that," his host admitted. "But thou couldst pass
as one. Thou couldst at least put on my grotesque garb, couldst learn
the quips and quirks by which I make men laugh. Thou wouldst not be the
first man who has hid an aching heart behind a smile. The tune thou
pipest may not bring _thee_ pleasure, but if it sets the world to
dancing it is enough. And, too, it is an honest way to earn thy bread.
Canst think of any other?"

Aldebaran hid his face within his hands. "No, no!" he groaned. "There
is no other way, and yet my soul abhors the thought, that I, a king's
son, should descend to this! The jester's motley and the cap and bells.
How can _I_ play such a part?"

"Because thou _art_ a king's son," said the Jester. "That in itself is
ample reason that thou shouldst play more royally than other men
whatever part Fate may assign thee."

Aldebaran sat wrapped in thought. "Well," was the slow reply after long
pause, "an hundred years from now, I suppose, 'twill make no difference
how circumstances chafe me now. A poor philosophy, but still there is a
grain of comfort in it. I'll take thy offer, friend, and give thee
gratitude."

And so next day the two went forth together. Aldebaran showed a brave
front to the crowd, glad of the painted mask that hid his features, and
no one guessed the misery that lurked beneath his laugh, and no one knew
what mighty tax it was upon his courage to follow in the Jester's lead
and play buffoon upon the open street. It was a thing he loathed, and
yet, 'twas as the Jester said, his training in the royal court had made
him sharp of wit and quick to read men's minds; and to the countrymen
who gathered there agape, around him in the square, his keen replies
were wonderful as wizard's magic.

And when he piped--it was no shallow fluting that merely set the rustic
feet a-jig, it was a strange and stirring strain that made the simplest
one among them stand with his soul a-tiptoe, as he listened, as if a
kingly train with banners went a-marching by. So royally he played his
part, that even on that first day he surpassed his teacher. The Jester,
jubilant that this was so, thought that his time to leave was near at
hand, but when that night they reached his dwelling Aldebaran tore off
the painted mask and threw himself upon the hearth.

"'Tis more than flesh can well endure!" he cried. "All day the thought
of what I've lost was like a constant sword-thrust in my heart. Instead
of deference and respect that once was mine from high and low, 'twas
laugh and jibe and pointing finger. And, too" (his voice grew shrill
and querulous), "I saw young lovers straying in the lanes together. How
can I endure that sight day after day when my arms must remain for ever
empty? And little children prattled by their father's side no matter
where I turned. I, who shall never know a little son's caress, felt like
a starving man who looks on bread and may not eat. Far better that I
crawl away from haunts of men where I need never be tormented by such
contrasts."

The Jester looked down on Aldebaran's wan face. It was as white and
drawn as if he had been tortured by the rack and thumbscrew, so he made
no answer for the moment. But when the fire was kindled, and they had
supped the broth set out in steaming bowls upon the table, he ventured
on a word of cheer.

"At any rate," he said, "for one whole day thou hast kept thy oath. No
matter what the anguish that it cost thee, from sunrise to sunsetting
thou hast held Despair at bay. It was the bravest stand that thou hast
ever made. And now, if thou hast lived through this one day, why not
another? 'Tis only one hour at a time that thou art called on to endure.
Come! By the bloodstone that is thy birthright, pledge me anew thou'lt
keep thy oath until the going down of one more sun."

So Aldebaran pledged him one more day, and after that another and
another, until a fortnight slowly dragged itself away. And then because
he met his hurt so bravely and made no sign, the Jester thought the
struggle had grown easier with time, and spoke again of going to his
kindred.

"Nay, do not leave me yet," Aldebaran plead. "Wouldst take my only
crutch? It is thy cheerful presence that alone upholds me."

"Yet it would show still greater courage if thou couldst face thy fate
alone," the Jester answered. "Despair cannot be vanquished till thou
hast taught thyself to really feel the gladness thou dost feign. I've
heard that if one will count his blessings as the faithful tell their
rosary beads he will forget his losses in pondering on his many
benefits. Perchance if thou wouldst try that plan it might avail."

So Aldebaran went out determined to be glad in heart as well as speech,
if so be it he could find enough of cheer. "I will be glad," he said,
"because the morning sun shines warm across my face." He slipped a
golden beam upon his memory string.

"I will be glad because that there are diamond sparkles on the grass and
larks are singing in the sky." A dew-drop and a bird's trill for his
rosary.

"I will be glad for bread, for water from the spring, for eyesight and
the power to smell the budding lilacs by the door; for friendly
greetings from the villages."

A goodly rosary, symbol of all the things for which he should be glad,
was in his hand at close of day. He swung it gaily by the hearth that
night, recounting all his blessings till the Jester thought, "At last
he's found the cure."

But suddenly Aldebaran flung the rosary from him and hid his face within
his hands. "'Twill drive me mad!" he cried. "To go on stringing baubles
that do but set my mind the firmer on the priceless jewel I have lost.
May heaven forgive me! I am not really glad. 'Tis all a hollow mockery
and pretence!"

Then was the Jester at his wit's end for a reply. It was a welcome sound
when presently a knocking at the door broke on the painful silence. The
visitor who entered was an aged friar beseeching alms at every door, as
was the custom of his brotherhood, with which to help the sick and
poor. And while the Jester searched within a chest for some old garments
he was pleased to give, he bade the friar draw up to the hearth and
tarry for their evening meal, which then was well-nigh ready. The friar,
glad to accept the hospitality, spread out his lean hands to the blaze,
and later, when the three sat down together, warmed into such a
cheerfulness of speech that Aldebaran was amazed.

"Surely thy lot is hard, good brother," he said, looking curiously into
the wrinkled face. "Humbling thy pride to beg at every door, forswearing
thine own good in every way that others may be fed, and yet thy face
speaks an inward joy. I pray thee tell me how thou hast found
happiness."

"_By never going in its quest_," the friar answered. "Long years ago I
learned a lesson from the stars. Our holy Abbot took me out one night
into the quiet cloister, and pointing to the glittering heavens showed
me my duty in a way I never have forgot. I had grown restive in my lot
and chafed against its narrow round of cell and cloister. But in a word
he made me see that if I stepped aside from that appointed path, merely
for mine own pleasure, 'twould mar the order of God's universe as surely
as if a planet swerved from its eternal course.

"'No shining lot is thine,' he said. 'Yet neither have the stars
themselves a light. They but reflect the Central Sun. And so mayst thou,
while swinging onward, faithful to thy orbit, reflect the light of
heaven upon thy fellow men.'

"Since then I've had no need to go a-seeking happiness, for bearing
cheer to others keeps my own heart a-shine.

"I pass the lesson on to thee, good friend. Remember, men need laughter
sometimes more than food, and if thou hast no cheer thyself to spare,
why, thou mayst go a-gathering it from door to door as I do crusts, and
carry it to those who need."

Long after the good friar had supped and gone, Aldebaran sat in silence.
Then crossing to the tiny casement that gave upon the street, he stood
and gazed up at the stars. Long, long he mused, fitting the friar's
lesson to his own soul's need, and when he turned away, the old
astrologer's prophecy had taken on new meaning.

"As Aldebaran the star shines in the heavens" (_no light within itself,
but borrowing from the Central Sun_), "so Aldebaran the man might shine
among his fellows." (_Beggared of joy himself, yet flashing its
reflection athwart the lives of others._)

When next he went into the town he no longer shunned the sights that
formerly he'd passed with face averted, for well he knew that if he
would shed joy and hope on others he must go to places where they most
abound. What matter that the thought of Vesta stabbed him nigh to
madness when he looked on hearth-fires that could never blaze for him?
With courage almost more than human he put that fond ambition out of
mind as if it were another sword he'd learned to sheathe. At first it
would not stay in hiding, but flew the scabbard of his will to thrust
him sore as often as he put it from him. But after awhile he found a
way to bind it fast, and when he'd found that way it gave him victory
over all.

A little child came crying towards him in the marketplace, its world a
waste of woe because the toy it cherished had been broken in its play.
Aldebaran would have turned aside on yesterday to press the barbed
thought still deeper in his heart that he had been denied the joy of
fatherhood. But now he stooped as gently as if he were the child's own
sire to wipe its tears and soothe its sobs. And when with skilful
fingers he restored the toy, the child bestowed on him a warm caress out
of its boundless store.

He passed on with his pulses strangely stirred. 'Twas but a crumb of
love the child had given, yet, as Aldebaran held it in his heart,
behold a miracle! It grew full-loaf, and he would fain divide it with
all hungering souls! So when a stone's throw farther on he met a man
well-nigh distraught from many losses, he did not say in bitterness as
once he would have done, that 'twas the common lot of mortals; to look
on him if one would know the worst that Fate can do. Nay, rather did he
speak so bravely of what might still be wrung from life though one were
maimed like he, that hope sprang up within his hearer and sent him on
his way with face a-shine.

That grateful smile was like a revelation to Aldebaran, showing him he
had indeed the power belonging to the stars. Beggared of joy, no light
within himself, yet from the Central Sun could he reflect the hope and
cheer that made him as the eye of Taurus 'mong his fellows.

The weeks slipped into months, months into years. The Jester went his
way unto his kindred and never once was missed, because Aldebaran more
than filled his place. In time the town forgot it ever had another
Jester, and in time Aldebaran began to feel the gladness that he only
feigned before.

_And then it came to pass, whenever he went by, men felt a strange,
strength-giving influence radiating from his presence,--a sense of hope.
One could not say exactly what it was, it was so fleeting, so
intangible, like warmth that circles from a brazier, or perfume that is
wafted from an unseen rose._

Thus he came down to death at last, and there was dole in all the
Province, so that pilgrims, journeying through that way, asked when they
heard his passing-bell, "What king is dead, that all thus do him
reverence?"

"'Tis but our Jester," one replied. "A poor maimed creature in his
outward seeming, and yet so blithely did he bear his lot, it seemed a
kingly spirit dwelt among us, and earth is poorer for his going."

All in his motley, since he'd willed it so, they laid him on his bier to
bear him back again unto his father's house. And when they found the
Sword of Conquest hidden underneath his mantle, they marvelled he had
carried such a treasure with him through the years, all unbeknown even
to those who walked the closest at his side.

When, after many days, the funeral train drew through the castle gate,
the king came down to meet it. There was no need of blazoned scroll to
tell Aldebaran's story. All written in his face it was, and on his
scarred and twisted frame; and by the bloodstone on his finger the old
king knew his son had failed not in the keeping of his oath. More regal
than the royal ermine seemed his motley now. More eloquent the sheathed
sword that told of years of inward struggle than if it bore the blood
of dragons, for on his face there shone the peace that comes alone of
mighty triumph.

The king looked round upon his nobles and his stalwart sons, then back
again upon Aldebaran, lying in silent majesty.

"Bring royal purple for the pall," he faltered, "and leave the Sword of
Conquest with him! No other hands will ever be found worthier to claim
it!"

That night when tall white candles burned about him there stole a
white-robed figure to the flower-strewn bier. 'Twas Vesta, decked as for
a bridal, her golden tresses falling round her like a veil. They found
her kneeling there beside him, her face like his all filled with starry
light, and round them both was such a wondrous shining, the watchers
drew aside in awe.

"'Tis as the old astrologers foretold," they whispered. "Her soul hath
entered on its deathless vigil. In truth he was the bravest that this
earth has ever known."


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: Obvious punctuation errors repaired.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Jester's Sword, by Annie Fellows Johnston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JESTER'S SWORD ***

***** This file should be named 39385.txt or 39385.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/3/8/39385/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
