The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 111,
December 13, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 111, December 13, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: April 6, 2012 [EBook #39393]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, DEC 13, 1851 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Characters with macrons have been marked in
brackets with an equal sign, as [=e] for a letter e with a macron on
top. Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts; equal signs
indicate =bold= fonts. Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. A list of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has
been added at the end.]




NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--No. 111. SATURDAY, DECEMBER 13. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Cowley and Gray. No. III.                                  465

      Old Song: The Cuckold's Cap, by J. R. Relton               468

      The Gododin, by Thomas Stephens                            468

      Folk Lore:--Lincolnshire Folk Lore                         470

      Minor Notes:--Modern Greek Names of Places--"There
      is no mistake"--Remarkable Prophecy--The Ball that
      killed Nelson--Gypsies                                     470

      QUERIES:--

      Dial Motto at Karlsbad                                     471

      Suppressed Epilogue by Dryden, by Henry Campkin            472

      Minor Queries:--Barrister--Indian Jugglers--Priory
      of Hertford--Jacobus Creusius (or Crucius)--Clekit
      House--Ballad on the Rising of the Vendee--Stanza on
      Spenser's "Shepherd's Calendar"--Prophecy respecting
      1837--Lines on the Bible--En bon et poyer--"England
      expects every man," &c.--Religious Houses in East
      Sussex--Parish Registers, Right of Search, Fees
      claimable--Bacon a Poet--Tregonwell Frampton--Weever
      and Fuller; their Autographs wanted--Is the Badger
      Amphibious?                                                472

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--Royal Registers--Paul
      Hoste--"Liber Mirabilis"--Saint Richard, King of
      England--Saint Irene or St. Erini                          474

      REPLIES:--

      Cockney                                                    475

      Replies to Minor Queries:--The Word Infortuner--Foreign
      Ambassadors--Petition for the Recall from Spain of the
      Duke of Wellington                                         476

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     477

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               478

      Notices to Correspondents                                  478

      Advertisements                                             478




Notes.


COWLEY AND GRAY, NO. III.

Before again recurring to Gray's partiality for the poems of Cowley, I
will make a remark or two on Mr. Wakefield's edition of Gray.

In his delightful "Ode to Adversity" Gray has written:

      "Daughter of Jove, relentless power,
        Thou tamer of the human breast,
      Whose _iron scourge, and tort'ring hour_,
        The bad affright, afflict the best."

Upon which Wakefield gives us this brilliant criticism:

  "'Torturing hour.' There seems to be some little impropriety and
  incongruity in this. _Consistency_ of figure rather required some
  _material_ image, like _iron scourge_ and _adamantine chain_."

Afterwards he seems to speak diffidently of his own judgment, which is
rather an unusual thing in Mr. Wakefield. Well would it have been for
the reputations of Bentley, Johnson, and Wakefield, that, before
improving upon Milton and Gray and Collins, they had remembered the
words of a truly great critic, even Horace himself:

      "Sunt delicta tamen quibus ignovisse velimus:
      Nam neque chorda sonum reddit quem vult manus et mens,
      Poscentique gravem persaepe remittit acutum;
      Nec semper feriet quodcunque minabitur arcus.
      _Verum ubi plura nitent in carmine, non ego paucis
      Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
      Aut humana parum cavit natura._"

      _Epist. ad Pisones_, 347.

Not by any means that I am allowing in this case the existence of a
"macula," or an "incuria" either. To D'Israeli's _Curiosities of
Literature_ I think I am indebted for the remark, that Gray borrowed the
expressions from Milton:

                    "When the _scourge_
      Inexorably, and _the torturing hour_
      Calls us to penance."

      _Par. Lost_, lib. ii. 90.

It is therefore with Milton, and not with Gray, that Mr. Wakefield must
settle the matter. And in proof of my earnest sympathies with him during
the very unequal contest, I will console him with "proprieties,"
"congruities," "consistencies of figure," and "material images," enough.

      "The lifted axe, the agonizing wheel,
      Luke's iron crown, and Damien's bed of steel."

      Goldsmith's _Traveller_, ad finem.

Or better for this purpose still:

      "Swords, daggers, bodkins, bearded arrows, spears,
        Nails, pincers, crosses, gibbets, hurdles, ropes,
      Tallons of griffins, paws and teeth of bears,
        Tigre's and lyon's mouths, not iron hoops,
      Racks, wheels, and trappados, brazen cauldrons which
      Boiled with oil, huge tuns which flam'd with pitch."

      Beaumonts's _Psyche_, cant. XXII. v. 69. p. 330.
      Cambridge, 1702. Folio.

"Torturing hour" is used by Campbell in his _Pleasures of Hope_, Part
I.:

      "The martyr smiled beneath avenging power,
      And braved the tyrant in his _torturing hour._"

And, indeed, "sweetest Shakspeare, Fancy's child," had used it before
any of them:

      "Is there no play, to ease the anguish of a torturing hour."

      _Midsummer Night's Dream_, Act V. Sc. 1.

Again, Gray writes in his truly sublime ode, "The Bard:"

      "On a rock, whose haughty brow
        Frowns o'er old Conway's foaming flood,
      Robed in the sable garb of woe,
        With haggard eyes the poet _stood_,
      (Loose his beard, and hoary hair
      Stream'd, like a meteor, to the troubled air),
      And with a master's hand, and prophet's fire,
      Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre."

Ordinary readers would have innocently supposed the above "pictured"
passage beyond all praise or criticism. "At non infelix" Wakefield:

      "A falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place,
      Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd."

      _Macbeth._

I must give his note as it stands, for I question whether the whole
range of verbal criticism could produce anything more ludicrous:

  "I wish Mr. Gray could have introduced a more poetical expression,
  than the inactive term _stood_, into this fine passage: as
  Shakspeare has, for instance, in his description of _Dover cliff_:

                          'Half way down
      _Hangs_ one, that gathers samphire; dreadful trade!'

      _King Lear_, Act IV. Sc. 6.

   "Which is the same happy picture as that of Virgil:

      "'Dumosa _pendere_ procul de rupe videbo.'

      _Ecl._ I. 77."

He might, when his hand was in, have adduced other passages also from
Virgil, _e.g._:

      "Imminet in rivi praestantis imaginis undam."

      _Culex_, 66.

However, with all due respect for Mr. Wakefield's "happy pictures," I do
not see anything left, but his eyebrows, for the luckless bard to _hang
by_! He could not have _hung_ by his _hair_, which "stream'd like a
meteor to the troubled air;" nor yet by his _hands_, which "swept the
deep sorrows of his lyre." Besides, there can scarcely be more opposite
pictures than that of a man gathering samphire, or kids browsing,
amongst beetling rocks; and the commanding and awe-inspiring position in
which Gray ingeniously places his bard. The expressions chosen by
Virgil, Shakspeare, and Gray were each peculiarly suitable to the
particular objects in view. If Gray was thinking of Milton, as I
intimated in a former letter, he may have still kept him in mind:

      "Incens'd with indignation, Satan _stood_
      Unterrify'd, and like a comet burn'd,
      That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
      In the Arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
      Shakes pestilence and war."

      _Par. Lost_, lib. ii. 706.

Or again:

                  "On th' other side, Satan, alarm'd,
      _Collecting all his might dilated stood_,
      Like Teneriff or Atlas unremov'd:
      His stature reach'd the sky, and on his crest
      Sat Horror plum'd; nor wanted in his grasp
      What seem'd both spear and shield."

      _Par. Lost_, lib. iv. 985.

It would be easy to adduce similar instances from the ancient sources,
but I will only mention from Milton an illustration of the [Greek:
systrepsas] of Demosthenes, and of the passionate abruptness with which
Gray commences "The Bard:"

      "As when of old some orator renown'd
      In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence
      Flourish'd, since mute, to some great cause addressed
      _Stood in himself collected_, while each part,
      Motion, each act won audience ere the tongue,
      _Sometimes in height began, as no delay
      Of preface brooking through his zeal of right_."

      _Par. Lost_, lib. ix. 670.

Wakefield's hypercritical fastidiousness would have completely defeated
the intentions of Gray. His "Bard" had a mission to fulfil which could
not have been fulfilled by one suspended like king Solomon, in the
ancient Jewish traditions, or like Mahomet's coffin, mid-way between
heaven and earth. His cry was [Greek: dos pou sto], and the poet heard
him. And thus, from his majestic position, was not--

      "Every burning word he spoke
      Full of rage and full of grief?"

In the full blaze of poetic phrensy, he flashes out at once with the
awfully grand and terrible exordium:

      "Ruin seize thee, ruthless king!
        Confusion on thy banners wait!
      Tho' fann'd by conquest's crimson wing,
        They mock the air with idle state.
      Helm, nor hauberk's twisted mail,
        Nor e'en thy virtues, Tyrant, shall avail
      To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
      From Cambria's curse, from Cambria's tears."

Collins thus describes the passion of _anger_:

      "Next Anger rush'd;--his eyes on fire,
        In lightnings own'd his secret stings:
      In one rude clash he struck the lyre,
        And swept with flurried hand the strings."

Word-painting can go no farther. When, however, he comes to
_melancholy_, in lines which contain more suggestive beauty, as well as
more poetic _inspiration_, than perhaps any others of the same length
in the English language, how does he sing?

        "With eyes upraised, as one inspired,
        Pale Melancholy _sate_ retired;
        And, from her wild sequester'd seat,
        In notes, by distance made more sweet,
      Pour'd thro' the mellow horn her pensive soul:
        And, dashing soft from rocks around,
        Bubbling runnels join'd the sound;
      Through glades and glooms the mingled measure stole,
      Or o'er some haunted stream with fond delay,
        Round a holy calm diffusing,
        Love of peace, and lonely musing,
      In hollow murmurs died away."

      _Ode on the Passions._

This is the concentrated essence of poetry. Surely Gray had _forgotten_
Collins when he penned the beautiful lines:

      "But not to one in this benighted age,
        Is that diviner inspiration given,
      That burns in Shakspeare's or in Milton's page,
        The pomp and prodigality of heaven,
      As when conspiring in the diamond's blaze,
        The meaner gems, that singly charm the sight,
      Together dart their intermingled rays,
        And dazzle with a luxury of light."

      _Stanzas to Mr. Bentley._

From a memorandum made by Gray himself, it is evident that he once had
contemplated placing his "Bard" in a _sitting_ posture; but I cannot but
rejoice that he altered his mind, for such breath-taking words could
never have been uttered in so composed and contented a posture. I give
part of it from Mr. Mason's edition:

  "The army of Edward I., as they marched through a deep valley, are
  suddenly stopped by the appearance of a venerable figure, _seated_
  on the summit of an inaccessible rock; who, with a voice more than
  human, reproaches the king with all the misery and desolation he
  had brought on his country, &c., &c. His song ended, he
  precipitates himself from the mountain, and is swallowed up by the
  river that rolls at its foot."--Vol. i. p. 73. Lond. 1807.

The last two lines of the passage before us--

      "And with a master's hand, and prophet's fire,
      _Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre_"--

remind us in some degree of Cowley:

      "Sic cecinit sanctus _vates_, digitosque volantes
      Innumeris per fila modis trepidantia movit,
      _Intimaque elicuit Medici miracula plectri_."

      _Davideidos_, lib. i. p. 13.

Again:

      "Dear as the _light that visits these sad eyes_."

      Gray, _The Bard_.

      "Namque _oculis plus illa suis, plus lumine coeli
      Dilexit_."

      _Davideidos_, lib. i. p. 14.

And--

      "The Attick warbler pours her _throat_."

      _Ode to Spring._

      "Tum magnum tenui cecinerunt _gutture_ Numen."

      _Davideidos_, lib. i. p. 20.

Also--

      "The hues of bliss more brightly glow,
      _Chastis'd_ by sabler tints of woe;
      And blended form with artful strife,
      The strength and harmony of life."

      Gray, _On the Pleasure arising from Vicissitude_.

The word _chastised_ is similarly used by Cowley:

      "From Saul his growth, and manly strength he took,
      _Chastised_ by bright Ahinoam's gentler look."

      _Davideidos_, lib. iv. p. 133.

The _idea_ of the whole passage may be found in Pope:

      "Love, Hope, and Joy, fair Pleasure's smiling train;
      Hate, Fear, and Grief, the family of Pain;
      These mix'd with art, and to due bounds confin'd,
      Make and maintain the balance of the mind;
      _The lights and shades, whose well accorded strife,
      Gives all the strength and colour of our life_."

      _Essay on Man_, Epist. II.

Again:

      "Amazement in his van with Flight combin'd,
      And Sorrow's faded form, and Solitude behind."

      Gray, _The Bard_.

      "Victorious arms thro' Ammon's land it bore,
      Ruin behind, and terror march'd before."

      _Davideidos_, lib. iv. p. 135.

Wakefield mentions some parallel passages, but omits the best of all:

  "A fire devoureth before them; and behind them a flame burneth:
  the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a
  desolate wilderness; Yea, and nothing shall escape them."--Joel,
  ii. 3.

In the "Ode on the Installation" Gray says:

      "Their tears, their little triumphs o'er
      Their _human passions_ now no more."

Wakefield dwells enraptured on the expression _human passions_. Cowley
speaks of "_humana quies_" (_Davideidos_, lib. i. p. 3.). Horace says:

      "---- Carminibus quae versant atque venenis
      _Humanos animos_."--_Sat._ viii. 19. lib. i.

_Human passions_ is not, however, a _creation_ of Gray's; for, if not
anywhere else, he might have found the words very often in the writings
of William Law, as vigorous a prose writer as England can boast of since
the days of Dr. South. See his _answer_ to Dr. Trapp's _Not Righteous
overmuch_, p. 62., Lond. 1741; and his _Serious Call_, cap. xii. p.
137., and cap. xxi. p. 293., Lond. 1816.

To mention its use by modern writers would be endless. I selected these
few passages on reading Mr. Wakefield's laudations, for otherwise I
should not perhaps have remarked the words as unusual. Wakefield adduces
from Pope's _Eloisa to Abelard_:

      "One _human tear_ shall drop, and be forgiven."

"Noble rage," Gray's _Elegy_. "Noble rage," Cowley's _Davideidos_, lib.
iv. p. 137. Again, in the _Elegy_:

      "Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
        The mopeing owl does to the moon complain
      Of such as, wand'ring near her secret bower,
        _Molest her ancient solitary reign_."

Cowley, in describing the palace of Lucifer, has some fine sentences;
and amongst them:

      "Non hic gemmatis stillantia sidera guttis
      _Impugnant saevae jus inviolabile noctis_."

      _Davideidos_, lib. i. p. 3.

And in English:

      "No gentle stars with their fair gems of light,
      _Offend the tyrannous and unquestion'd night_."

      _Davideidos_, lib. i. p. 6.

Akenside constantly used the adjective _human_ in different
conjunctions.

    RT.

  Warmington.


OLD SONG: THE CUCKOLD'S CAP.

The following song I never saw in print. I knew an old lady, who fifty
years ago used to sing it. Is it known?

      Near Reading there lived a buxom young dame,
      The wife of a miller, and Joan was her name;
      And she had a hen of a wondrous size,
      The like you never beheld with your eyes:
      It had a red head, gay wings, yellow legs,
      And every year laid her a bushel of eggs,
      Which made her resolve for to set it with speed,
      Because she'd a mind to have more of the breed.

      Now as she was setting her hen on a day,
      A shepherd came by, and thus he did say:
      "Oh, what are you doing?" She answered him then,
      "I'm going to set my miraculous hen."
      "O, Joan," said the shepherd, "to keep your eggs warm,
      And that they may prosper and come to no harm,
      You must set them all in a large cuckold's cap,
      And then all your chickens will come to good hap."

      "O, I have no cuckold's cap, shepherd," said she,
      "But nevertheless I'll be ruled by thee;
      For this very moment I'll trudge up and down,
      And borrow one, if there be one in the town."
      So she went to the baker's, and thus she did say:
      "O, lend me a cuckold's cap, neighbour, I pray,
      For I'm going to set my miraculous hen,
      And when that I've done with't, I'll bring it again."

      The baker's wife answered, and thus she replied:
      "Had I got such a thing, you should not be denied;
      But these nineteen or twenty years I have been wed,
      And my husband ne'er had such a cap to his head.
      But go to my cousin, who lives at the mill,
      I know she had one, and she may have it still;
      Tell her I sent you, she'll lend it, I know."
      "Thank ye," says Joan, and away she did go.

      So, straight to the house of the miller she went,
      And told her that she by her cousin was sent,
      To borrow a thing which was wondrous rare,
      'Twas a large cuckold's cap, which her husband did wear.
      "I do not dispute but such things there may be;
      But why should my cousin, pray, send you to me?
      For these nineteen or twenty years I've been a wife,
      And my husband ne'er had such a cap in his life.

      "But go to the quaker who lives at the Swan,
      I know she had one, and if 'tisn't gone,
      Tell her to lend it to you for my sake,
      Which I the same for a great favour shall take."
      So she went to the house of old Yea and Nay,
      And said to his wife, who was buxom and gay,
      "I'm come for to borrow, if that you will lend,
      A large cuckold's cap: I was sent by a friend."

      The quaker's wife answered and said, with a frown,
      "Why, I've no such thing, if thou'dst give me a crown;
      Besides, I'd not lend it, friend Joan, if I had,
      For fear it should make my old husband run mad.
      In town there are many young damsels, perhaps,
      Who may be ingenious in making these caps,
      But as for their names, I really can't say,
      So, therefore, friend Joan, excuse me, I pray."

      Now Joan being tired and weary withal,
      She said, "I've had no good fortune at all.
      I find that it is the beginning of sorrow,
      To trudge up and down among neighbours to borrow.
      A large cuckold's cap I wanted indeed,
      A thing of small value, and yet couldn't speed:
      But, as I'm a woman, believe me," says Joan,
      "Before it be long, I'll have one of my own."

    J. R. RELTON.


THE GODODIN.

This poem, though not absolutely the earliest in point of date, is the
longest of the numerous poems produced among the Kymry of the north of
England during the sixth and seventh centuries. Two translations have
already appeared in English; one by the Rev. Edward Davies, the author
of _Celtic Researches_, and the other by a gentleman named Probert. Of
these the latter, though very imperfect and extremely defective, is the
only one which an English reader should consult; the version given by
Davies is only a very ingenious misrepresentation. The poem has no more
reference to Hengist than it has to the man-in-the-moon; and GOMER
might have suspected that a version which, without rule or reason,
deprived historic personages of their reality, could not have been
correct. _Every proper name mentioned in the Gododin may be shown
without any alteration to be those of persons living between 577 and
642._ The proof of this assertion, when carefully examined, is all but
overwhelming; but here I can only cite a few of the most tangible facts.
The design of the poem is thus described by the bard himself:--

          "O ved O vuelin,
          O Gattraeth werin,
          Mi a na vi Aneurin
          Ys gwyr Taliesin,
          Oveg cyvrenhin
          Neu cheing Ododin
          Cyn gwawr dydd dilin."

These lines may be thus translated:--

      "Of mead from the mead horn,
      Of the host of Cattraeth,
      I, Aneurin, will do
      What is known to Taliesin,
      A man of kindred disposition.
      Will I not sing of what befell
      Gododin, before the break of day?"

From frequent notices in other parts of the poem, we find that the
subject is the defeat of (the Ottadini) the men of Gododin, in a battle
which took place in the year 603, near Cattraeth, which may be
identified with the Cataracton of Ptolemy, the Cataract of Bede, and the
present Catterick in Yorkshire. The men of Gododin in this campaign were
in league with the Novantae of Wigtonshire, the Britons of Strathclyde,
the Scots of Argyle, and the Picts of Fife and Perth. Of this army the
chiefs alone amounted to three hundred and sixty; but, to use the words
of the bard, "Mead brought shame on the best of armies;" and the chiefs,
on account of temporary success over a part of Ethelfrith's Northumbrian
army, spent the night in wild carousal. Overtures of peace were made to
them by Ethelfrith, and contemptuously rejected; they rushed pell-mell
to battle _before the break of day_; and the bard, seeing them falling
helplessly drunk from their horses, "drew a veil over his face and fled,
weeping on his way." I here assume that Cattraeth and Cataract are the
same place; and to cite only one of many evidences, the position of the
Ottadini in the immediate neighbourhood of Catterick, lends this view
strong confirmation. But there is here another assumption, to which I
invite the attention of English antiquaries. The _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_
relates the occurrence of a great battle between Ethelfrith of
Northumbria and the northern Britons in the year 603: of that battle the
site is variously named Degstan, Daegsanstane, and Egesanstane; but
antiquarian researches have not determined where Egesanstane was. Some
place it at Dawston, near Jedburg, in Scotland, and others at Dalston in
Cumberland; but all confess uncertainty. Now I assume that the place
called Egesanstane is more likely to be Siggeston, in the North Riding
of Yorkshire, which is about five or six miles east of Catterick; and
this conjecture is strongly supported by the fact that Ethelfrith in
this case was not the invader but the invaded, as it is said, "Hering,
the son of Hussa, led the enemy thither," to the dominions of
Ethelfrith, which were then but little else than the eastern coast of
Northumberland and Yorkshire. If this view be correct, our antiquaries
have hitherto been in error on this point; the site of the great battle
of 603 is no longer unknown; and Egesanstane and Cattraeth are only two
names for the same battle, just as another battle-field is variously
named the battle of Waterloo by us, and that of Mont St. Jean by the
French.

Probert places the death of Aneurin in 570: the Gododin shows him to
have been an eyewitness of an event which took place in 642. Davies,
whose works are striking evidences of a powerful intellect completely
led astray, makes the subject to have been the reported massacre at
Stonehenge, which possibly never took place, but which he fixes in 472.
Now I have cited a passage which, referring to Taliesin as an authority,
implies that Aneurin was his junior; and Taliesin was living in 610.
Again, Davies makes an abortive attempt to get rid of the last poem of
Llywarch Hen, which shows him to have been living as late as the year
640, when most of his sons had fallen in battle. Llywarch himself was
either at the battle of Cattraeth, or assisted in organising the
campaign; for though not mentioned by Aneurin, he himself alludes to the
time "when we attacked the great-smoker-of-towns (Ethelfrith)."

At this battle Aneurin was taken prisoner, and confined in "an earthen
house," from which he was released "by the bright sword of Cenau, the
son of Llywarch." The son of Llywarch could scarcely have been living in
472; and Davies in vain essays to get rid of this obdurate fact. This
passage in Aneurin--

      "Under foot was gravel,
      Stretched out was my leg
      _In the subterranean house_,
      And an iron chain
      Was bound about my knees,"

shows the use of under-ground hovels to have extended far into the
historic period.

One fact more, and this demonstration that Aneurin has been ante-dated
will be complete. The bard in three several places mentions a battle of
Mannan, in much the same way as we at this day speak of Waterloo; and it
is evident that, in the estimation of the bard and his countrymen, the
battle of Mannan was the last great event before the battle of
Cattraeth. The first of these passages is--

          "Caeawe Cymnyviat cyvlat Erwyt
          .    .    .    .    .    .
          Rae ergit _Cadfannan_ catwyt."

      "_Caeog_ was a conflictor with destructive pikes.
      .    .    .    .    .    .
      He was preserved from the blows of Mannan-fight."

_Caeog_, whom Davies converts into the adjective "adorned," was the
brother of Cynddylan, Prince of Powys (_Elegies of Llywarch Hen_, p.
70.). On the death of his brother in 577, he went to North Briton; he
escaped from the blows of Mannan, and _afterwards_ fell at Cattraeth.
Again, of a chief named Twrch it is said:--

      "He loved the battling of spears,
      At Mannan, and before Aldud the renowned."

          "Emyt af crennyt y gat waewawr
          Catvannan yr Aelut clodvawr."

Again he says of another chief:--

          "Yn dieding . . . . .
          Ac Adan Cadvannan cochre,
          Veirch marchawg goddrud y more."

      "Resistless
      As Aeddan of the blood-stained steeds of Mannan-fight,
      He was an impetuous rider that morning."

Here we have three separate proofs of the fact, that Cadvannan was
anterior to the battle of Cattraeth: now when and where did that take
place? In the year 582, and probably at Clackmannan, on the Firth of
Forth in Scotland. Here is my authority (_Annals of Ulster_):

   "DLXXXII. Bellum Manan, in quo victor erat Aodhan Mar Gawran."

The battle of Cattraeth must be that of 603, at which Aeddan was also
present.

These few annotations from a new translation of _The Gododin_ now in
MS., will, it is hoped, satisfy your correspondent GOMER that I am
justified in repeating the views of Davies. Should he wish to get a
correct text, and a judicious version of _The Gododin_, he had better
subscribe to a translation by the Rev. J. Williams (author of the
_Ecclesiastical Antiquities of the Cymry_), now about to issue from the
Llandovery press, at a very moderate price. Probert's translation is
very scarce.

Is there no tradition of this battle at Sigston?

    THOS. STEPHENS.


FOLK LORE.

_Lincolnshire Folk Lore._--The following, illustrating as it does a
superstition still very prevalent in Lincolnshire, may interest some of
your readers. I transcribed it a few days ago in the British Museum from
Holly's _Lincolnshire Notes_, vol. iii. fol. 358.:--

  "The other I receaued from Mr. Thomas Codd, minister of Laceby in
  Linc, w[=c]h he gave under his owne hand; he himself being a
  native of ye place where this same happened, and it was thus:

  "At Axholme, alias Haxey, in ye Isle, one Mr. Edward Vicars
  (curate to Mr. Wm. Dalby, vicar), together with one Robert
  Hallywell a taylor, intending on St. Marke's even at night to
  watch in ye church porch to see who shoud die in ye yeare
  following (to this purpose using divers ceremonies), they
  addressing themselues to the busines, Vicars (being then in his
  chamber) wished Hallywell to be going before and he would
  p[=s]ently follow him. Vicars fell asleep, and Hallywell
  (attending his coming in ye church porch) forthwith sees certaine
  shapes p[=s]nting themselves to his view, resemblances (as he
  thought) of diuers of his neighbours, who he did nominate; and all
  of them dyed the yeare following; and Vicars himselfe (being
  asleep) his phantome was seen of him also, and dyed with ye rest.
  This sight made Hallywell so agast that he looks like a Ghoast
  ever since. The lord Sheffield (hearing this relation) sent for
  Hallywell to receiue account of it. The fellow fearing my Lord
  would cause him to watch the church porch againe he hid himselfe
  in the Carrs till he was almost starued. The number of those that
  died (whose phantasmes Hallywell saw) was as I take it about fower
  score.

  "Tho. Cod, Rector Ecclie de Laceby."

    EDWARD PEACOCK.

  Bottesford Moors, Messingham, Kirton in Lindsey.


Minor Notes.

_Modern Greek Names of Places._--It is commonly stated in books of
geography that the modern name of Athens is _Statines_. In Hennin's
_Manuel de Numismatique Ancienne_ it is stated to be _Satines_ or
_Atini_; and Mr. Akerman, in his most excellent _Numismatic Manual_,
makes the same statement. We find it stated also universally that the
modern name of Cos is _Stanco_; and this has been repeated in all maps
and charts until the recently published Admiralty Chart, No. VI. of the
Archipelago series, where it is called _Cos_.

The origin of this and other similar blunders is curious. Athens retains
its plural termination, and is always used with the article, [Greek: hai
Athenai]. If you ask a peasant walking from the Piraeus whither he is
going, he will answer you, [Greek: Eis tas Athenas], but will rapidly
enunciate it as follows, [Greek: 's't'sAthenas], whence _Statines_,
lately reduced to _Satines_.

I am surprised that Cos was not set down as _Stinco_ rather than
_Stanco_, for if you hail a Coan vessel, and ask whither it is bound,
the [Greek: karaboukyri], or skiff-master, would certainly reply [Greek:
sten Ko], if Cos were his destination.

I find that both M. Hennin and Mr. Akerman assert that Thebes is now
called _Stives_. I conversed with a noble-looking youth on the ruins of
Eleusis, and asking him from what part of the country he came, I shall
not easily forget the stately dignity with which he tossed his capote
over his shoulder, and answered [Greek: eimi Thebaios]--I am a Theban.
The bold Boeotian would have stared in amazement had I spoken to him of
_Stives_, although, if homeward-bound, he would have said he was going
[Greek: 's tas Thebas].

The Turks have made Istambol or Stamboul out of [Greek: sten polin]; and
we may, perhaps, hear from our friends, the Nepaulese ambassadors, that
the capital of England is called _Tolondon_, and that of France _Apari_.

    L. H. J. T.

"_There is no mistake._"--The Duke of Wellington's reply to Mr.
Huskisson, "There is no mistake," has become familiar in the mouths of
both those who remember the political circumstances that gave rise to
it, and those who have received it traditionally, without inquiring into
the origin of it. You may perhaps think it worthy of a "Note" that this
was not the first occasion on which the Duke used those celebrated
words. The Duke (then Earl of Wellington) in a private letter to Lord
Bathurst, dated Flores de Avila, 24th July, 1812, writes in the
following easy style:

  "I hope that you will be pleased with _our_ battle, of which the
  dispatch contains as accurate an account as I can give you. _There
  was no mistake_, everything went on as it ought; and there never
  was an army so beaten in so short a time."

The whole letter is well deserving of insertion; but my object is simply
to draw attention to the occasion on which the Duke first used the
sentence now so well known.

    F. W. J.

_Remarkable Prophecy._--The following prediction of St. Caesario, Bishop
of Arles, in the year 542, may not be considered void of interest at the
present moment. It is taken from a book, entitled _Liber Mirabilis_,
printed in Gothic characters, and deposited in the Royal Library,
Paris:--

  "The administration of the kingdom, France, will be so blended,
  that they shall leave it without defenders. The hand of God shall
  extend itself over them, and over all rich; all the nobles shall
  be deprived of their estates and dignity; a division shall spring
  up in the church of God, and there shall be two husbands, the one
  true, and the other adulterous. The legitimate husband shall be
  put to flight; there shall be great carnage, and as great a
  profusion of blood as in the day of the Gentiles. The universal
  church and the whole world shall deplore the ruin and destruction
  of a most celebrated city, the capital and mistress of France. The
  altars of the temple shall be destroyed, the holy virgins outraged
  shall fly from their seats, and the whole church shall be stripped
  of her temporal gods; but at length the black eagle and the lion
  shall appear hovering from far countries. Misery to thee, O city
  of philosophy! thou shalt be subjected! A captive humbled even to
  confusion, shall at last receive his crown, and destroy the
  children of Brutus."

    ALPHA.

_The Ball that killed Nelson_ (Vol. iv., p. 174.).--

  "The musket-ball that killed Nelson is now in the possession of
  the Rev. F. W. Baker, of Bathwick, near Bath. A considerable
  portion of the gold lace, pad, and silk cord of the epaulette,
  with a piece of coat, were found attached to it. The gold lace was
  as firmly fixed as if it had been inserted into the metal while in
  a state of fusion. The ball, together with the lace, &c., was
  mounted in crystal and silver, and presented by Captain Hardy to
  the late Sir William Beattie, the surgeon of the Victory."

I have extracted this from the _Illustrated London News_, First Number.
If this relic be now in the possession of Prince Albert, I presume it
became his by purchase or presentation from the above-named gentleman.

    BLOWEN.

_Gypsies._--The Indian origin of the numerals of this people is evident
from the following comparison:

         Sanscrit.     Hungarian    Spanish
                         Gypsy.     Gitano.
       1. eka             jek        yeque
       2. dwaou           dui        dui
       3. traya           trin       trin
       4. tchatouara      schtar     estar
       5. panyntcha       pansch     pansche
       6. chach           tschov     job
       7. sapta           efta       hefta
       8. achtaou         ochto      otor
       9. nava            enija      esnia
      10. dasa            doesch      deque

The Sanscrit must be read with a French pronunciation, being from
Balbi's _Atlas Ethnographique_; the Hungarian Gypsy as German, and the
last as Spanish; the two latter are from Borrow's _Zuicali_, vol. ii. p.
118.

    T. J. BUCKTON.

  Lichfield.




Queries.


DIAL MOTTO AT KARLSBAD.

The inclosed inscription was brought over for me from Karlsbad by the
late Lord Chief Justice Tindal. Can any one throw light upon the capital
letters? I give it copied exactly from Sir Nicholas Tindal's writing,
with his observation beneath, and may safely venture to warrant _his_
accuracy. It might be supposed to be a chronogram, but for the
introduction of the letter "E."

  "_Motto from a Dial formed on the two Sides of the Angle of a
  House at Karlsbad._

        "'Hora Hor[I]s [CE]d[I]t, pere[V]nt s[IC] Te[M]pora nob[I]s,
        [V]t t[I]b[I] f[I]nal[I]s s[I]t bona, [VIV]e bene.'

  "The letters which are written in capitals were so in the original
  inscription, and were coloured red: probably the anagram of some
  one's name is concealed under them."

Having been a collector of existing dial mottoes for many years, I shall
feel greatly obliged to any of your correspondents who will inform me
of remarkable ones in their own neighborhood.

There are four--one in English, one in Latin, one in Greek, and one in
Hebrew--on the keep of Carlisle Castle; but though I possess the three
former, I have not the last, and should be very glad to obtain it, if
possible.

There is a motto at Bonneville in Switzerland, as I have been told:

      "Soli Soli Soli."

What can be the interpretation thereof?

Of course I am acquainted with Leadbetter's _Art of Dialling_, and the
curious list of mottoes he gives, together with the still more curious
translations of the same; as _e.g._

      "Aut Caesar, aut nullus."
      (I shine, or shroud!)

Or--

      "Sic transit gloria mundi:"
      (So marches the god of day!!)

But what I want is, mottoes from dials actually in existence.

    HERMES.


SUPPRESSED EPILOGUE BY DRYDEN.

Mr. Payne Collier communicates to the _Athenaeum_ of the 22nd November,
1851, an interesting letter relative to an unspoken epilogue to Dryden,
and Nat Lee's famous tragedy of _The Duke of Guise_. This rare
composition, entitled "Another Epilogue intended to have been spoken to
the Play before it was forbidden last Summer, written by Mr. Dryden,"
occurs in conjunction with the Prologue and Epilogue which were actually
spoken, upon a separate sheet of foolscap; in which shape, as Mr.
Collier informs us, they were often printed for sale at the playhouse
doors. Mr. Collier's acceptable communication suggests a Query or two.
At the end of my copy of this play, the 4to. edit. of 1687, is the
following

  "ADVERTISEMENT.

  "There was a Preface intended to this play, in vindication of it,
  against two scurrilous libels lately printed. But it was judged,
  that a defence of this nature would require more room than a
  preface would reasonably allow. For this cause, and for the
  importunity of the stationers, who hastened their impression, 'tis
  deferred for some little time, and will be printed by itself. Most
  men are already of opinion that neither of the pamphlets deserve
  an answer, because they are stuffed with open falsities, and
  sometimes contradict each other; but, for once, they shall have a
  day or two thrown away upon them, tho' I break an old custom for
  their sakes, which was to scorn them."

Was this threatened preface ever issued? Are the "two scurrilous libels"
here spoken of so scornfully, known to be in existence?

The new-found Epilogue belongs as much to the political as to the
dramatic history of those troublous times; and let us hope, _maugre_ the
unfortunate coarseness of the school to which it belongs, that Mr.
Collier will some day present us with a reprint of it _in toto_,
accompanied by the above noted preface, if it exist. There is ample
matter, as the pages of "NOTES AND QUERIES" have lately shown, for a new
volume of Dryden Miscellanies.

    HENRY CAMPKIN.


Minor Queries.

332. _Barrister._--Can any of your correspondents refer me to the etymon
of this name, given to a vocation attached to our English courts of law?
I can find none even in the comprehensive _Etymological Dictionary_ of
Nat. Bailey, unless, indeed, by dividing the word into two portions,
viz. "bar" and "rister," and then, with a little of the critic's
license, assuming that the latter half might originally have been
written "roister." But as this analysis would _render_ it so little
characteristic of the class so named, and would strongly imply that some
portion at least of that distinguished body was once viewed as the
"roisters," _i.e._ "bullies and blusterers," of that division of our
courts called "the Bar," it is evident that we cannot reasonably look
for the derivation of the latter part of the word from that source. But
still, as there may be those who are inclined, in spite of these cogent
objections, to doubt whether this may be its true etymon; and it is fit
that any such lurking and slanderous suspicion should be dispelled from
every sceptic mind, some one of your curious and learned correspondents,
anxious to effect it, will, perhaps, tax his etymological skill to the
suggestion of a less offensive, and more just and appropriate
derivation, than "Bar-roister."

    W. Y.

333. _Indian Jugglers._--Can any of your readers favour me with
references to any works containing an account of the trick practised by
jugglers in the East Indies, and known there by the name of "growing a
mango?" In performing this trick a seed is planted in a pot or basket of
earth, which is then covered up from the sight by a cloth or other wire;
in a little time this is removed, and the seed is seen to have
germinated, and its growth is similarly shown in successive stages, the
last of which exhibits the plant in fruit. Hundreds of Europeans have
seen the trick, but I have never heard of any one who was able to detect
the successive substitutions in which it obviously consists. I do not at
present recollect the name of any author who takes any notice of it.

    N.

334. _Priory of Hertford._--The Priory of Hertford was founded by Ralph
de Limesey and his wife Hadewise, some time after the Conquest. Can any
of your antiquarian correspondents inform me in what year this took
place?

The Rev. DR. ROCK had the politeness to answer my Query respecting the
Abbot Eustacius; perhaps he could oblige me by solving the present one.

    J. L.

335. _Jacobus Creusius_ (_or Crucius_).--_Jacobi Creusii Theologi et
Medici, Frisii, Victimas Humanas._ I should be greatly obliged by any
information respecting the author, or the book, which I find so
mentioned in a MS. of 1677.

    S. W. RIX.

  Beccles.

336. _Clekit House._--In the will of John Buttery of Bury, 1557, is this
item:

  "My capitall mesuage, with the maltinge house and the tenement
  called Banyards, with all the gardaines, yards, and close, to them
  belonginge,--except the ij tenements called the _Clekit_ House."

What is the meaning of _Clekit_? In the E.-Anglian dialect, _clicket_ is
"to chatter." Phillips has "CLICKET, the knocker of a door, but Chaucer
uses it for a key."

    BURIENSIS.

337. _Ballad on the Rising of the Vendee._--Who is the author of a
modern ballad on the Rising of the Vendee, of which the last lines are--

      "We crush'd, like ripen grapes, Montreuil, we tore
          down old Vetier--
      We charged them with our naked breasts, and took them
          with a cheer--
      We'll hunt the robbers through the land, from Seine to
          sparkling Rhone.
      Now 'Here's a health to all we love: our King shall
          have his own!'"

    D. B. J.

338. _Stanza on Spenser's "Shepherd's Calender."_--In some of the early
quarto editions of Spenser, in the "Shepherd's Calender," June, there is
a stanza which in almost all the subsequent folio editions is omitted. I
shall be much obliged for any information as to when and why it was left
out; in the copies in which it appears it is the twelfth stanza, and is
as follows:--

      "Now dead he is, and lieth wrapt in led,
      (O why should death on him such outrage show?)
      And all his passing skill with him is fled,
      The fame whereof doth daily greater grow;
      But if on me some little drops would flow
      Of that the spring was in his learned head,
      I soon should learn these words to wail my woe,
      And teach the trees their trickling tears to shed."

The last line is a good specimen of alliteration.

    E. N. W.

  Southwark, Nov. 17. 1851.

339. _Prophecy respecting 1837._--I remember seeing in the year 1837, I
think in one of the morning papers, the following lines, which were
said, as far as my memory serves me, to have been taken from an old
almanac, in which they were prophetical of what should happen in the
above-named year:--

      "By the power to see through the ways of Heaven,
      In one thousand eight hundred and thirty-seven,
      Shall the year pass away without any spring,
      And on England's throne shall not sit a king."

Can any of your readers inform me whether these lines were only composed
after the events related took place--that is, at the time the lines
appeared in the paper in which I saw them, or whether they are really to
be found in any old almanac; and if so, in what almanac, and in what
year?

    N. L. N.

  Maidstone.

340. _Lines on the Bible._--In a small volume of Sacred Poetry, in the
possession of a friend of mine, the following lines on the Bible are
ascribed to Byron:

      "Within this awful volume lies
      The mystery of mysteries;
      Oh! happiest they of human race
      To whom our God has given grace
      To hear, to read, to fear, to pray,
      To lift the latch, and force the way:
      But better had they ne'er been born
      Who read to doubt, or read to scorn."

Not having met with these lines in the works of Lord Byron, can any of
your readers say whether they are his, or not, or who is the author?

    JOHN ALGOR.

  Sheffield.

341. _En bon et poyer._--The family of Cockayne of Ashbourne, co. Derby,
used as a motto upon their seals, in the fourteenth century, the
following words, "En bon et poyer." This has been explained to mean,
"Boni est posse," or "Right is might." Can any of your readers suggest
anything to confirm or throw doubt on this interpretation?

    FRANCIS M. NICHOLS.

342. _"England expects every man," &c._--For nearly fifty years our
countrymen have taught their children Nelson's last signal--

      "England expects every man to do his duty."

Such was my impression of this emphatic form of words. I am surprised to
see upon the column in Trafalgar Square,

      "England expects every man _will_ do his duty."

Pray is there any authority for the inscription as it there stands?

    E. N. H.

343. _Religious Houses in East Sussex._--Can any of your readers refer
me to any sources of information, printed or in manuscript, in addition
to those mentioned in the last edition of Dugdale's _Monasticon_,
respecting the following religious houses in East Sussex: _Otham_,
_Bayham_, _Michelham_, _Robertsbridge_?

    E. V.

344. _Parish Registers--Right of Search--Fees claimable._--Considerable
attention has of late been excited with reference to the difficulties
attending the ordinary means of access to various public depositories of
documentary evidence in this country. In some of these departments, the
commencement of a welcome reform is already apparent; others, it is but
reasonable to hope, will, ere long, yield to the frank and inquisitive
spirit of the times in this respect. The present communication is
confined to a very wide, though less dignified source of official
information, viz. Parish Registers. I am sure I need not say one word to
illustrate the importance of the last-mentioned class of evidence to the
genealogist, the topographer, or the archaeological inquirer in
general,--in one word, to those who enter into the spirit of the "NOTES
AND QUERIES." I beg, therefore, to submit the following inquiries:

1. Have the actual parishioners of a place a right to consult their own
register of baptisms, marriages, and burials, _gratuitously_? If not:--

2. What fee is _legally_ demandable,--and by whom,--and under what
restrictions? And--

3. Do the terms differ when the inquirer is not a _parishioner_? If so,
in what respect do they differ?

These inquiries have reference to the contents of the chests kept in, or
in connection with, parochial churches and chapels, and not to those in
the custody of the modern "Registrar." I need scarcely add, that my
concern is with the strictly _legal_ rights of search, and demand of
fees; and not as to what courtesy may concede, or usage sanction.

    D.

  Rotherfield.

345. _Bacon a Poet._--In Boswell's Journal of his _Tour to the Hebrides_
he quotes the subjoined couplet, premising, "As Bacon says--

      "Who then to frail mortality shall trust,
      But limns the water, or but writes in dust."

Is not _Bacon_ here a slip of the pen or press? Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord
Bacon, and Bacon the sculptor, are the only conspicuous men of the name,
and none of them that I know wrote verses.

    R. CS.

346. _Tregonwell Frampton._--Where can I obtain any particulars of the
life of Tregonwell Frampton, Esq., commonly called the "Father of the
Turf," who died at an advanced age about 1727-8. Reference is made to
him in the _Rambler_.

    T. R. W.

347. _Weever and Fuller--their Autographs wanted._--Can any of your
readers direct the etcher of a portrait of Weever, where to find his
autograph, from which to make a copy to illustrate it? It is not to be
found in the British Museum. The extreme paucity of information
respecting this worthy is somewhat strange, considering the value of his
contributions to literature. In our leading biographies and cyclopaedias
his name does not occur. By-the-bye, where was he buried, and what
inscription is there on his "funeral monument?"

An etched portrait is about to be published in the next part of the
_Antiquarian Etching Club_, of Fuller, the author of _Worthies_, _Church
History_, &c., without a copy of his signature for the same reason,
unless one should be discovered.

It has been suggested that search made in the library of Queen's
College, Cambridge, might prove successful in both cases, from the fact
of their having both belonged to that college. Perhaps some member of
the university would kindly undertake the inquiry.

    A. E. C.

348. _Is the Badger Amphibious?_--Turner (_Sacred History of the World_,
Letter XV. vol. i. p. 428. 4th edit. 1833) says:

  "The beaver, otter, and _badger_ are _amphibious_ creatures, but
  not oviparous."

Surely this is a mistake, and worthy of a Note? I cannot find the badger
mentioned as an _amphibious_ animal in any modern zoology. I certainly
have not by me Kerr's _Linnaeus_ to refer to, as a verification of Sharon
Turner's note on this passage.

    CHARLES PASLAM.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Royal Registers._--I have nine volumes of a work published by Bew,
Paternoster Row, and which appeared from 1778 to 1784, pretending to
give sketches of the characters of public men by his Majesty. Can any of
your correspondents inform me who was the writer, and what number of
volumes were published?

    B.

  [This literary curiosity was completed in nine volumes, which are
  sometimes bound in three. In 1841 Mr. H. G. Bohn advertised a copy
  with all the names filled up in manuscript, the initials being no
  doubt sufficiently intelligible at that time. For a notion of the
  work on its first appearance, see the _Gentleman's Magazine_, vol.
  xlviii. p. 130.]

_Paul Hoste._--Paul Hoste, a Jesuit, published early in the seventeenth
century a small quarto with diagrams on "Breaking the Line," so much
discussed, as being first done in Rodney's action. If any one can give
me some account of Paul Hoste and his _scientific_ views on naval
architecture, the information will be acceptable to

    AEGROTUS.

  [See Chalmers' and Gorton's _Biographical Dictionaries_; Moreri,
  _Le Grand Dictionnaire_, and _Nouveau Dictionnaire Historique,
  s.v._]

"_Liber Mirabilis._"--Can any of your readers inform me if there be a
copy of the _Liber Mirabilis_ in any library in the United Kingdom? It
contains a remarkable prediction of St. Caesario, Bishop of Arles, in the
year 542. The work is printed in Gothic characters, and there is a copy
in the Royal Library, Paris.

    CLERICUS.

  Dublin.

  [A copy is in the library of the British Museum, consisting of two
  parts. Part I. is in Latin, and Part II. in French, 4to., 1523.]

_Saint Richard, King of England._--In the Romish Calendar we find, on
the 7th February, amongst other saints, "Saint Richard, King of
England." Which of our Richards does this refer to? I have never read in
history of any of them having been canonized, nor should I have thought
any of them at all a likely candidate for that honour; but if such was
really the case, I presume that Coeur de Lion must be the man, and that
his valour in the Crusades was suffered to outweigh his many other
unsaintly qualities.

    J. S. WARDEN.

  Balica.

  [St. Richard was an English prince, in the kingdom of the West
  Saxons, which it is probable he renounced that he might dedicate
  himself to the pursuit of Christian perfection. About the year
  722, on his way to Rome, he died suddenly at Lucca in Italy. See
  Butler's _Lives of the Saints_, Feb. 7.]

_Saint Irene or St. Erini._--Can any of your correspondents direct me to
where information may be found regarding the Saint Irene or St. Erini,
from whom the Grecian island of Santorin takes its name?

    [Greek: S.]

  Bristol Dec. 1. 1851.

  [Irene, Empress of Constantinople, A.D. 797-802, was one of the
  most extraordinary women in Byzantine history. The Greeks have
  placed her among their saints, and celebrate her memory on the
  15th of August. Consult Smith's _Dictionary of Greek and Roman
  Biography and Mythology_, and Gibbon's _Decline and Fall_, chap.
  xlviii.]




Replies.


COCKNEY.

(Vol. iv., pp. 273. 318.)

The following passages collected from various sources, will perhaps help
to illustrate the origin and the several meanings of this word
_Cockney_:--

Fuller's first sense is--

  "One coaks'd or cockered, made a wanton or nestle-cock of,
  delicately bred and brought up, so that when grown men or women
  they can endure no hardship, nor comport with pains taking."

  "'Tis not their fault, but our mothers', our cockering mothers,
  who for their labour make us to be called _Cockneys_."--Dekker, _A
  Knight's Conjuring_, 1607.

      "And when this jape is told another day
      I shall be halden a daffe or a _Cokenay_."

      Chaucer, _The Reve's Tale_.

The following extracts will show that to this first sense Fuller might
have added, _one abundantly and daintily fed:_--

  "Unlesse it be shortly considered, and that faukons be broughte to
  _a more homelye diete_, it is ryght likely, that within a shorte
  space of yeares, our familiar pultry shall be as scarse, as be now
  partriche and fesaunte. I speake not this in disprayse of the
  faukons, but of them whiche keepeth them lyke _Cokeneys_."--Elyot,
  _The Governour_, 1557.

  "Some again are in the other extreme, and draw this mischief on
  their heads by too ceremonious and strict diet, being over precise
  _cockney-like_, and curious in their observation of
  meats."--Burton. _Anatomy of Melancholy_.

Fuller's second sense is--

  "One utterly ignorant of husbandry and huswifery such as is
  practised in the country, so that he may be easily persuaded
  anything about rural commodities, and the original thereof."

He relates the old _cock-neigh_ story, and adds another jest of a
similar kind:

  "One merrily persuaded a she-citizen, that seeing _malt_ did not
  grow, the good huswives in the country did spin it; 'I knew as
  much,' said the _Cockney_, 'for one may see the threads hang out
  at the ends thereof."

Shakspeare uses the word _Cockney_ in this latter sense in _King Lear_,
Act II. Sc. 4.:

  "_Lear._ Oh me, my heart, my rising heart! But down."

  "_Fool._ Cry to it, nuncle, as the _Cockney_ did to the eels, when
  she put 'em i' th' paste alive; she knapt 'em o' th' coxcombs with
  a stick, and cried 'Down, wantons, down;' 'twas her brother, that
  in pure kindness to his horse buttered his hay."

_Cokeney_ was apparently used in very early times to designate _London_.
In the _Britannia_, art. "Suffolk," Hugh Bigod, a rebellious baron in
the time of Henry II., boasts thus:

      "Were I in my castle of Bungey,
      Upon the river Waveney,
      I would ne care for the King of _Cockeney_."

I conceive that _Cokeney_ in this sense is derived from the Anglo-Saxon
word _cycene_, a kitchen or cooking place. Nares, however, in his
_Glossary_, says:

  "Le pais de cocagne, in French, means a country of good cheer; in
  old French _coquaine_; cocagna, in Italian, has the same meaning.
  Both might be derived from _coquina_. This famous country, if it
  could be found, is described as a region 'where the hills were
  made of sugar-candy, and the loaves ran down the hills, crying
  'Come eat me, _come eat me_.'"

Hickes gives, in his _Anglo-Saxon Grammar_, an ancient poem, describing
the plenteous land of _Cokeney_ or _Cokaigne_:

      "Fur in see hi west Spaynge
      Is a lond ihote Cocaygne
      Ther nis lond under hevenriche
      Of wel of goodnis hit iliche
      In Cokaygne is met and drink
      Withute care, how, and swink
      .......
      Ther nis lac of met no cloth
      .......
      Ther beth rivers gret and fine
      Of oile, melk, honi and wine.
      Water seruith ther to nothing
      Bot to siyt and to waussing.
      .......
      Ther is a wel fair abbei
      Of white monkes and of grei
      .......
      The gees irostid on the spitte
      Fleey to that abbai, god hit wot,
      And gredith 'gees al hote, al hot.'"

Shakspeare's use of _Cockney_, in _Twelfth Night_, Act IV. Sc. 1., is
somewhat obscure; but I conceive that the Clown means to express his
opinion that the world is already replete with folly:

      "_Seb._ I prithee vent thy folly somewhere else; thou know'st
              not me.

      "_Clown._ Vent my folly! He has heard that word of some great
              man, and now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly! I am
              afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a
              _Cockney_."

The Clown probably intends to say, that to vent his folly to the world
will be like sending coals to Newcastle, or provisions to _Cocagne_; for
that, as regards folly, this great lubber the world will prove to be a
_Cocagne_ or _Cokeney_, _i.e._ a land of plenty. He may, however, mean
to hint, in a round-about way, that _Cockneys_, or natives of London,
are full of folly; or that the world is as well supplied with folly as a
_Cockney_ is with food.

I do not know whether I committed a _Cockney_, a _clerical_, or a
_canonical_ error, when I wrote the name of Chaucer under the following
lines instead of the word _Cokeney_:--

      "I have no peny, quod Pierce, polettes for to bie,
      Ne neither gose ne grys, but two grene cheses,
      A few curdes and creame, and an haver cake,
      And two loves of beanes and branne, bake for mi folke,
      And yet I say by my soule, I have no salt bacon
      Ne no _Cokeney_, by Christe, coloppes to make."

      _The Vision of Pierce Plowman_, printed 1550.

      "At that fest thay wer seruyd with a ryche aray,
      Every fyve and fyve had a _Cokenay_."

      _The Turnament of Tottenham._

The sentence for which I am responsible, p. 318., should read thus:
"_Cokeney_, in the above lines quoted by Webster, probably refers to any
substantial dish of fresh meat which might be cut in collops." I may add
that this use of the word brings it into close alliance with the
Anglo-Saxon word _cocnunga_, signifying _things cooked_, _pies_,
_puddings_, and _cock's-meat_.

The French and Neapolitan festivals, called _cocagne_ and _cocagna_,
appear to have presented themselves in this country under the form of
Cockneys' feasts and revels conducted by the King of Cockneys. Strype,
in the first appendix to his edition of Stow's _London_, under the head
"Stepney," describes at some length "The Cockney's Feast of Stepney;"
and Dugdale, in his _Origines Juridiciales_, recapitulates an order
entered on the _Register of Lincoln's Inn_, vol. iv. fo. 81a, in the 9th
of Henry VIII.:

  "That the _King of Cockneys_ in Childermass-day should sit and
  have due service, and that he and all his officers should use
  honest and lawful manner and good order, without any waste of
  destruction making, in wine, brawn, chely, or other victuals: as
  also that he, his marshal, butler, and constable marshal, should
  have their lawful and honest commandments by delivery of the
  officers of Christmas: and that the said King of Cockneys, ne none
  of his officers, medyll neither in the buttry nor in the Stuard of
  Christmass his office--upon pain of xi's. for every such medling.
  And lastly, that Jack Straw and all his adherents should be
  thenceforth utterly banisht, and no more to be used in this house
  upon pain to forfeit, for every time five pounds, to be levied on
  every fellow hapning to offend against this rule."

Some obliging bencher of Lincoln's Inn will perhaps have the goodness to
examine, or to permit me to examine the _Register_, to ascertain whether
this potentate was king of Cockneys, as Dugdale has it, or of Cockney.

    A LONDONER.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_The Word Infortuner_ (Vol. iv., p. 328.).--J. C. W. enquires, "Is
_infortuner_ to be found in any old Dictionary?" I would state that I
have not been able to find it; but in Cockeram's _English Dictionarie_,
1639, I find "_Infortunate_, unhappy;" and in Bailey's _Dictionary_,
vol. i. 1753, "_Infortunate_, unhappy, unlucky;" "_Infortune_,
misfortune," referred to Chaucer; "_Infortunes_, an astrological term,
applied to Saturn and Mars, because of their unfortunate influences;"
"_Infortunid_, unfortunate," referred to Chaucer; and in vol. ii of
Bailey's _Dictionary_, 1727, I find "_Infortunateness_, unhappiness,
unluckiness." It is singular that Cockeram gives "infortunate" in his
first alphabet, which, he says, in his preface, "hath the _choicest_
words now in use, wherewith our language is enriched." "Unfortunate" he
places in the second alphabet, which, he says, "contains the _vulgar_
words." Neither Cole's _English Dictionary_, 1685, nor Blount's
_Glossographia_, 1670, nor Phillips' _World of Words_, 1678, contain the
word "unfortunate" in any of its terminations or applications. Mr.
Halliwell, in his _Dictionary of Provincial Words_, gives the word
"_Infortune_, misfortune," deriving it from the Anglo-Norman.

Whilst referring thus to our early lexicographers, allow me to allude
to an anecdote respecting, Dr. Adam Lyttleton, who, when compiling his
Latin Dictionary, announced the verb "concurro" to his amanuensis; the
latter, imagining, from an affinity of sound, that the first two
syllables gave the English meaning of the verb, said, "_Concur_, I
suppose, sir." To which the Doctor peevishly replied, "_Concur_,
condog." The scribe wrote down what he supposed his employer dictated,
and the word "condog" was inserted, and stands as one interpretation of
"concurro" in the first edition of the Dictionary; it is, of course,
expunged from subsequent ones. I give this statement as I find it in
print. I do not vouch for its correctness, not having the first edition
of the Dictionary to refer to. Strange to say, however, "condog" was
regarded as a synonym, or rather as an equivalent to "concur," long
before the date of the first edition of Dr. Lyttleton's _Dictionary_. In
Cockeram's _Dictionarie_, before referred to, sixth edition, 1639, I
find the second alphabet, among the words which the author calls
_vulgar_, the verb "to agree" defined "Concurre, cohere, _condog_,
condiscend." Cockeram's _Dictionary_ was evidently a work of some
authority in its day; it was dedicated to Sir Richard Boyle, and reached
to, at least, a _sixth_ edition, which edition is announced in the
title-page as "revised and enlarged," and therefore "condog" did not owe
its place in it to the error of an amanuensis or transcriber. The book,
although small, contains much curious matter, to which I may, perhaps,
hereafter refer. In his "premonition to the reader," he says, "where
thou meetest with a word marked thus +, know you that it is now out of
use, and only used of some ancient writers." Among these words thus
marked as obsolete in 1639, I find, on casually opening the book, the
following, "abandon, abate, bardes, insanity." He also defines _Troy
weight_ as "a pound weight of twelve ounces, wherewith _bread_, precious
stones, gold and silver are weighed." Blount also (1670), and Cole
(1685), say bread was sold by Troy weight; the latter adds medicines to
the articles sold by that standard. Cowell, in his _Law Dictionary_
(1708), says, "Electuaries, and medicinal things, and _brede_, are to be
weighed by Troy weight;" Bayley, in 1753, says, "Gold, silver, drugs,"
&c., are weighed by Troy weight, but does not enumerate bread. Can any
of your readers inform me when bread was first directed to be sold by
Troy weight, and when it ceased to be so?

    P. T.

  Stoke Newington.

_Foreign Ambassadors_ (Vol. iv., p. 442.).--There is a list of French
ambassadors, envoys, ministers, and other political agents at the court
of England, in the _Annuaire_ of the Societe de l'histoire de France for
1848, which is the twelfth volume of the series. The list commences in
1396, and is continued to 1830.

I believe there is a copy of this most useful publication in the British
Museum. If so, it should appear in the _experimental_ catalogue of 1841,
under the head of ACADEMIES--EUROPE--FRANCE--PARIS--_Societe de
l'histoire de France!_

    BOLTON CORNEY.

_Petition for the Recall from Spain of the Duke of Wellington_ (Vol.
iv., p. 233.).--AEGROTUS asked if a copy of the petition to the above
effect from the Corporation of London to the Crown can be found, as it
is a droll historical document, which should not sink into oblivion; he
jumps at the conclusion that it does exist, but I think is mistaken.
Through the kindness of a friend who is in the Corporation, I have had
the journals searched, and have not been successful in finding any
address to the above tenor. There are abundance congratulating the
Prince Regent on the successes of the Duke, but none of censure. I have
likewise ascertained that some of the oldest servants of the City feel
quite sure that no such address was ever carried. If AEGROTUS can give me
any grounds for his belief, or anything likely to aid my inquiry, I will
renew the search.

    E. N. W.

  Southwark.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

If any doubt could exist as to the value of the _Germania_ of Tacitus,
as an invaluable contribution to the history of all the Teutonic races,
a glance at the Appendix to Klemm's _Germanische Altherthumskunde_, in
which that author has enumerated not only the best editions and
translations of the _Germania_, but also the most important
dissertations to which it has given rise, would at once dispel it. The
scholar and the antiquary of this country may therefore be congratulated
on the fact of Dr. Latham having prepared an edition of it, which has
been issued under the title of _The Germania of Tacitus, with
Ethnological Dissertations and Notes_. Although "the work," to use Dr.
Latham's own words, "is rather a commentary upon the geographical part
of the _Germania_, than on the _Germania_ itself--the purely descriptive
part relating to the customs of the early Germans being passed over
almost _sicco pede_,"--yet our readers will have no difficulty in
estimating its importance, when we inform them that the Ethnological
Dissertations and Notes which accompany the text may be said to embody
the views, (ofttimes indeed dissented from by Dr. Latham,) of Grimm and
Zeuss, and the learning with which those distinguished men have
illustrated the subject. Indeed, Dr. Latham, who sets an example of
openly acknowledging his obligations to other scholars which we should
be glad to see more generally followed, expressly states, that whether
the work before us took its present form, or that of a translation with
an elaborate commentary of Zeuss's learned and indispensable work, _Die
Deutschen und die Nachbarstaemme_, was a mere question of convenience.

If the story that we have heard be true, namely, that one of the most
learned and active members of the episcopal bench did, at a late
clerical meeting, hold up a copy of Whitaker's _Clergyman's Diary and
Ecclesiastical Directory_, and pronounce it to be a little book so full
of useful and invaluable information as to be indispensable to every
clergyman, it is clear that the work is beyond all criticism.

_The Family Almanack and Educational Register for 1852_, contains--in
addition to full particulars of nearly a thousand public schools,
colleges, and universities, and a list (containing upwards of a
thousand) of the principal private schools in the kingdom,--a vast
amount of miscellaneous information (including for the first time the
Statutes of the Irish University) and statistical tables, and so forms a
volume which no person interested in the great question of education can
at all do without.

While on the subject of education, we may acknowledge the receipt of
several educational works, which we can only notice with great brevity.

M. Merlet's _Dictionary of French Difficulties_ (which, but that the
subject is almost too grave for such a jest, we should have suggested
might very appropriately have been dedicated to the President) bears on
its title the stamp of its merit in the words "_third edition_."

M. Falch Lebahn's _Self Instructor in German_; _Practice in German_; and
_German in One Volume_ (4th ed.), are very able attempts to facilitate
the study of that most useful language.

The last work, containing as it does La Motte Fouque's beautiful tale of
_Undine_, with explanatory notes on all the difficult words and phrases,
and its vocabulary of 4500 words synonymous in German and English,
cannot be found otherwise than most useful.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

SOUTHEY'S EDITION OF COWPER. Vols. X. XII. XIII. XIV.

JOURNAL OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF DUBLIN. Vol. I. Part I. (Several
copies are wanted, and it is believed that many are lying in London or
Dublin.)

MITFORD'S HISTORY OF GREECE. Vol. VI. Cadell, 1822. 8vo.

WILLIS'S ARCHITECTURE OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 15_s._ will be given for a
copy.

FLUDD (ROBERT, M.D.) _alias_ DE FLUCTIBUS, called the Searcher. Any of
his works.

BEHMEN'S (JACOB) GENESIS.

LAW'S APPEAL, &c.

LAW'S APPEAL CASE OF REASON.

HUNTER'S DEANERY OF DONCASTER. Vol. I. Large or small paper.

CLARE'S RURAL MUSE.

CHRISTIAN PIETY FREED FROM THE DELUSIONS OF MODERN ENTHUSIASTS. A.D.
1756 or 1757.

AN ANSWER TO FATHER HUDDLESTONE'S SHORT AND PLAIN WAY TO THE FAITH AND
CHURCH. By Samuel Grascombe. London, 1703. 8vo.

REASONS FOR ABROGATING THE TEST IMPOSED UPON ALL MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT.
By Samuel Parker, Lord Bishop of Oxon. 1688. 4to.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

"_Our correspondents will see, on very little reflection, that it is
plainly the Editor's interest to take all he can get, and make the most
and the best of every thing." Thus we spoke in our earlier numbers, and
we repeat it now as a reply to two or three communications which have
reached us during the present week. As in the management of_ "NOTES AND
QUERIES" _we can have no party to serve, no prejudices to gratify, we
beg our correspondents--more especially those who are personally unknown
to us (and to whose communications we always endeavor to give the
earliest insertion possible, because we cannot explain to them, as we
could to those to whom we are known, the reasons for delay.)--that for
the delay or non-insertion of their communications there are always what
we believe they would admit to be satisfactory reasons if they were but
acquainted with them; although, from the difficulty attendant on the
management of a work like the present, we are not able to bring those
reasons before them._

_Among other interesting articles which are in type, but necessarily
omitted from the present number, are_ "The Crucifix as used by the Early
Christians," _by_ SIR J. EMERSON TENNENT; "Remains of James II.;" "Wady
Mokatteb identified with Kibroth Hattavah," _by the_ Rev. M.
Margoliouth; "Legend of the Red Breast," &c.

JARLTZBERG _is thanked. His suggestion will be carried out at the
commencement of the New Year._

GRUS. _Surely the inscription is not correctly copied. The first line we
should read_ "LADI, HELP!" _and the second_, "MERCY, JHESU!"

P. M. M. _The article on_ "Deep Wells," _is omitted this week only from
want of room. The other communication is postponed for a short time._

W. W. R. (Oxford) _is at present the only remonstrant. We will, however,
give his suggestion our best consideration._

J. B. (Manchester), _who inquires respecting the family of Tonge, is
informed that his Query may be fully answered by a reference to_ vol.
xiii. _of the Rev. Canon Raine's_ Lancashire MSS.

W. L. (Hitchin) _will find articles on_ "Vegetating Insects" _in our_
3rd Vol. pp. 166, 398, 436.

LONG'S ASTRONOMY _has been reported, and may be had by applying to our
Publisher._

_Full price will be given for clean copies of_ No. 19. _upon application
to our Publisher._

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Derivation of London--General Moyle--Cavalcade,
&c.--Races in which Children are named after the Mother--Schola
Cordis--Voltaire--Cagots--Carmagnoles--Use of
Tobacco--Pigeons--Inscription on Spectacles--Talented--Latin verse on
Franklin--Warnings to Scotland--Suicides--Earwig--Johannes
Trithemius--Share of Presbyters, &c.--Countess of Desmond--Proverbial
Philosophy--Crosses and Crucifixes--Theodolite--Mitigation of Capital
Punishment--Milesian--Truth--Verses in Prose--Cabal--Jocelyns'
Legacy--San Grail--Curious Tenure--Boiling to Death--Arbor Lowe._

_Copies of our_ Prospectus, _according to the suggestion of T. E. H,
will be forwarded to any correspondent willing to assist us by
circulating them._

VOLS. I., II., _and_ III., _with very copious Indices, may still be had,
price 9s. 6d. each, neatly bound in cloth._

NOTES AND QUERIES _is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers may receive it on Saturday. The subscription for the Stamped
Edition is 1Os. 2d. for Six Months, which may be paid by Post-office
Order drawn in favour of our Publisher_, MR. GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet
Street; _to whose care all communications for the Editor should be
addressed._

_Erratum._--In last line but one of Art. 307. p. 424. for "proud
father," read "grandfather."




Just published, by THOMAS KERSLAKE, Bookseller, No. 3. Park Street,
Bristol.

  A CATALOGUE OF THE ENTIRE PHILOLOGICAL AND ANTIQUARIAN LIBRARY of
  the late MR. SERJEANT LUDLOW, Town Clerk of Bristol, Leader of the
  Oxford Circuit, &c. &c., lately bought of his Executors, and
  containing the Principal Works on ANGLO-SAXON and GOTHIC
  LITERATURE, the Collections of OLD ENGLISH POETRY, &c. To which is
  prefixed (by Permission of the Author) his CHARACTER, by the Hon.
  SIR T. NOON TALFOURD. (Franked by two Stamps.)

  Also,

  A CATALOGUE OF THE GEOLOGICAL and SCIENTIFIC LIBRARY of the late
  REV. DAVID WILLIAMS, Rector of Bleadon, Somerset. (Franked by one
  Stamp.)

  THOMAS KERSLAKE, Old and New Bookseller, No. 3. Park Street,
  Bristol.


PRESTON, LANCASHIRE

  Collections in Numismatology and Natural History, Miscellaneous
  Library, &c., of the late MR. KENYON, F.R.S.E., &c.

  MR. JOHN BURTON respectfully announces to the Virtuosi,
  Naturalists, &c. that he will SELL by AUCTION in his Rooms, No.
  11+. Fishergate, Preston, on MONDAY, the 8th, TUESDAY, the 9th,
  WEDNESDAY, the 10th, THURSDAY, the 11th, FRIDAY, the 12th,--on
  MONDAY, the 15th, TUESDAY, the 16th, WEDNESDAY, the 17th.
  THURSDAY, the 18th, and FRIDAY, the 19th days of DECEMBER, 1851,
  at 11 o'clock in the Forenoon each day, the MOST IMPORTANT and
  VALUABLE COLLECTION of COINS and MEDALS ever offered to public
  competition in this portion of the provinces. It comprises nearly
  six thousand specimens of Coinage, Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern;
  including Greek, Roman, Byzantine, British, Anglo-Saxon,
  Anglo-Gallic, English, Scotch, Irish, various Continental, &c., in
  Gold, Electrum, Silver, Tin, Copper, Bronze, and other Metals, all
  in exceedingly fine preservation, and extending chronologically to
  the present time--a collection of unparalleled interest to the
  Historian, Archaeologist, and Virtuoso.--Several Cabinets of
  Natural Curiosities, illustrative of the Sciences of Geology,
  Mineralogy, Conchology, Entomology, and Botany.--A Miscellaneous
  Library, including numerous valuable Numismatic Works, Works on
  the several branches of Natural History, &c.:--and a few Oil
  Paintings, Framed Engravings, and other effects, late the property
  of the very eminent Connoisseur and Collector, MR. KENYON,
  F.R.S.E., &c. deceased.

  Also,

  The Medical and Miscellaneous Library, Surgical Instruments,
  Chemical Apparatus and Appliances, Powerful Magic Lantern, Solar
  Microscope, Theodolite, &c. &c.

  LATE the PROPERTY of W. ALEXANDER,

  Esq., M.D., deceased.

  Catalogues (in two Parts, Sixpence each) may be had on application
  to Mr. JOHN BURTON, Auctioneer and Accountant, 11+, Fishergate, or
  38. Avenham Lane, near the Terrace, Preston.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND

      ANNUITY SOCIETY,

  3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

  Founded A.D. 1812.

  _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

  _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

  _Consulting Counsel._--Sir William P. Wood, M.P.,
  Solicitor-General.

  _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

  _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age. _l._  _s._ _d._

      17    1    14    4
      22    1    18    8
      27    2     4    5
      32    2    10    8
      37    2    18    6
      42    3     8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


THE BEST IS THE CHEAPEST.

      The Best Congou Tea             3_s._  8_d._  per lb.
      The Best Souchong Tea           4_s._  4_d._     "
      The Best Gunpowder Tea          5_s._  8_d._     "
      The Best Old Mocha Coffee       1_s._  4_d._     "
      The Best West India Coffee      1_s._  4_d._     "
      The Fine True Ripe Rich
          Rare Souchong Tea           4_s._  0_d._     "

  40_s._ worth or upwards sent CARRIAGE FREE to any part of England
  by

  PHILLIPS & CO., TEA MERCHANTS, No. 8. King William Street, City,
  London.


BOOKS AT REDUCED PRICES ON SALE BY GEORGE BELL, 186. FLEET ST.

  SHAKSPEARE'S PLAYS AND POEMS. 11 vols. 8vo. half morocco, neat.
  4_l._ 10_s._ Pickering. 1825.

  MILTON'S POETICAL WORKS. 3 vols. 8vo. half morocco, neat. 28_s._
  Pickering, 1826.

  CHAUCER'S CANTERBURY TALES, edited by TYRWHITT. 5 vols. 8vo. half
  morocco, neat. 2_l._ 5_s._ Pickering, 1830.

  CHAUCER'S ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE, TROILUS AND CRESEIDE, AND MINOR
  POEMS, with Life by Sir H. NICOLAS. 3 vols. 8vo. calf, old style
  (by Hayday). 29_s._ Pickering, 1826.

  WILSON'S AND BONAPARTE'S NATURAL HISTORY OF THE BIRDS OF THE
  UNITED STATES, Edited by JAMESON. 4 vols. 12mo. large paper, half
  morocco, neat. 24_s._ Edinburgh, 1831.

  DR. JOHNSON'S WORKS, by MURPHY. 12 vols. 8vo. half calf, neat.
  3_l._ 12_s._ 1823.

  DEAN SWIFT'S WORKS, edited by HAWKESWORTH. 21 vols. 12mo. calf,
  neat. 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._ 1760.

  MILTON'S POETICAL WORKS, by TODD. 6 vols. 8vo. half calf. 2_l._
  2_s._ 1826.

  BEWICK'S QUADRUPEDS. 8vo. half calf. 9_s._ 1792.

  ARISTOTELIS OPERA, edited by BEKKER, 11 vols. 8vo. calf, extra, by
  Hayday. 5_l._ 10_s._ Oxford, 1837.

  ROSE'S BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY. 12 vols. 8vo. half calf. 7_l._
  1850.

  FACCIOLATTI LEXICON TOTIUS LATINITATIS CONSILIO ET CURA.
  FACCIOLATTI OPERA ET STUDIO FORCELLINI. 2 vols. folio. russia.
  1_l._ 12_s._ Patav. 1805.

  ORATORES GRAECI A REISKE. 12 vols. 8vo. russia, neat. 3_l._ 13_s._
  6_d._ 1770-75.

  NEWMAN'S PAROCHIAL SERMONS. 5 vols. 8vo. boards. 35_s._ Published
  at 2_l._ 12_s._ 6_d._

  STOTHARD'S MONUMENTAL EFFIGIES. Folio, half morocco. 6_l._ 10_s._
  Published at 19_l._

  OLD ENGLAND. Vol. I. folio, cloth. 15_s._ Published at _22s._
  6_d._

  ATLAS ANTIQUUS. SPRUNER. Royal 4to. cloth. 18_s._ Published at
  26_s._ 1850.

  ATLAS VON HELLAS. KIEPART. Folio. half morocco. 24_s._

  WHOWELL'S ANALOGY OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS. 2 vols. 4to.
  cloth 1_l._ 10_s._ 1843.

  OXFORD TRACTS. 5 vols. in 6 parts, cloth, and No. 89. 30_s._

  ARROWSMITH'S GENERAL ATLAS. Royal 4to. calf. 30_s._ Published at
  2_l._ 5_s._ 1840.

  CETIUS IN LOCA SCRIPTURAE. Folio, calf. 6_s._ 1628.

  CATENA IN EPISTOLAS CATHOLICAS, accesserunt OEcumenii et Arethae.
  Commentarii in Apocalypsin. Edidit Cramer. 8vo. boards. 7_s._
  Published at 12_s._ 6_d._ 1840.

  LA PLACE'S MECANIQUE CELESTE, translated by BOWDITCH. 4 vols. 4to.
  boards. Scarce. 11_s._

  MOSHEIM'S ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 4 vols. 8vo. calf extra. 2_l._
  5_s._ 1845.

  SCHELLER'S LATIN LEXICON, by RIDDLE. Folio. calf (Hayday). 4_l._
  10_s._ 1830.

  SCHLEUSNER'S LEXICON TO THE GREEK NEW TESTAMENT. 2 vols. 8vo half
  bound. 10_s._ 6_d._ 1817.

  SCAPULAE LEXICON. Folio, calf. 21_s._ Oxford, 1820.

  ---- 4to calf. 18_s._ London, 1820.


THE LITERARY GAZETTE

  IS ENLARGED,

  FOR THE PURPOSES OF

  SCIENCE, FINE ARTS, MUSIC, AND THE DRAMA.

  The Proprietors of "THE LITERARY GAZETTE," impressed with a
  conviction that it was not possible to treat efficiently of
  Literature, Science, Fine Arts, Music, and the Drama, within the
  limits of a paper of sixteen pages, resolved, at the commencement
  of their undertaking in January last, to devote the Journal
  exclusively to the interests of Literature. As the season arrived
  for the Exhibitions of Pictures, it was found necessary, in
  compliance with the wishes of many Subscribers, to give Critical
  Notices of them; but these were insufficient to mark the progress
  of Fine Arts, while they intrenched upon the space intended for
  Literature. The insertion of Reviews of Scientific Works elicited
  also complaints that the Reports of the Learned Societies should
  have been relinquished, and it has been felt that a weekly record
  of the progress of Science is still a desideratum.

  Encouraged by the success that has attended their efforts in the
  department of Literature (the circulation of "THE LITERARY
  GAZETTE," notwithstanding these deficiencies, having been more
  than doubled), the Proprietors have determined to enlarge their
  Journal to twenty-four pages, and to devote the additional space
  to special departments of Science, Fine Arts, Music, and the
  Drama.

  The contents of "THE LITERARY GAZETTE" will henceforth be arranged
  as follows:--

  REVIEWS.--Critical Reviews, with extracts of all important new
  English Works, and occasionally of Foreign Works.

  NOTICES.--Brief Critical and Analytical Notices of New Books, not
  suitable for review.

  SUMMARY.--Announcements of Forthcoming Works, with notices of New
  Editions, Reprints, Translations, Periodicals, and Pamphlets.

  LIST OF NEW BOOKS.--The usual List, with particulars of size, and
  price of all books published during the week.

  COMMUNICATIONS.--Original Memoirs, Biographies, Accounts of
  Scientific Voyages and Travels, Letters from Correspondents, &c.

  TOPICS OF THE WEEK.--An editorial record of literary, scientific,
  and social intelligence.

  PROCEEDINGS OF SOCIETIES.--Abstracts of original Lectures and of
  Papers read at the Learned Societies, with occasional Illustrative
  Woodcuts of Diagrams, Sections, &c.

  FINE ARTS.--Reviews and Notices of Art Publications, Prints,
  Exhibitions, Sales of Pictures, &c., and general art intelligence.

  FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE.--Letters from Correspondents resident in
  Paris, Leipsic, Madrid, and other continental cities.

  MUSIC.--Notices of Operas, Concerts, Oratorios, New Publications,
  and general musical intelligence.

  THE DRAMA.--Reports of the Theatres, with Criticisms of New Plays,
  and general dramatic intelligence.

  VARIETIES.--Fragments of general interest.

  Price FOURPENCE; Stamped Edition, FIVEPENCE.

  REEVE and BENHAM, 5. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.


BOOK PLATES.--HERALDIC QUERIES answered; Family Arms found, and every
information afforded. Drawing of Arms, 2_s._ 6_d._; Painting ditto,
5_s._; Book Plate Crest, 5_s._; Arms, &c. from 20_s._; Crest on Card
Plate, and one hundred Cards, 8_s._; Queries answered for 1_s._ Saxon,
Mediaeval, and Modern Style Book Plates. The best authorities and MS.
Books of thirty-five years' practice consulted.--Apply (if per letter
enclosing stamps or post office order) to JAMES FRISWELL, Heraldic
Engraver, 12. Brooke Street, Holborn.


BIBLES AND BIBLICAL WORKS FOR PRESENTATION.

  BAGSTER'S POLYGLOT BIBLES.

  The elegant manner in which these well-known Books are got up,
  renders them especially eligible as PRESENTATION COPIES of the
  "Sacred Scriptures." Bound in Bagster's peculiar style of flexible
  Turkey morocco, of durable beauty, and enriched with every
  external adornment, the typographical completeness is enhanced.
  The Miniature Polyglot, or small pocket size, the Foolscap Octavo,
  pocket size, and the Facsimile Large-Print Edition, all correspond
  page for page; and in their combinations with the Book of Common
  Prayer, Indexes, Concordances, Lexicons, etc., afford a variety
  suited to every requirement. The "Comprehensive Family and Pulpit
  Bible," containing the largest number of parallel references and
  illustrative notes ever published, is kept, of various quarto
  sizes, bound up with Family Registers, in plain and sumptuous
  bindings. The "Hexapla" is a treasury of the most condensed
  criticism. It consists of the Greek Text of the New Testament,
  printed in the largest type, with six standard English
  translations beneath it, arranged for comparison in parallel
  columns. Kept in every style of best binding. "The Bible of Every
  Land," now just completed, is a collection of interesting Memoirs
  of every Language into which the Bible has been translated, with
  engraved Specimens, numerous coloured Maps, and a full series of
  Native Alphabets. "The Blank-Paged Bible," "The Biblia Ecclesiae
  Polyglotta," "The Large-Print Critical Greek Testament and
  Septuagint" may also be suggested as suitable gifts. See
  descriptive Catalogues, which are furnished without charge, and
  sent free by post.

  London: SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS, 15. Paternoster Row, where, and
  at most respectable Booksellers in the Kingdom, a large assortment
  may be seen.

  MULTAE TERRICOLIS LINGUAE, COELESTIBUS UNA.

  [Greek: Pollai men thnetois Glottai, mia d' Athanatoisin.]


THE IRISH QUARTERLY REVIEW, NO. IV.

  DECEMBER, 1851. Price 2_s._ 6_d._

  I.--Halliburton's (Sam Slick) The English in America.

  II.--Maria Edgeworth.

  III.--A Glance at the Past and Present Condition of Ireland: "The
  Exodus."

  IV.--The Celtic Records of Ireland.

  V.--Mr. Montague Dempsey's Experiences of the Landed
  Interest--Concluded.

  VI.--The Poor-Law in Ireland--The Consolidated Annuities.

  VII.--Ruskin and the Pre-Raphaelists.

  Dublin: W. B. KELLY. 8. Grafton Street. London: SIMPKIN, MARSHALL
  & CO. Edinburgh: OLIVER & BOYD.


Just published, 32mo. cloth, with Coloured Frontispiece, price 4_s._;
morocco, 6_s._ 6_d._

  LYRA CHRISTIANA; Poems on Christianity and the Church, Original
  and Selected. From the Works of ROBERT MONTGOMERY, M.A., Author of
  "The Christian Life," "God and Man," &c.

  GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS.--One GUINEA REWARD will be paid for the
Certificate of Baptism of ROBERT BROUGHTON, born between 1700 and 1705.

  Address to the Publishing Office of "NOTES and QUERIES."


The Important Library of the COUNT MONDIDIER, deceased.

  Nine days' Sale.

  PUTTICK AND SIMPSON, Auctioneers of Literary Property, will sell
  by Auction at their Great Room, 191. Piccadilly, on MONDAY,
  December 15, and eight following days (Sunday excepted), the very
  extensive and valuable Library of the COUNT MONDIDIER, deceased,
  consigned from Germany. Also, a very important Selection from the
  Library of a late well-known ENGLISH COLLECTOR, the whole
  presenting an extraordinary assemblage of Voyages, Travels, and
  Itineraries, Works relating to America, including many of the
  rarest Productions, some of which have been hitherto unknown to
  Bibliographers: together with many highly valuable Works in
  General Literature, Natural History, Foreign and English Local and
  Personal Histories, Private Memoirs, Ana. Facetiae, &c.
  &c.--Catalogues will be sent on application; if in the country, on
  receipt of six stamps.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5 New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, December 13, 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-IV]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 88  | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No. 89  | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No. 90  | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No. 91  | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 92  | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No. 93  | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No. 94  | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No. 95  | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No. 96  | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      | Vol. IV No. 109 | Nov. 29, 1851      | 417-430 | PG # 39233 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 110 | Dec.  6, 1851      | 433-460 | PG # 39338 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number
111, December 13, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, DEC 13, 1851 ***

***** This file should be named 39393.txt or 39393.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/3/9/39393/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
