Project Gutenberg's A System of Easy Lettering, by J. Howard Cromwell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A System of Easy Lettering

Author: J. Howard Cromwell

Release Date: April 7, 2012 [EBook #39398]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SYSTEM OF EASY LETTERING ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Rebecca Hoath and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                    A

                  SYSTEM

                    OF

             EASY LETTERING.

                    BY

         J. HOWARD CROMWELL, PH.B.,

             Fourth Thousand.

              [Illustration]

  SPON & CHAMBERLAIN, 12 CORTLANDT STREET, NEW YORK.
                   1897.




             COPYRIGHT, 1887,
                    BY
             WM. CHAMBERLAIN.




PREFACE.


The formality of a preface may seem scarcely necessary for the
supplementing of a system as simple and comprehensible as the one
herewith presented.

We have but to divide any surface we may wish to letter into squares (or
parallelograms as the case may be), in pencil lines; form the required
letters, in ink or paint, and according to the style chosen; erase the
pencil lines, and the lettering is complete.

J. H. C.



[Illustration: 1]


[Illustration: 2]


[Illustration: 3]


[Illustration: 4]


[Illustration: 5]


[Illustration: 6]


[Illustration: 7]


[Illustration: 8]


[Illustration: 9]


[Illustration: 10]


[Illustration: 11]


[Illustration: 12]


[Illustration: 13]


[Illustration: 14]


[Illustration: 15]


[Illustration: 16]


[Illustration: 17]


[Illustration: 18]


[Illustration: 19]


[Illustration: 20]


[Illustration: 21]


[Illustration: 22]


[Illustration: 23]


[Illustration: 24]


[Illustration: 25]


[Illustration: 26]


       *       *       *       *       *




The

ORNAMENTAL PENMAN'S

ENGRAVERS . SIGN . WRITERS

AND

STONECUTTERS


POCKET BOOK OF ALPHABETS


INCLUDING

CHURCH TEXT, EGYPTIAN, EGYPTIAN PERSPECTIVE,

FRENCH, FRENCH ANTIQUE, FRENCH RENAISSANCE, GERMAN TEXT,

_ITALIC_, _ITALIAN SHADED_, _ITALIAN HAIRLINE_,

Monograms, Old English, Old Roman, Open Roman, Open Stone, Ornamental,

ROMAN, LATIN, RUSTIC, TUSCAN, &c.


SPON & CHAMBERLAIN, _Publishers_, 12 CORTLANDT STREET, NEW YORK.




THE BEST AND CHEAPEST IN THE MARKET.


ALGEBRA SELF-TAUGHT.

BY

W. PAGET HIGGS, M.A., D.Sc.

FOURTH EDITION.


CONTENTS.

Symbols and the signs of operation. The equation and the unknown
quantity. Positive and negative quantities. Multiplication, involution,
exponents, negative exponents, roots, and the use of exponents as
logarithms. Logarithms. Tables of logarithms and proportional parts.
Transportation of systems of logarithms. Common uses of common
logarithms. Compound multiplication and the binomial theorem. Division,
fractions and ratio. Rules for division. Rules for fractions. Continued
proportion, the series and the summation of the series. Examples.
Geometrical means. Limit of series. Equations. Appendix. Index. 104
pages, 12mo, cloth, 60c.


_See also_ =Algebraic Signs=, Spons' Dictionary of Engineering No. 2. 40
cts.

_See also_ =Calculus=, Supplement to Spons' Dictionary No. 5. 75 cts.


=Barlow's Tables= of squares, cubes, square roots, cube roots,
reciprocals of all numbers up to 10,000. A thoroughly reliable work of
200 pages, 12mo, cloth, $2.50.

=Logarithms.=--Tables of logarithms of the natural numbers from 1 to
108,000 with constants. By CHARLES BABBAGE, M.A. 220 pages, 8vo, cloth,
$3.00.

=Logarithms.=--A. B. C. Five figure logarithms for general use. By C. J.
WOODWARD, B.Sc. 143 pages, complete thumb index 12mo, limp leather,
$1.60.


_Books mailed post-paid to any address on receipt of price_




[Illustration: ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING]

NEW YORK AND CHICAGO.

DEVOTED TO

=Art, Architecture, Archaeology, Engineering and Decoration.=

PUBLISHED ONCE A WEEK.

Subscription, $4.00 per year. Foreign Subscription, $6.00.

Sample Copy Free.


WHAT SUBSCRIBERS SAY.

=Adler & Sullivan, Architects, Chicago, Ill.=--"We have been subscribers
to ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING for many years, and have always found its
contents interesting and instructive."

=Henry Ives Cobb, Architect, Chicago, Ill.=--"I have been a subscriber
to your magazine for a number of years, and have found it a useful and
progressive periodical. I take pleasure in recommending it is a valuable
acquisition to any collection of architectural periodicals or library."

=D. H. Burnham, Chief of Construction, World's Columbian Exposition,
Chicago, Ill.=--"I am a subscriber to ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING, a
weekly magazine published in New York and Chicago, and find it valuable
in many ways. I can recommend it heartily to those needing such a
periodical."

=Holabird & Roche, Architect, Chicago, Ill.=--"In reply to your inquiry
as to our opinion of your paper, ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING, would say
that we have taken the magazine for the last three years and are
entirely satisfied with it."

=Francis J. Norton, Architect, Chicago, Ill.=--"Being a thorough reader
of all the leading architectural papers, I feel justified in saying that
I consider ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING the most modern and practical
architectural paper published."

=Frank Niernsee, Architect of the State House, Columbia, S.C.=--"I take
several architectural publications, and I find your journal second to
none--always keeping fully abreast of the times. You have a wide
circulation in the South."


WILLIAM T. COMSTOCK, Publisher,

23 Warren Street, New York.

Monadnock Building, 825 Dearborn Street, Chicago.




CROSS SECTION PAPER.

Scale EIGHT to ONE Inch.

Printed on one side, in blue ink, all the lines being of equal
thickness. Size of sheet, 8 x 10 inches. In lots of 100 sheets, price,
75c.

THE HANDY SKETCHING PAD.

Made from this paper, with useful tables. Size 8 x 10 inches. Price,
25c. each. Per dozen pads, $2.50.

THE HANDY SKETCHING BOOK.

Made from this paper but printed on both sides. Size of book 5 x 8
inches, stiff board covers. Price, 25c each; per dozen books, $2.50.

=Or Books and Pads Assorted, per dozen, $2.50.=


Scale EIGHT to ONE Inch.

A large sheet with heavy inch lines and half inch lines, printed in
orange ink. Size of sheet, 17 x 22 inches. Per quire (24 sheets), 75c.

Scale TEN to ONE Inch.

Size 17 x 22 inches, printed in blue ink, with heavy inch lines and half
inch lines. Per quire (24 sheets), 75c.


=The Electrician's Sketching Book.=

Made from this paper. Scale 10 to 1 inch. Size of book 5 x 8 inches,
with stiff board covers. Price, 25c. each; per dozen, $2.50.


ANY QUANTITY MAILED TO ANY PART OF THE WORLD ON RECEIPT OF PRICE.


_Pads of any size and thickness, in quantities, made to order._


This paper is _not ruled_. Try it and you will find it

GOOD, ACCURATE AND CHEAP.

=SPON & CHAMBERLAIN,=

=12 CORTLANDT STREET, NEW YORK.=

=TRY THIS PAPER FOR EASY LETTERING.=




THIRD THOUSAND.

=New Edition (Oblong 8 x 11 inches), boards 32 pages text, 44
illustrations, and 9 full-page plates=, Price $1.00


LETTERING FOR DRAFTSMEN

ENGINEERS AND STUDENTS.

_A Practical System of Freehand Lettering for Working Drawings_


BY

CHARLES W. REINHARDT,

_Chief Draftsman for "Engineering News."_


What this work actually intends to show is a "Practical System of
Freehand Lettering for Working Drawings"--one that by the method
outlined, is easily acquired and rapidly executed. The mode of procedure
given for every letter can easily be followed and always be remembered,
and by avoiding the common errors, as pointed out in parenthesis
alongside each correctly formed letter, the student will very soon be
able to form satisfactory letters for himself.--_Preface_.


TESTIMONIALS.

"It is the first book on Lettering I have ever seen that is good for
anything, practically speaking. I shall advocate its adoption in this
college at the earliest opportunity."--_Prof. Walter Flint, Maine State
College._

"It comes nearer to may ideal of a satisfactory treatment of this
subject than anything I have ever seen."--_Professor E H. Lockwood, Yale
University._

"My opinion of it is good, generally, and that it fills a long felt
want. It teaches what I have been trying to teach for some
time--commercial work."--_Prof. W.B. Hampson, University of Nebraska._

"It is just what my knowledge of the author's work on _Engineering News_
would lead me to expect--a practical system. I shall use the book
hereafter in my classes."--_Prof. Leonard S. Smith, University of
Wisconsin._

"This book is to the point, and supplies just what is wanted to the
profession. It is neat, concise, and a book that should be in the hands
of every student."--_Prof. C. W. Marx, Missouri State University._

"In my opinion it fills a long felt want of every practical draftsman,
besides finding an especial field of usefulness in school work."--_Prof.
Granberry Jackson, Vanderbilt University._

"I have examined his work and am surprised at the results of a trial. I
find that a beginner can make respectable letters with a copy of this
valuable book before him. I heartily recommend it for use in Technical
schools as being ahead of anything I have ever seen."--_Prof. R. D.
Hawkins, Tulane University._


D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY, Publishers,

23 Murray and 27 Warren Streets,

Copies sent by mail on receipt of price. NEW YORK.




PRACTICAL HANDBOOKS.


Engine Cylinder Diagram.

With (Meyer) cut-off at 1/8, 1/4, 3/8 and 1/2 stroke of piston, with
movable valves. By H. W. Weightman. On card, 25 cts.


How to Run Engines and Boilers.

A Handbook of Practical Instruction for Young Engineers and those in
charge of Steam Engines. By E. P. Watson. Illustrated, cloth, 1.00


The Fireman's Guide.

A Handbook on the Management of Boilers. Written in plain language for
Young Firemen and those in charge of boilers. By K. P. Dahlstrom, M. E.
Cloth, 50 cts.


The Corliss Engine and Its Management.

The best and most practical book on the Corliss Engine. By John T.
Henthorn and C. D. Thurber. Plainly written, thoroughly practical, and
fully illustrated. Cloth, 1.00


Ammonia Refrigeration.

Theoretical and Practical Ammonia Refrigeration. By I. I. Redwood, M.
Am. Inst. ME. A practical handbook for the use of those in charge of
Refrigerating Machinery and Ice Plants. Fully illustrated and about 24
pages of valuable tables. 12mo, cloth, 1.00


Manual of Instruction in Hard Soldering.

New edition, with an appendix on the Repair of Bicycle Frames, Soldering
Alloys, Fluxes, and a chapter on Soft Soldering. By Harvey Rowell.
Illustrated, cloth, 75 cts.


Practical Electrics.

A Handbook on the Construction, Fitting-up and Use of Telephones, Bells
Receivers, Batteries, Alarms, Annunciators, Dynamos, Motors, Carbons,
Microphones, Phonographs, Photophones, Coils, and all kinds of
electrical appliances. Fully illustrated, cloth, 75 cts.


The Magneto Telephone.

Its Construction, Fitting-up and Adaptability to Every-day Use. By
Norman Hughes. Specially written in plain language for the use of
beginners. Illustrated, cloth, 1.00


Syrups, Extracts, Flavorings, Phosphates, &c.

The Non Plus Ultra Soda Fountain Requisites. By G. Dubelle. A Handbook
of Practical Receipts. Nearly 500 recipes. Cloth, 2.50


Algebra Self Taught.

The Best and Cheapest Algebra in the Market. By W. P Higgs. Cloth, 60
cts.


A System of Easy Lettering.

By J. H. Cromwell. Containing 25 pages of alphabets. Well printed on
good paper, oblong. Paper, 50 cts.




PRACTICAL PAMPHLETS.


=Hints to Young Engineers= Upon Entering Their Profession. By Joseph W.
Wilson. 8vo, paper, 20 cts.

=Designing Belt Gearing.= By E. J. Cowling Welch. 16mo, paper, 20 cts.

=Tables= of the Principal Speeds Occurring in Mechanical Engineering
expressed in metres, in a second. By P. Keerayeff. Translated by Sergius
Kern, M.E. 16mo, paper, 20 cts.

=The French Polishers' Manual.= By a French polisher. 16mo, paper, 20
cts.

=Cleaning and Scouring.= A Manual for Dyers and Laundresses, and for
Domestic Use. By S. Christopher. 16mo, paper, 20 cts.

=The Cooking Range.= Why is it my cooking range does not work properly,
and why so extravagant with fuel? By F. Dye. 16mo, paper, 20 cts.

=The Gas Consumers' Handybook.= By William Richards, C.E. 16mo, paper,
20 cts.

=Turner and Fitters' Pocket Book.= For calculating the change wheels for
screws on a turning lathe and for a wheel cutting machine. By J. La
Nicca. 16mo, paper, 20 cts.

=Screw-Cutting Tables=, for the use of Mechanical Engineers, showing the
proper arrangement of wheels for cutting the threads of screws of any
required pitch, with a table for making the Universal Gas Pipe Threads
and Taps. By W. A. Martin. Paper, 20 cts.

=Ornamental Penmanship.= A Pocketbook of Alphabets for Engravers, Sign
Writers and Stone Cutters, containing 32 pages of alphabets. Paper, 20
cts.

=The Handy Sketching Book,= for the use of Draftsmen and Engineers,
containing cross-section paper to =EXACT= eighth of an inch, with useful
tables. Bound in boards, per dozen, $2.50. Each, 25 cts.

=The Kitchen Boiler= and Water Pipes: Their arrangement and
management--more especially their treatment during frost and how to
avoid explosions. By H. Grimshaw. Second edition, illustrated, 8vo,
paper, 40 cts.




Pocket-books for Reference.


=Molesworth and Hurst.=--The pocket-book of pocket-books. Being Hurst's
and Molesworth's pocket-book bound together in full Russia leather,
32mo., round corners, gilt edges, $5.00.

=Cutler and Edge.=--Tables for setting out curves from 100 feet to 5,000
feet radius. Useful for setting out roads, sewers, walls, fences and
general engineering work, 16mo., cloth, $1.00.

=Maycock.=--Practical electrical notes and definitions, for the use of
engineering students and practical men, 286 pages, illustrated, 32mo.,
cloth, 75c.*

=Thompson's Electrical Tables.=--A valuable little reference book for
engineers, electricians, motor inspectors and others interested in
electrical engineering. Illustrated, vest pocket edition, 64mo., roan,
50c.

=Dearlove.=--Tables to find the working speed of cables; comprising also
data as to diameter, capacity and copper resistance of all cores. 32mo.,
cloth, 80c.

=Molesworth.=--Metrical tables, weights and measures. 57 pages, 32mo.,
cloth, 60c.

=Brooks.=--French measures and english equivalents. 32mo., 40c.

=Molesworth.=--Pocket-book of useful formulae and memoranda for civil and
mechanical engineers. 781 pages, illustrated, 32mo, leather, $2.00.*

=George.=--Pocket-book of calculation in stresses, etc., for engineers,
architects and general use. 140 pages, illustrated, 32mo., cloth, $1.40.

=Sexton.=--Pocket-book for boiler makers and steam users, board of trade
surveyors, and the general steam-using public. 287 pages, illustrated,
32mo., leather, $2.00.

=Hurst.=--A hand-book of formulae, tables and memoranda for architectural
surveyors. 477 pages, illustrated, 32mo., leather, $2.00.

=Jordan.=--Tabulated weights of angle, tee and bulb iron and steel and
other information for the use of naval architects, shipbuilders and
manufacturers. 579 pages, 32mo., leather, 1896, $3.00.

=Spons'.=--Tables and memoranda for engineers, by Hurst. The vest pocket
edition, 64mo., roan, 50c.

=Mackesy.=--Tables of barometrical heights to 20,000 feet, specially
adapted for the use of officers on service, civil engineers and
travellers. With 3 diagrams, 32mo., cloth, $1.25.

=Bayley.=--Pocket-book for chemists, chemical manufacturers,
metallurgists, dyers, distillers, brewers, sugar refiners,
photographers, students, etc., etc. 32mo., roan, $2.00. In the
press.


_Books mailed post paid to any address in the world on receipt of
price._

       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Note: Minor punctuation, spelling and capitalisation
in adverts corrected for conistency. Italic text is denoted by
_underscores_ and bold text by =equals sign=.





End of Project Gutenberg's A System of Easy Lettering, by J. Howard Cromwell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SYSTEM OF EASY LETTERING ***

***** This file should be named 39398.txt or 39398.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/3/9/39398/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Rebecca Hoath and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
