The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Hymn on the Life, Virtues and Miracles of
St. Patrick, by Saint Fiech

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Hymn on the Life, Virtues and Miracles of St. Patrick
       Composed by his Disciple, Saint Fiech, Bishop of Sletty

Author: Saint Fiech

Release Date: April 11, 2012 [EBook #39428]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HYMN ON THE LIFE, VIRTUES ***




Produced by Michael Gray (Diocese of San Jose)




A

HYMN

ON THE

LIFE, VIRTUES, AND MIRACLES OF ST. PATRICK,


COMPOSED BY HIS DISCIPLE,

SAINT FIECH, BISHOP OF SLETTY

---

As this specimen of the language spoken in Ireland about 1200 years
ago, is here published, not only for the elucidation of our apostle's
history, but also for the gratification of the lovers of Irish
literature in general; the Irish original is accompanied, on the
opposite page, with an English translation of the whole.

In this translation, the literal meaning, and idiomatic expression of
the words and phrases, are adhered to in all such stanzas as the
editor (with the aid of some members of the Gaelic Society,
particularly conversant with subjects of this sort) could fully
understand: for he acknowledges that neither he nor these gentlemen
are so vain or disingenuous as to pretend that they comprehend the
whole of this very ancient composition.

In order to obviate any objection which may be made against the
passages in which the editor differs from the author of the version
of this hymn, in Colgan's collection of our patron saint's lives, the
Latin translation adopted in _his_ edition, is also subjoined to the
poem, at the bottom of each page.

To the hymn are added some short notes, illustrative of the subject.

_Vindication of St. Fiech's Hymn, in Answer to Dr. Ledwich's
Objections._

Respecting the authenticity and antiquity of this curious specimen of
our language about the commencement of the sixth century, some doubts
were entertained by the sagacious Bollandists, who, consequently,
considered St. Fiech to have lived long after our saint's time. This
opinion, those learned Jesuits founded on Fiech's referring to other
_histories_ for the truth of what he relates with regard to his
master, St. Patrick, during the first sixty years of his life
previously to his arrival on the mission of Ireland.

This plausible objection has been adopted and urged by Dr. Ledwich,
against St. Patrick's existence, with that dogmatical tone of
magisterial positiveness so conspicuous in his volume of invectives
against the ancient splendour, sanctity, and literature of his native
country, declaring that Fiech and Sedulius's poems on our saint "are
the wretched productions of some cloistered ecclesiastic."

To this, the only remaining one of these formidable objections,
adduced by the doctor against our apostle's existence, we answer,
that Fiech lived and composed this hymn some time after St. Patrick's
death, in the 120th year of his age, and 60th of his apostleship. Now
supposing Fiech to have lived to the 84th year of his age, and to
have composed this hymn in 600, seven years after his master's death,
which he so circumstantially relates in the poem; Fiech must
consequently have been no more than about 17 years of age when our
saint commenced his mission here. Where, or whence, then, except by
divine revelation, or from St. Patrick himself, or from the
revelation of others, could his disciple derive his information with
respect to St. Patrick's parents and ancestors, who lived in a
foreign country? or sacred Tours, in Gaul, the place of our saint's
nativity? or his original name Succoth? or his voyages and travels by
sea and land, after his escape from servitude in Ireland? or his
insular retreats or studies under the spiritual guidance of St.
German of Auxerre? &c, &c. &c.

Now, Fiech very justly informs his readers, that all these
transactions, wrought before he was born, and in a foreign country,
during the first 60 years of his great master's life, were
ascertained in _skelaiv_, (STORIES,) as in the first stanza; or
Fiadhaid, _testified to us_, as he says in the sixth stanza of his
poem, the only two places were Fiech appeals to others for the
foreign actions performed in the early period of St. Patrick's life:
of whom, though there were many lives written and published during
his existence, yet it is uncertain whether Fiech obtained his account
from written or oral documents, for either may be denoted by the
Irish word _Scealaw_ (stories.) The term by which the translator of
this hymn into Latin has rendered it, may also denote either oral or
written information. In English, too, the word _history_ often
imports oral narration: thus Pope says:

  "What _histories_ of toil could I declare,
  But still, long-wearied nature wants repair."



INNUIN PATRAIC.

I.

  Genair Patraic i nem Thur, (1)
  Asseadh ad fet hi scelaibh,
  Macan se m-bliadharn decc
  An tan do bhreth fo dheraibh.

II.

  Succat a ainm hitrubhradh
  Cidh a atair ba fisse,
  Mac calpuirn mic Otide
  Ho Deocain Odisse. (2)

III.

  Baise bliadhna bi foghnamh
  Maise doine nis tomledh
  Bitar le cothraighe, (3)
  Ceathar trebha dia fognadh.

IV.

  As bert Uictor fri gniadh
  Milcon, teseadh far tonna
  Forruibh a chois for sind leic
  Maraidh dia aes ni bronna.

V.

  Do faidh tar ealpa uile (4)
  De mhuir, bo hamhra reatha
  Comdh fargaibh la _Gearman_
  Andeas an deiscort leatha.

VI.

  An-innsibh mara toirrian
  Ainis indibh, ad rimhe,
  Leghais cannoin la _Gearman_
  Is eadh ad fiadhad line.

VII.

  Do cum n-Erenn dod fetis
  Aingil _de_ hi fithis,
  Menic it chithe ifisibh
  Dos mcfed arithisi.

VIII.

  Ro po cobhair don D-Eren
  Tichta Patraic for Oclat:
  Ro clos cian son an garma
  Macraidhi caille fochlad.

IX.

  Gadhadair co tisseadh in noebh
  Ar a nimthised lethu,
  Ar atin taradh o cloean
  Tuath a h-Eren do bheathu.

X.

  Tuata h-Eren Tairchantais
  Dos nicfead Sithlaith nua,
  Meraidh co ti amartaige
  Bidh fas tir temhrach.

XI.

  A Dhruidh ar Laoghaire
  Tichta Patraic ni cheiltis,
  Ro firad ind aitsine,
  Ina flatha as beirtis.

XII.

  Ba leir Patraic cumbebha,
  Ba sabh innarba cloeni,
  Ised duargoibh a Eua
  Suas de sech threbhah doeani

XIII.

  Immuin agus Apocapalips,
  Na tri coicat nos canad
  Pritchad, batset, arniged,
  Do moladh De in anad.

XIV.

  Ni con Gebed fuacht sine
  Do shess aidche hillinnibh
  For nim consena a Righe,
  Pritcais fri de indindaibh.

XV.

  Hi slan tuaith benna-bairche
  Nis gebhe Dhtart, na lia
  Canadh Cead psalm cech naidhehe
  Do Righ aingel fo Gnia.

XVI.

  Foidh for luim iaramh,
  Ochus cuilche fhliuchimme,
  Ba coirthe a rithadart
  _Ni leic a corp e timme_.

XVII.

  Pritcadh soscela do caech
  Do gnih mor fearta i Leathu
  Iccaid luscu la trusca
  Mairbh dos fuisceadh beathu.

XVIII.

  Padraic priotcais do Scotuibh
  Ro cheas mor seath i Leathu
  Immi co tisat do brath
  In cach dos fiuec do beathu.

XIX.

  Meic Eimhir, meich Eirimoin
  Lotar huile la ciseal,
  Fos Zolaic in tarmchosal
  Is in morchathe nisel.

XX.

  Conda tanic in T-apstal
  Do faith gidh gaethe dene
  Pritchais tri fichte bliadhna,
  Croeich crist do thuathaibh Fene.

XXI.

  For thuath h-Erenn bai temnei
  Tuata adhorta idhla,
  Ni chraitsed in Fhirdheacht
  In i _Trinoite_ fire.

XXII.

  In Ardmacha fil righi
  Is cian do reracht Emhain,
  Is cell mor Dun-leth-glaisse
  Num dil cidh dithribh Temhair.

XXIII.

  Patraic dia mboi illolhra
  Ad cobra dol do Mhache
  Do lluidh Aingev ar a cenn
  For sed a meadhon laithe.

XXIV.

  Do faith fa dheos do Uictor
  Ba he arid ralastur,
  Lassais immuine imbai,
  Asan tein ad galastar.

XXV.

  As bert ordan do Mache,
  Do Crist atlaighthe buidhe
  Do chum nimhe mor raga,
  Ro ratha duit do guidhe.

XXVI.

  Immon do roeghu it biu
  Bid luirech didin do chach,
  Immuit illathiu mesa
  Regait fir n-Erend do brath.

XXVII.

  Anais Tasac dia aes
  An tan do bert Comain do
  As bert mios nic fead Patraic
  Briathra Tasaigh nir bu go.

XXVIII.

  Samh aighis crich fri aidhci
  Ar na cate les oca:
  Co cenn bliadhna bai soilsi,
  Ba he sitlaithe foda.

XXIX.

  An cath fechto i m-Beatron
  Fri tuait Canan la mac Nun,
  Assuith in grian fri Gabon
  Asseadh at fet littre dun.

XXX.

  Huair assuith la h-iesue
  In ghrian fri bas ina cloen,
  Ciasu threbech be huisse
  Soillse fri betsecht an noebh.

XXXI.

  Clerich Erend do llotar
  Dairi Patraic as cech set,
  Son in ceatuil fos roiare
  Con tuil cach uadhibh for set.

XXXII.

  Anim Patraic fria chorp
  As iar saethaibh ro scarad,
  Angeil de i cet aldhce
  Arid fethis ceannadh.

XXXIII.

  In tan conhualai Patraic,
  Ad ella in Patraic naile,
  Is malle connucc aibhset
  Do chum hisu mac Maire.

XXXIV.

  Patraic cen airae nuabhair
  Bo moer do maith ro meanuir,
  Bith ingellsine meic Maire,
  Bha sengaire in genuir. genuir.



HYMN ON ST. PATRICK.

I.

  Patrick was born at heavenly Tours,
  As it is ascertained in stories;
  A youth of sixteen years
  At the time he was brought under bondage.

II.

  Succat his name at the beginning;
  Who his father _was_, be it known
  Son of Calphurn, son of Otide,
  _Descended_ from the Deacon Odisse.

III.

  He was six years in servitude,
  The food of the people he eat not,
  They were all by him supported,
  Four tribes to whom he was enslaved.

IV.

  Victor (the angel) said to the servant
  Of Milcho: depart over the waves,
  He (Victor) placed his foot upon a stone
  His marks after him remained.

V.

  He departed over all the mountains,
  O'er sea, prosperous was his flight.
  He dwelled along with German,
  Southward of the southermost _part_ of Letavia.

VI.

  In the islands of the Touronian sea
  He resided, as related;
  He read his Canons with German,
  As is certified to us.

VII.

  Towards Ireland he proceeds,
  Warned by God's angels in apparitions,
  Often saw he in his sleep
  That he ought to return.

VIII.

  Great the assistance to Eire,
  The coming of Patrick to Oclat:
  He heard the long sound of entreaties
  Of children from the wood of Foclat.

IX.

  They implored the saint may come
  Upon forsaking Letavia,
  For drawing from error's propensity
  The people of Eire to life.

X.

  The people of Eire prophesy
  That _there_ will come new days of peace,
  Existing till the end of time;
  Desert will be in the country of Tara.

XI.

  O Druid! upon Laoree,
  _The_ coming of Patrick you hid not;
  Too true the prophecies
  Respecting the sovereign you predicted.

XII.

  Prudent was Patrick during life;
  Pleasing was in banishing evil propensities;
  This is what extended his fame
  Up to each tribe of people.

XIII.

  _He_ hymns, and revelations,
  _And_ the three fifties daily sung:
  _He_ preached, baptized, and prayed,
  From praising God he never ceased.

XIV.

  He felt not the cold of the season;
  He stayed the night in the waters,
  With heaven to be blessed as his kingdom,
  He preached through the day on the hills.

XV.

  In saving the people of Benibarka
  He experienced neither drought nor hunger;
  He sang an hundred psalms each night,
  The King of angels to serve.

XVI.

  He then rested on a bare stone,
  And a wet coverlid over him,
  A rock was his pillow,
  He left not his body in indolence.

XVII.

  He preached the Gospel to all;
  He worked great miracles at Letavia
  He healed the blind with fasting,
  The dead he awoke to life.

XVIII.

  Patrick preached to the Scotians
  _After_ he underwent great labours in Letavia,
  That they may come to judgment,
  Each whom he guided to life.

XIX.

  The sons of Emir, the sons of Erimor,
  Were all following after the devil,
  Buried was the Armament
  In the great depths of hell.

XX.

  Till the Apostle arrived
  Who preserved them tho' dreadful the blasts
  He preached three score years
  The cross of Christ to the people of the Phenians.

XXI.

  On the people of Eire was darkness,
  People adoring idols;
  They believed not in the Godhead
  Nor in the true Trinity.

XXII.

  In Armagh is the seat of royalty;
  Long has been the prerogative of Emania,
  And of the great church at Dundalethglas,
  Nor is it pleasant that Teamar be tribeless.

XXIII.

  Patrick being about to sicken,
  For alleviation on going to Armagh,
  An angel came upon his head
  On the way, in the middle of the day.

XXIV.

  He proceeded southerly to Victor (angel)
  It was he who sent for him,
  Blaze does the bush in which he (Victor) was
  Out of the blaze he him addressed.

XXV.

  There is granted rule to Armagh,
  To Christ for this be given thanks:
  Thou, to heaven, great shalt come,
  To thee prosperous has been thy petition.

XXVI.

  A hymn, sung by thee, while living,
  Will be a protecting coat of mail to all
  In the day of judgment with thee
  The men of Erie will go to be judged.

XXVII.

  Tassac remained after him,
  The time he gave the communion to him,
  He predicted that Patrick would not return
  The sayings of Tassach were not false.

XXVIII.

  Subside does the end of the night,
  Whereupon they had great light,
  Till the year's end continued the lights,
  This was the protracted day.

XXIX.

  The battle fought in Bethoron,
  Against the people of Canaan by Nun's son
  The sun sat over Gabaon,
  It is what scripture records to us.

XXX.

  As then stood for Joshua,
  The sun for the death of the ill-inclined
  Why not trebly greater be this
  Light on the death of his saint.

XXXI.

  The clergy of Eire they proceeded
  To wake Patrick, from every side
  The sound of the musical instrument buried
  All asleep upon the spot.

XXXII.

  The soul of Patrick from his body
  After his labours, separated;
  Angels of God on the first night
  Watched around him incessantly.

XXXIII.

  At the time that Patrick died
  He proceeded to the other Patrick,
  And with him ascended
  To Jesus, the son of Mary.

XXXIV.

  Patrick, without a puff of pride,
  Manifold blessings produced;
  He was in subjection to Mary's son.
  And with auspicious bliss was born.



HYMNUS SANCTO PATRICIO

I.

  Natus est Patricius Nemturri
  Ut refertur in historiis,
  Fuit annorum sedecim
  Quando ductus in captivitatis aerumnas.

II.

  Sucat nomen ei primo impositum erat
  Quantum ad patrem attinet sciendum fuerit.
  Filius Calfurnii filii Otidii
  Nepos Diaconi Odissii.

III.

  Annis sex erat in servitute
  Escis hominum (nempe gentilium) non vescens
  Ideo Vocatus Cathraige
  Quia quatuor familiis inserviebat.

IV.

  Dixit Victor angelus servo
  Milconis: ut trans mare se conferret
  Pedem imposuit supra petram
  Ibique: exinde manent impressa ejus vestigia.

V.

  Profectus est trans Alpes omnes,
  Trajecto mari; (quae fuit felix expeditio)
  Et apud Germanum remansit
  In Australi parte Latii.

VI.

  In insulis maris Tyrrheni
  Mansit: uti memoro
  Legit canonus apud Germanum
  Sicut testantur historiae.

VII.

  In Hiberniam venit
  Admonitus angelorum apparitionibus
  Saepius in visionibus videbat
  Se debere denuo eo redire.

VIII.

  Salutaris erat Hiberniae
  Adventus Patricii ad Fochlaidios
  Audiebat a longe vocem invocantium
  Infantium de silvis Fochlaid.

IX.

  Rogabant ut ad eos veniret sanctus
  Qui discurrebat per Latium
  Ut converteret ab errore
  Populos Hiberniae ad viam vitae.

X.

  Vates Hiberniae vaticinabantur
  Adventurum tempus pacis novum
  Quae duratura sit in perpetuum
  Unde deserta foret Temorea sub silentio.

XI.

  Sui Druydae Loegario
  Adventum Patricii non caelabant
  Adimpleta sunt vaticinia
  De domino quem predicabant.

XII.

  Carus erat Patricius usq. mortem
  Exhibit et strenuus in exterminandis erroribus
  Ex ninc merita ejus exaltata sunt
  Supra nationes hominum.

XIII.

  Hymnos et Apocalypsin
  Et tres quinquagenas _psalmorum_ in dies canenat
  Praedicabat, baptizabat, orabat,
  Et a laudibus dei non cessabat.

XIV.

  Nec temporis algor impediebat
  Quo minus maneret de nocte in mediis aquis
  Ad coeli potiandum gaudium
  Praedicabat de die super collibus.

XV.

  In fonte sian ad aquilonem juxta Bennaboirche
  (Qui fons nunquam deficit)
  Decantabat centum psalmos singulis noctibus
  Regi angelorum inserviendo.

XVI.

  Cubabat postea super nuda petra
  Cassula amictus madida
  Saxum fuit ejus pulvinar
  Sic arcebat a corpore remissionem.

XVII.

  Praedicabat evangelium populis,
  Multas virtutes et signa simul operatus
  Curabat caecos et leprosos:
  Mortuos revocabat ad vitam.

XVIII.

  Patricius praedicabat Scotis
  Passus multos labores in Latio
  Ut venirent in die judicii
  Quos convertit ad vitam aeternam.

XIX.

  Filii Emeri, Filii Erimonii,
  Omnes seducti a daemone,
  Quos et recondidit Sathanas
  In magno puteo infeniali.

XX.

  Donec advenit apostolus
  Qui eos preservavit, licet turbines vehementes
  Qui praedicavit annis sexagihta
  Crucem Christi populis Feniorum.

XXI.

  Super populos Hiberniae erant tenebrae
  Populos adorantes idola
  Non credebant in veram Deitatem
  Trinitatis verae.

XXII.

  Ardmachae est regni sedes
  Futura aeterni nominis populis Emaniae
  Et est ecclesia celebris in Dundalethglas
  Nec gratum quod Temoria deseratur.

XXIII.

  Patricius quando cepit infirmari
  Desiderabat ire Ardmacham
  Sed Angelus Dei ad eum venit
  In via in medio die.

XXIV.

  Venit versus Ausirum ad Victorem angelum
  (Is fuit qui eum accersivit)
  Rubus in quo angelus erat exarsit
  Et ex eo ipsum alloquebatur.

XXV.

  Dixit angelus regimen sit penes Ardmacho.
  Christo propter haec gratias age;
  Ipse ad coelos venies;
  Impetrasti adeoquae petieras.

XXVI.

  Hymnus decantatus tibi jam viventi,
  Erit lorica protectionis populis;
  In die judicii te comitabuntur
  Hiberni ad supremum judicem.

XXVII.

  Remansit Tassachus post eum
  Quando ministravit communionem ipsi
  Dixit quod communicaturus esset Patricium
  Nec prophetia Tassachi erat falsa.

XXVIII.

  Possuit tenebras nocti
  Ita quod apud eos erat indeficiens lui
  Spatio unius anni continuata lux erat
  Et ista continuata dies et prolongata erat.

XXIX.

  Praelium gestum in Bethoron
  Contra populum Cananeorum per filium Nun
  In quo stetit sol contra Gabaoan
  Ut referunt sacrae litteraae nobis.

XXX.

  Quandoquidem sic steterit Josuae
  Sol ad caedendos iniquos
  Esto triplo major sit haec
  Lux potiori jure concedenda erat in mort hujus sancti.

XXXI.

  Clerici enim Hiberniae confluebant
  Ad celebrandas exequias Patricii undique
  Sonus concentus superni
  Reddebat ipsos sopore irruenti ubi humi decumbantes.

XXXII.

  Anima Patricii a corpore
  Post labores seperata est,
  Angeli dei prima nocte,
  Excubias circa ipsum protinus agebant.

XXXIII.

  Quando decessit Patricius
  Venit ad Patricium alterum
  Et simul ascenderunt
  Ad Jesum filium Mariae.

XXXIV.

  Patricius absque elationis naevo
  Multa bona excogitavit
  In servitio filii Mariae
  Faelicibus natus est auspiciis.



St. Fiech, the author of the above Hymn, was a disciple to Duvhach,
poet laureate of Laoree, monarch of Ireland. He was converted by St.
Patrick, who taught him the elements of the Latin language, in which
he was enabled to read the bible after fifteen days' study. Fiech was
appointed bishop of Leinster by his holy master, upon which he
founded a celebrated monastery, called from him _Domnach-Fiech_, on
the mountain of Sletty, about a mile to the north of Carlow, in the
territory of Leix, now in the barony of Slieve-Margey, and Queen's
county. In this church, the remains of which still exist, he also
established a college, celebrated for producing many saints, as may
be seen in Colgan's Lives of Irish Saints, &c.



NOTES.

_The figures refer to the stanzas_.

(1) In the Latin translation accompanying Colgan's edition of this
Hymn Nein Thur, or _Holy Tours_, is rendered into _Nemthur_, as if
the two words were but one, designating a place of that name. In the
fifth and ninth stanzas, the word _Lethu_ or _Letha_, is rendered by
_Latium_ or _Italy_: upon which absurd translation, Colgan, without
rectifying the mistake, observes that _Nisi Germanus dicatur degisse
in eis (insulis Tyrrheni maris) videtur hic preposterus ordo_;
"except St. German be said here to have lived in them, (the islands
of the Tyrrhenian sea,) the order of time seems preposterous." So
contradictory does this appear to the Latin translator, that he has
totally mistranslated the 17th and 18th verses, in which _Letha_
again occurs, by his omitting the word altogether. The editor's
reason for deviating from the Latin translation may be seen, at full
length, in the preceding work.

(2) Colgan, from the psalter of Cashel, traces back St. Patrick's
pedigree to the 17th progenitor, thus:

  Calphurnius     1
  Potitus         2
  Mercutius       3
  Oda, or Othus   4
  Oricius         5
  Muricius        6
  Muricius        7
  Oricius         8
  Leo             9
  Maximius       10
  Otrasius       11
  Ericius        12
  Pelestius      13
  Fierinius      14
  Brittanus      15
  Fergusius      16
  Nemethus       17
  &c. &c.

From the names of the above list, if they could be depended on, it
would appear that St. Patrick's ancestors were of Roman origin.

(3) As Father Michael Clery, one of the annalists called the four
masters was employed for fifteen years previously to the Anglo-Cromwellian
invasion in collecting Irish manuscripts, and translating
them into Latin for Colgan's Lives of the Irish Saints, it is very
probable he was the translator of this Hymn into Latin at the same
time. He was also the author of an Irish dictionary of difficult
words. To the translation of such a scholar, made also at a time when
the language was regularly studied in the seminaries of Ireland,
great deference must be paid. In this third stanza, however, the
editor has ventured to deviate from his version, which runs thus,
according to the Latin words "St. Patrick was six years in slavery,
during which he eat not the food of the (heathenish) people. For this
reason he was called Cathraige, because he served four masters." Now,
as _Cothraighe_ may also mean a supporter, maintainer, protector, &c.
this last import of the word is adopted in the English translation.

(4) Instead of St. Patrick's running over the Italian "Alps," as the
Latin translator affirms here, he travelled over all the mountains
from the north to the south of Ireland, whence he took shipping for
his native country; for _Ealpa uile_ denotes all mountains in
general.

(5) Tassach was originally a brazier and silversmith, who ornamented
the celebrated crozier of St. Patrick, called the _Staff of Jesus_.
Tassach was afterwards a priest.

In the 5th, 6th, 9th, 11th, 14th, 17th, and 18th stanzas, the English
translation will be found to differ very materially from the Latin
one. Some verses of the 28th and 31st stanzas, neither the editor nor
some literary friends (of whose observations he has availed himself
in translating other parts of the Hymn) could make any tolerable
sense; he at the same time acknowledges, that he is far from being
satisfied with the Latin translation. He thinks it necessary to
observe here, once for all, that the Hymn has been faithfully
collated with, and printed word for word, according to Father
Colgan's edition.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Hymn on the Life, Virtues and
Miracles of St. Patrick, by Saint Fiech

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HYMN ON THE LIFE, VIRTUES ***

***** This file should be named 39428.txt or 39428.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/4/2/39428/

Produced by Michael Gray (Diocese of San Jose)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
