The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 112,
December 20, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 112, December 20, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: April 13, 2012 [EBook #39438]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, DEC 20, 1851 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Characters with macrons have been marked in
brackets with an equal sign, as [=e] for a letter e with a macron on
top. Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts; equal signs
indicate =bold= fonts. Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. A list of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has
been added at the end.]




NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--NO. 112--SATURDAY, DECEMBER 20. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Wady Mokatteb identified with Kibroth Hattavah, by
      the Rev. Moses Margoliouth                                 481

      On a Passage in Goldsmith, by Henry H. Breen               482

      Minor Notes:--Biographical Dictionary--The Word
      Premises--Play of George Barnwell--Traditions from
      Remote Periods through few Links                           483

      QUERIES:--

      Deodands and their Application, by Jonathan Peel           484

      Minor Queries:--Hell paved with the Skulls of
      Priests--Charib--Thumb Bible--Tripos--Louis Philippe
      and his Bag of Nails--Brass Statues at Windsor--Edmund
      Bohun--Bishop Trelawney                                    484

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--Companion Ladder--Macaulay's
      Ballad of the Battle of Naseby                             485

      REPLIES:--

      The Crucifix as used by the Early Christians, by
      J. Emerson Tennent                                         485

      The Word "[Greek: Adelphos]." by T. R. Brown               486

      The Roman Index Expurgatorius of 1607                      487

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Hobbes's "Leviathan"--Age
      of Trees--Treatise against Equivocation--Lycian
      Inscriptions--Alterius Orbis Papa--Carmagnoles--General
      James Wolfe--Johannes Trithemius--Sir   William
      Herschel--Dr. Wm. Wall--Parish Registers--Compositions
      during the Protectorate--General Moyle--Descendants
      of John of Gaunt--Church of St. Bene't Fink--Coins
      of Vabalathus--Engraved Portrait--"Cleanliness is next
      to godliness"--Cozens the Painter--Whig and Tory--Prince
      Rupert's Drops--Deep Well near Bansted Downs--Mrs. Mary
      Anne Clarke--Upton Court                                   487

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     493

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               494

      Notices to Correspondents                                  494

      Advertisements                                             494




Notes.


WADY MOKATTEB IDENTIFIED WITH KIBROTH HATTAVAH.

The difficulty of deciding the antiquity of the famous inscriptions in
the deserts of Arabia, would be considerably diminished if we could
ascertain the earliest mention of the valley now known as Wady Mokatteb.
What I am about to submit to the readers of the "NOTES AND QUERIES," is
not a presumptuous or rash suggestion, but an idea diffidently
entertained, and cautiously and maturely considered.

It is not at all improbable that that valley, with its surrounding rocky
chronicles, was first mentioned by Moses, the first delineator of the
"great wilderness." The mention I allude to is to be found in Numbers,
xi. 26. The passage, as it occurs in the English version, runs thus:

  "But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the one
  was Eldad, and the name of the other was Medad; and the Spirit rested
  upon them, and they were of them that were written."

The original words of the last clause are but the two following:--

  [Hebrew: vhemah bakkthuwbiym]

which literally signify, "and they were amongst the inscriptions."

A personal and literary examination of the locality of the Sinaitic
inscriptions convinces me that Eldad and Medad were then in that famous
region. By a reference to the chapter alluded to, it will be found that
the children of Israel were then at that awfully memorable place called
_Kibroth Hattavah_ (ver. 34.), and no one, who has but a slight
knowledge of scripture topography, will be at a loss to observe that it
is the very spot where the mysterious inscriptions are found.

Dr. Robinson, in his _Biblical Researches_, vol. i. p. 138., thus
notices the subject in question:

  "The Sinaite inscriptions are found on all the routes which lead from
  the West towards Sinai, above the convent El-Arbain, but are found
  neither on Gebel Musa, nor on the present Horeb, nor on St. Catherine,
  nor in the valley of the convent; while on Serbal they are seen on its
  very summit."

Lord Lindsay, in his first letter from _Edom and the Holy Land_,
introduces the same district in the following words:

  "We now entered Wady Mokatteb, a spacious valley, bounded on the east
  by a most picturesque range of black mountains, but chiefly famous for
  the inscriptions on the rocks that line it, and from which it derives
  its name. There are thousands of them, inscriptions too, and here is
  the mystery, in a character which no one has yet deciphered."

Now, let the ancient and modern maps be compared, and it will be
discovered that the same place which is called, in Num. xi. 26.,
[Hebrew: kthuwbiym], probably on account of its inscriptions, is also
called by the Arabians [Arabic: wadi el mokatteb] _Wady el Mokatteb_.

Should the identity between Wady Mokatteb and Kibroth Hattavah be
considered conclusive, then the antiquity of the Sinaitic inscriptions
is far more remote than the date fixed by certain archaeologists and
palaeographists; the records may prove to be, in truth and in deed, the
handy-work of the Israelites during their encampment there.

The readers of the "NOTES AND QUERIES" need scarcely be told that the
inscriptions were first noticed in the sixth century by Cosmas, a
Graeco-Indian merchant, who was hence surnamed Indicopleustes. But it is
necessary to impress the fact that Cosmas, though a man of intelligence
and of letters, considered that the alphabet in which the inscriptions
were made, was unknown; but having visited the Wady in company with
certain well-informed Jews, his Hebrew companions read and deciphered
several of the records, and decided that the Israelites of the Egyptian
Exodus were the performers of the inscriptions. All this Cosmas stated
in his _Christian Topography_ (a work published for the first time in
1707 by the learned Montfaucon), and concurs in the opinion that the
ancient Hebrews were the scribes. This circumstance borne in mind, will
be proof against the theory conceived by Professor Beer, brought forth
by Dr. Lepsius, adopted and fostered by Dr. Wilson, viz. that an Utopian
Nabathaean Christian tribe executed those inscriptions during their
pilgrimages to the sacred localities on Mount Sinai. Is it not strange
that Cosmas should not have heard that there was such a tribe of scribes
in the valley? Is it not unaccountable that the knowledge of the
alphabet should so soon have been forgotten? Cosmas flourished
comparatively but a short time after the supposed Nabathaeans.

But the advocates of the Nabathaean theory argue that the Sinaitic
inscriptions must be of a comparatively modern date, since there are
found amongst them some Greek and Latin ones; and, moreover, the cross
does sometimes occur in various shapes. I venture to submit that the
inscriptions bear self-evidence that they have been executed at various
dates. It is true that by far the greatest number of them display
indubitable marks of remote antiquity; but there are some which must be
pronounced juvenile when compared with the _great majority_. The latter
bear marks of an execution resembling the inscriptions on the ancient
Egyptian obelisks, whilst the former are rude and superficially cut, and
already almost effaced. I take, therefore, the Greek and Latin, and
indeed some of the yet unknown inscriptions, to have been cut at a
comparatively modern date. Who knows whether Cosmas and his companions
did not try their hands at a few?

Why should it be thought improbable that the different monks on Mount
Sinai, who occupied the convent there at various ages, should have done
their quota to puzzle the modern palaeographist and traveller? Is it
absolutely impossible that the prefect of the Franciscan missionaries of
Egypt, who visited the Wady in 1722, and his companions, who were well
instructed in the Arabic, Greek, Hebrew, Syriac, Coptic, Latin,
Armenian, Turkish, English, Illyrian, German, and Bohemian languages,
should have chiselled a few in the characters they were most expert? In
the same manner might the occurrence of the cross be accounted for, if
it were necessary, without precipitating oneself to the conclusion that
"the occurrence, in connection with the inscriptions of the cross in
various forms, indicates that their _origin_ should be attributed to the
early Christians." But is it possible that such antiquaries as Drs.
Beer, Lepsius, and Wilson, should be ignorant, or affect to be ignorant,
that the cross was an ancient hieroglyphic, of a date long before the
Christian era, well known by the name of _Crux Ansata_, and of the
_Divina Taw_, and signified among the Egyptians "Life to come"? That the
form of the cross was used among the Hebrews is conclusive from the fact
that it was the ancient Hebrew mint letter for the [Hebrew: tav]. What,
then, is the value of the arguments in behalf of the Nabathaean theory?
All the specimens that have been given hitherto of the inscriptions, are
no more in comparison with the vast numbers which literally cover the
highest mountains, than a drop out of a bucket, including even those
given in the _Philosophical Transactions_ of 1766, in the _Transactions
of the Royal Society of Literature_ of 1832, and by the Rev. Charles
Forster of this year[1], and even adding the 1200 taken by M. Lottin de
Laval. (See "NOTES AND QUERIES", Vol. iv., p. 332.)

  [Footnote 1: _The One Primeval Language, &c._, by the Rev. Charles
  Forster. The above is a compendium of two letters which the writer
  addressed on the subject to his Grace the Archbishop of Dublin,
  and the late Bishop of Norwich,--to the former from Paris, to the
  latter from Alexandria. See _A Pilgrimage to the Land of my
  Fathers_, vol. i. pp. 6-15. Mr. Forster's work did not appear
  until about a year after the publication of part of the writer's
  travels.]

    MOSES MARGOLIOUTH.


ON A PASSAGE IN GOLDSMITH.

Goldsmith, in _The Deserted Village_, has the lines:

      "Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
      Where wealth accumulates and men decay:
      Princes and lords may flourish or may fade,
      _A breath can make them, as a breath has made_;
      But a bold peasantry, their country's pride,
      When once destroy'd, can never be supplied."

In this passage the fourth line, which I have given in italics, is
traced by D'Israeli, in _Curiosities of Literature_, under the head of
"Imitations and Similarities," to the French poet, De Caux, who,
comparing the world to his hour-glass, says--

                               ---- "C'est une verre qui luit,
      Qu'un souffle peut _detruire_, et qu'un souffle a _produit_."

The turn given to the thought in the French has suggested to D'Israeli
an emendation of the passage in Goldsmith. He proposes that the word
"unmakes" should be substituted for "can make." The line would then
read--

      "A breath _unmakes_ them, as a breath has made."

This emendation seems to me to be alike ingenious and well-founded. The
line itself is but the corollary of the one that precedes it; and in
order to make the sense complete, it should contain antithetical
expressions to correspond with "flourish" and "fade." Now, between "can
make" and "made" there is nothing antithetical; but between "made" and
"unmakes" there is.

In support of this view, I may quote one or two parallel passages, in
which the antithesis is preserved. The first is a quatrain commemorating
the devastating effects of an earthquake in the valley of Lucerne in
1808:

      "O ciel! ainsi ta Providence
        A tous les maux nous condamna:
      Un souffle _eteint_ notre existence
        Comme un souffle nous la _donna_."

The second is a line which occurs in _Curiosities of Literature_, and
which I am compelled to quote from memory, having no access to that
work. It is as follows:

      "A breath _revived_ him, but a breath _o'erthrew_."

That Goldsmith wrote the line in question with the word "unmakes," there
seems little reason to doubt. To say of princes and lords that "a breath
can make them, as a breath has made," far from conveying any idea of
their "fading," would be, on the contrary, to indicate the facile
process by which they may be perpetuated. It would show how they may
"flourish," but not how they may "fade."

Although this emendation in Goldsmith was pointed out many years ago,
and recommends itself by its appositeness, and its obvious adaptation to
the context, yet I believe it has never been introduced into any edition
of that poet. I have before me two copies of _The Deserted Village_, and
both contain the words "can make." As, however, among the many useful
hints thrown out by "NOTES AND QUERIES," that of suggesting the
emendation of obscure or difficult passages in our poets, appears to
have met with the approbation of your readers, I trust some future
editor of Goldsmith may be induced to notice this passage, and restore
the text to its original accuracy.

    HENRY H. BREEN.

  St. Lucia.


Minor Notes.

_Biographical Dictionary._--May I beg for the assistance of "NOTES AND
QUERIES" to enforce a want which I am sure is daily felt by thousands of
educated Englishmen? The want I speak of is that of _a good Biographical
Dictionary_, coming down to the middle of the century; a dictionary as
good as the _Biog. Universelle_ for _foreign_ lives, and _a hundred
times better for English lives_. Every one knows how meagre and
unsatisfactory is that otherwise magnificent work in its English part.
Why should we not have an abridged translation, with the home portion
re-written?

    Z. Z. Z.

_The Word Premises._--The use of the word _premises_ for houses, lands,
and hereditaments, is surely incorrect. I have never found the word
_praemissa_ used in any Latin writer in a sense that can sanction the
modern application of its derivative. Johnson's authority supports the
view that the word is perverted in being made to stand for houses and
lands, as he says it is "in low language" that the noun substantive
"premises" is used in that sense, as, "I was upon the _premises_," &c.
The office of "the premises" in a deed, say the Law Dictionaries, is to
express the names of the grantor and grantee, and to specify the thing
granted. "The _premises_ is the former part of a deed, being all that
which precedeth the _habendum_ or limitation of the estate." I believe
the term "parcels" is applied, technically, to the specification of the
property which forms the subject of a deed. In an instrument, it may not
be wholly incorrect to refer by the term "premises" to the particulars
premised, and, if an etymological inaccuracy, it may be excused for the
sake of avoiding repetitions; but surely we ought not to speak of
houses, lands, &c. by this term. I see I am not the first to call an
editor's attention to this point, for, in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ of
Jan., 1795, a correspondent complains of this improper application of
the word, and attributes the perversion to the lawyers, "who," he says,
"for the sake of brevity (to which, by-the-bye, they are not much
attached), have accustomed themselves to the phrase, 'the aforesaid
_premises_,' whence the word has come to be universally taken as a
collective noun, signifying manors, tenements, and so on." The absurdity
of such a use of the word is illustrated by putting it for animals,
household goods, and personal estate, for which it may as well stand as
for lands and houses.

    W. S. G.

  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

_Play of George Barnwell:_--

  "Last Friday a messenger came from Hampton Court to the Play House by
  the Queen's command, for the manuscript of George Barnwell, for Her
  Majesty's perusal, which Mr. Wilks carried to Hampton Court early on
  Saturday morning; and we hear it is to be performed shortly at the
  Theatre in Hampton Court, for the entertainment of the Royal Family,"
  &c.--_Daily Post_, Monday, July 5. 1731.

    H. E.

_Traditions from Remote Periods through few Links_ (Vol. iii., pp. 206.
237.):--

  "My greatest boast in this line is, that I have conversed with Sir
  Isaac Herd, the celebrated herald, and he had conversed with a person
  who was present at the execution of Charles I."--Lord Campbell's
  _Lives of the Chief Justices_, vol. ii. p. 304. note.

    E. H. A.




Queries.


DEODANDS AND THEIR APPLICATION.

Blackstone states (1 _Comm._ p. 300.) that a deodand--

  "Is forfeited to the king to be applied to pious uses, and distributed
  in alms by his high almoner, though formerly destined to a more
  superstitious purpose. It seems to have been originally designed, in
  the blind days of Popery, as an expiation for the souls of such as
  were snatched away by sudden death; and for that purpose ought
  properly to have been given to holy church."

The authorities for this latter statement are Fitzh., _Abr._, tit.
"Enditement," pt. 27., and Staunf., _P.C._, 20, 21., neither of which
books are in my possession, nor in this remote district can I gain
access to them. Hume, Lingard, Henry, and Rapin, omit all mention of
this change in the destination of the deodand, at least so far as I can
find. Fleta, who lived, according to Dr. Cowell (_Interpreter_, in verb.
"Fleta"), tem. Ed. II., Ed. III., or, according to Jacob (_Law Dic._, in
ver. "Fleta"), tem. Ed. I., says that--

  "This deodand is to be sold to the poor, and the price distributed to
  the poor for the soul of the king and all faithful people departed
  this life."--_Interpreter_, in ver. "Deodand."

It would therefore appear that in Fleta's time it was settled law that
deodands went to the Crown; nor does this writer seem to take any notice
of their having been, at any time, payable to the Church. Hawkins, East,
and I think Hale also, are equally silent upon the point.

Can any of your readers kindly supply the information as to when
deodands first ceased to be given to the Church, and when they became
the property of the Crown?

    JONATHAN PEEL.


Minor Queries.

349. _Hell Paved with the Skulls of Priests._--The proverb "Hell is
paved with good intentions" (Vol. ii. pp. 86. 140.), brings to my
recollection a remark I once heard from the lips of a French priest. He
was addressing an audience chiefly composed of students in divinity, and
while descanting on the peculiar dangers to which ecclesiastics are
exposed, and the obstacles they have to encounter at every step on the
road to salvation, he said there could be no doubt that by far the
greater number of them would incur eternal damnation. "It was this"
(added he, with an emphasis which sent thrill of horror through all
present), "It was this that made one of the early fathers assert, that
Hell is paved with the skulls of priests." I think the preacher
mentioned Tertullian as his authority for this singular sentiment, but
he only gave the words: "L'enfer est pave de tetes de pretres." Can any
of your readers point out the precise passage referred to?

    HENRY H. BREEN.

  St. Lucia.

350. _Charib._--Can any of your correspondents inform me what is the
derivation and meaning of the word _Charib_? The Charibs were the
ancient inhabitants, as is well known, of the smaller West Indian
islands.

    W. J. C.

  St. Lucia.

351. _Thumb Bible._--Can any of your readers tell me the history of the
Thumb Bible, reprinted by Longman, 1850? Who was "J. Taylor," who seems
to have been the author? He has strangely spoilt Bishop Ken's Morning
and Evening Hymns at the conclusion of his book.

    HERMES.

352. _Tripos._--What is the origin of the term "tripos" as applied to
the mathematical and classical honour lists in the university of
Cambridge?

    A. F. S.

353. _Louis Philippe and his Bag of Nails._--Has any of your
correspondents heard a story about a bag of rusty nails which Louis
Philippe used to carry about with him; with which he considered his fate
as in some way connected; and which he lost a few days before February
24, 1848? If so, is it known whether the story is well authenticated?

    R. D. H.

354. _Brass Statues at Windsor._--"The Brass Statues at Windsor," sold
in 1646 by order of the House of Lords to pay the troops at
Windsor:--What were these statues?

    WAYLEN.

355. _Edmund Bohun._--Is it possible that some Trans-atlantic notist may
be able to supply a scrap or two of intelligence respecting the brief
career of Edmund Bohun, as Chief Justice of South Carolina, 1698-1701? I
believe he died in the latter year, and was buried at Charlestown.

    S. W. RIX.

  Beccles.

356. _Bishop Trelawney._--To what parliamentary decision does Atterbury
allude in the subjoined extract from the dedication to Trelawney, Bishop
of Winchester, prefixed to his Sermons in four volumes, 1723?

  "This and another parliamentary decision, which your lordship not long
  after with equal difficulty obtained, and by which the bishop's sole
  right to judge of the qualifications of persons applying for
  institution was unutterably confirmed, are such instances of your
  magnanimity and public spirit as will remain in memory while the
  church or the law of England lasts."

    E. H. A.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Companion Ladder._--Why are the stairs leading from the deck to the
chief cabin of a ship called "the companion ladder?"

    A CONSTANT READER.

  [The _companion_ in merchant ships is a wooden porch placed over the
  entrance or staircase of the cabin. Hence the ladder by which officers
  ascend to and descend from the quarter-deck, is called the _companion
  ladder_.]

_Macaulay's Ballad of the Battle of Naseby._--Where is Mr. Macaulay's
ballad of the "Battle of Naseby" to be found printed entire? It is not
republished in the last edition of his _Lays of Ancient Rome_.

    D. B. J.

  [It has never, we believe, been printed since its first publication in
  _Knight's Magazine_, about the year 1824. From the omission pointed
  out by our correspondent, it is obvious that the accomplished writer
  of it does not himself regard this ballad as deserving of
  republication.]




Replies.


THE CRUCIFIX AS USED BY THE EARLY CHRISTIANS.

(Vol. iv., p. 422.).

A correspondent questions the accuracy of MR. CURZON's statement, in his
_Monasteries of the Levant_, that--

  "The crucifix was not known before the fifth or sixth century, though
  the cross was always the emblem of the Christian faith,"--

and asks for information as to its use, and the dates of the earliest
examples. Some twenty years ago I devoted some care to this inquiry, and
the result will be found in a chapter on the decline of the arts in
Greece, in a _History of Modern Greece_, which I published in 1830. To
that essay, but more especially to the authorities which it cites, I
would refer your correspondent; and I think, after an examination of the
latter, he will be disposed to concur with me, that Mr. Curzon's
statement is correct. It is in accordance with that of Gibbon, and
sustained by the same authorities as Basnage, to the effect that the
first Christians, from their association with the Jews, and their
aversion to the mythology of the Greeks, were hostile to the use of
images of any description in their primitive temples, in which they
reluctantly admitted the figure of the ignominious cross, as a memorial
of the Redeemer's death. At a later period, however, the veneration for
the _relics_ of departed saints led to the admission of their painted
_portraits_, and eventually to the erection of their images and effigies
in wood and marble. (_Gibbon_, chap. xxiii. xlix.) Reiskius states that
it was not till the fourth century after Christ that the latter
innovation began:

  "Ecclesia vero Christiana tribus seculis prioribus ne quidem imagines
  recepit aut inter sacra numeravit instrumenta. Sed demum sub finem
  quarti seculi ea lege admisit ut in templis memoriae ac ornatus causa
  haberentur."--Reiskius, _De Imaginibus Jesu Christi Exercitationes
  Histor._, ex. i. c. i. sec. ii. p. 12.

Lillio Giraldi concurs with Reiskius:

  "Illud certe non praetermittam nos dico Christianos ut aliquando
  Romanos fuisse sine imaginibus in primitiva quae vocatur
  ecclesia."--Lillius Gregorius Giraldus, _Historiae Deorum Syntage_, v.
  i. p. 15.

The earliest images of Christ were those mentioned as being placed, by
Alexander Severus, along with those of Abraham, Jupiter, Pythagoras,
Plato, and Aristotle. (_Reiskius_, ex. vii. c. i. sec. i. p. 151.)
Constantine placed two equestrian statues of the Saviour in the Lateran
Church. But Molanus, who mentions the latter fact, insists that there
were existing about this period numerous statues of the Saviour, which
he would refer to the time of Pontius Pilate. (_De Historia SS.
Imaginibus, &c._, lib. i. c. vi. p. 65.)

The most ancient examples now remaining of the decorations employed by
the early Christians, are doubtless those found in the catacombs at
Rome. I have not access to any recent copies of these interesting
antiquities; but so far as my recollection serves, they contain no
example of a crucifix, or any literal delineation of the death of the
Saviour. In fact, even in these gloomy retreats, the vigilance of
persecution compelled the Christians to caution, and forced them to
conceal, under allegories and mystery, the memorials of their faith; the
figure of the Redeemer being always veiled under an assumed character,
most generally that of a shepherd bearing in his arms a recovered lamb.
This, which is the most common form of allegory of this period, occurs
in the catacomb of the Via Latina, in that of Priscilla in the Via
Salaria, discovered in 1776, both of which, according to Aringhi, are
amongst the oldest Christian monuments now remaining. (_Roma
Subterranea_, vol. ii. p. 25. 292.) In a sepulchral chamber in the
cemetery of St. Calixtus, Jesus is represented as Orpheus with a lyre,
as emblematic of the subduing influences of his life. But his death is
still more cautiously shadowed forth by the types of Jonas, Isaac on the
altar of Abraham, and Daniel in the den of lions,--examples of all of
which are numerous; and the cover of an urn figured by Agincourt
presents them all three. (_Histoire de l'Art par les Monumens_, vol.
iv.; _Dec. Sculp._, pl. v. no. 10.)

Art, after its decline in Rome, was later cherished by the Greeks at
Byzantum, and allegory in their hands, during the third and fourth
centuries, exhibited a much higher refinement than amongst the
degenerate Romans,--the divinity and _life_ of Jesus being represented
in their paintings by a youth of godlike mien and heavenly grace, with
his foot upon the mane of a lion, whilst his _death_ is still typified
by a lamb expiring at the foot of a cross, which it sprinkles with its
blood, and his _resurrection_ by a phoenix, which rests upon the summit
of a palm-tree, the emblem of his _victory_.

I have stated that even the _cross_, as an emblem, was admitted
"reluctantly" into the churches of the early Christians. The fact,
and the causes of this reluctance, are stated fairly by Gibbon
(ch. xx.), principally on the authorities consulted by Basnage in
his _Histoire des Eglises Reformees_, to have had their origin in
the idea of infamy and ignominy which they attached to the mode of
execution by crucifixion,--feelings analogous to those inspired by
a gallows or a gibbet; and it required a long lapse of time, even
after Constantine had abolished throughout the Roman dominions the
punishment which had prevailed for slaves and malefactors, but which
the Saviour of mankind had submitted to suffer, before the people
could be led to regard as a symbol for veneration that which had so
long been an object of horror and disgust. A most interesting account
of the subsidence of this feeling, and of its effects upon Sacred Art
whilst it prevailed, will be found in Emeric David's _Discours sur la
Peinture Moderne_, p. 115. It rendered allegory so indispensable, that
in the exhaustion of fancy it declined into conceits and puerility,
which finally brought the subject into contempt, and compelled the
hierarchy to exert the influence of the Church for its correction.
This led to a measure the record of which is strongly corroborative
of the statement of Mr. Curzon; namely, that A.D. 692, at the Quine
Sextine, or _Council in Trullo_, it was ordered that thenceforth
fiction and allegory should cease, and _the real figure of the Saviour
be depicted on the tree_. (_Can._ 82. _Act. Concil._ Paris, 1714,
v. iii. col. 1691, 1692.)

The Greeks complied, but with reluctance, to delineate the actual
crucifixion; and as, in the controversy which arose in the second
century, and never entirely subsided, regarding the beauty or deformity
of the Saviour's features, the Greek Church had espoused the side of St.
Basil, Tertullian, and Origen, who maintained that "he was without form
or comeliness," their artists exhibited such a spectacle of deformity on
the cross, that to the present hour a proverb compares a lean and ugly
person to "un crucifix des Grecs." The Latins and Italians, on the other
hand, whilst they were equally hostile to the literal exhibition of the
Redeemer's death, and _forbore for nearly a century_ to comply with the
orders of the Council _in Trullo_, adopted, as to his beauty, the party
of Celsus and Chrysostom,--quoted the expression of David, "thou art
fairer than the children of men,"--and painted the Saviour, albeit
suspended on the fatal tree, as a youth of heavenly mien; and instead of
the crown of thorns, the lance, and the sponge, they represented him
with a diadem, and insensible to suffering or pain.

These remarks, though they will no doubt be insufficient as an answer to
your correspondent, may perhaps direct him to authorities, the
consultation of which will satisfy his inquiry.

    J. EMERSON TENNENT.

  London.


THE WORD "[Greek: Adelphos]."

(Vol. iv., pp. 339, 458.)

In commenting on the criticisms of J. B., may I be allowed to follow the
order of his own reasoning as much as possible?

1st. I am glad to find that Scapula is right, but I must object to the
use of the participle _acquiescing_, as applied to me. My word is
"_de_duction," and is applied to a rule grounded upon Scapula's
correctness, and may, I think, settle the sense of those disputed verses
in Matt. xiii. 55, 56, to say nothing of two indisputable proofs which
might be adduced.

2nd. _I_ am wrong--for what? for _appearing_, in the eyes of J. B., to
have done that which I have not done,--for bringing in links of "the
Indo-Germanic languages," which I have neither done, nor can do.

3rd. "The word is solely and peculiarly Greek." Let me give only one
etymon by way of preparation for my answer. Let us take the word
_mouse_. Well, it comes from the Latin _mus_, which comes, you will say,
from the Greek [Greek: mys], and there are many clever etymologists,
excepting a few, with J. B. and myself, would say, "it is solely and
peculiarly Greek;" but _we_ go up to the Sanscrit (the _mother_ of
European languages), and bring forward _mush_, a mouse, and here is _the
terminus_--and why? because _mush_ signifies _to steal_, and therefore
sufficiently describes the nature of the little animal. Now, because we
cannot _find_ an existing link between the Greek and Sanscrit, is that a
reason for asserting [Greek: adelphos] to be of pure Greek _origin_? No;
and if J. B. will only recollect that all words in Sanscrit, excepting
bare primary roots, are compounded after the same manner as [Greek:
adelphos] or rather [Greek: del-ph], he will, I hope, find that I have
_not been wrong_ in my _etymon_. Moreover, let J. B. prove, _if he can_,
what is _the meaning_ of [Greek: delph] in the Greek, unaided by any
other language.

4th. Why is the Sanscrit _bhratre_ brought into the contest? perhaps to
prove what has not been proved, viz. that _it also_ signifies _frater
uterinus_.

5th. "How happened it that the word [Greek: phrater] was lost in Greek?"
Why, because the Greeks thought it too _barbarous_ a word to _own_, as
coming through the Latins from the barbarous Goths, Scandinavians, &c.!
Let us pass over irrelevant matter till we come to

6th. J. B.'s authoritative rule, "that no apparent similarity between
words in the Semitic and Asian (read Sanscrit) families can be used to
establish a real identity, the two classes of language being _radically_
and fundamentally distinct." Vide _mouse_, and a hundred more roots,
that might quash this rule.

To conclude, I did not introduce the Sanscrit _dal_ into my former note,
because, I suppose, an idea passed through my mind that I might offend
some "_interesting_ points in Greek manners."

I have only one more remark to make, which is, that the Sanscrit
_bhra-tre_ is a compound word like [Greek: del-phys]. I will give the
full etymology of this word _bhra-tre_, to prove that J. B. has done
wrong in bringing in a word to militate against his _own_ rule. Persian,
_bra-dar_; Sanscrit, _bhra-tre_; Gothic, _bro-thar_; Islandic,
_bro-dir_; German, _bru-der_; Swedish and Danish, _bro-der_;
Anglo-Saxon, _bro-ther_. Now, will J. B. prove that the Hebrew, Chaldee,
and Syriac [Hebrew: bar], _bar_, a son, is not connected with the
Persian and Sanscrit _bra_ and _bhra_? If he does, I shall doubtless be
edified.

    T. R. BROWN.

  Vicarage, Southwick, near Oundle.


THE ROMAN INDEX EXPURGATORIUS OF 1607.

(Vol. iv., p. 440.)

I am happy in being able to give, I trust, a satisfactory answer to the
Query of your American correspondent U. U., respecting the original
edition of 1607.

There can be no doubt that the copy in the Bodleian Library is of the
genuine edition. It was in the Library certainly before the year 1620,
as it appears in the catalogue printed in that year, and still bears the
same reference on the shelf as is there given to it, namely, 8vo. I. 32.
Theol.; and it was doubtless the copy used by Dr. James, who
superintended the forming of that catalogue, and who died only a few
months before. The title runs thus:

                                 INDICIS
       (red ink)                LIBRORVM
       (red)                 EXPVRGANDORVM
                    in studiosorum gratiam confecti.
                              Tomus Primus
                     _IN QVO QVINQVAGINTA AVCTORVM_
                _Libri prae ceteris desiderati emendantur._
       (red ink)
                    PER FR. IO. MARIAM BRASICHELLEN.
       (red ink)
                   SACRI PALATII APOSTOLICI MAGISTRVM
                   in vnum corpus redactus, & publicae
                           commoditati aeditus
       (this first word red)                        (this date red)
       ------------------------------------------------------------
       ROMAE,          ex Typographia R. Cam. Apost.       M.DC.VII.
       ------------------------------------------------------------
       (the line above red)
                          SVPERIORVM PERMISSV.

There is a full stop at confecti, also at emendantur, and at
Brasichellen; but no stop whatever at auctorum. It extends (besides
eight leaves of title and preliminary matter) to pp. 742. On the recto
of the next and last leaf, "Series chartarum," &c., and at the bottom:

                             ROMAE, M.DC.VII.
               ----------------------------------------
               _Ex Typographia Reu. Camerae Apostolicae._
               ----------------------------------------
                          SVPERIORVM PERMISSV.

There is also in the Bodleian Library a copy of the Bergomi edition, the
title of which is as follows:

       (red ink)                 INDICIS
                                LIBRORVM
       (red)                 EXPVRGANDORVM
                      In studiosorum gratiam confecti
       (red)                  TOMVS PRIMVS
                  In quo quinquaginta Auctorum Libri prae
                       caeteris desiderati emendantur
       (red)           PER F. IO. MARIAM BRASICHELL.
                      Sacri Palatij Apost. Magistrum
            _In vnum corpus redactus & pub. commoditati aeditus._

At the bottom:

       (red)                ROMAE Primo, Deinde
                  BERGOMI, _typis Comini Venturae_, 1608.

This edition extends to 608 pages, in double columns, besides the
preliminary matter, consisting of four articles, of which the first in
this edition is the last in the genuine copy of 1607,--a circumstance
mentioned by Clement as peculiar to the Altdorff edition; but here the
signatures run to pages in eights, whereas the Altdorff edition "qu'ne
remplit qu'un alphabet, et seize feuilles."

I have never seen a copy of the Ratisbon edition.

    B. B.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Hobbes's "Leviathan"_ (Vol. iv., p. 314.).--The meaning of the
frontispiece to the first edition of this work, is, I imagine,
sufficiently obvious. The large figure representing a commonwealth holds
in his right hand a sword, in his left a pastoral crook. He is the
emblem of a commonwealth "ecclesiastical and civil" (as the title of the
book shows us). Ranged down one side of the page, under the
sword-bearing arm, are the weapons and resources which the State
possesses. Down the other side of the page, under the protection of the
pastoral staff, is the corresponding armament of the Church. Thus, a
castle and a church, a crown and a mitre, a cannon and spiritual
thunderbolts, a trophy of guns and spears, &c., and one of dilemmas
(represented by a pair of bull's horns), syllogisms (made like a
three-pronged fork), and the like; these, ending with a battle on one
side, a convention of bishops on the other, show the power which (as
Hobbes would have it) each arm of the commonwealth should be able to
have at its command. The whole picture is at best an absurd conceit, and
very unworthy of the author of the _Leviathan_.

    H. A. B.

The best edition of Hobbes's works was printed 1750. The print of
_Leviathan_ in it is neither like Charles nor Cromwell, of whom I have
old and good prints, and many. The print has at the bottom of it
"_Written_ by Thos. Hobbs, 1651."

    C. J. W.

_Age of Trees_ (Vol. iv., p. 401.).--I am rather surprised that your
correspondent L., in his enumeration of remarkable trees, and
collections of trees, in Great Britain, makes no mention, whilst on the
subject of yew, of the splendid collection of old yew trees in Kingley
Bottom, near Chichester, in Sussex. Should L. never have visited this
charming spot, and its green antiquities, I can promise him a rich treat
whenever he does so. Common report of the neighbourhood, from time
immemorial, gives these venerable trees a date as far back as the
landing of the sea-kings on the coast of Sussex; and sundry poems by
local bards have been written on this theme.

On one of the most prominent of the South Down Hills, rising immediately
above the yew-tree valley, and called Bow Hill, are two large, and some
smaller tumuli, which are always called by the natives the graves of the
sea-kings, who with their followers are supposed to have fallen in a
battle fought under these very yew trees.

Can anybody tell me if the age of any of these trees has ever been
ascertained? Kingley Bottom, or, as people now-a-days prefer calling it,
Kingley Vale, is so much frequented as a spot for pic-nics and festive
days, that I have no doubt many of your readers have seen the trees to
which I refer, and can bear me out in asserting that they are worthy of
ranking, in age and beauty, with any of their species in the kingdom.

    SCANDINAVIAN.

The "Hethel Thorn," so well known to many Norfolk people, is on a farm
now the property of that munificent patron of historical literature, Mr.
Hudson Gurney, by whom it was purchased from Sir Thomas Beevor. The
first Sir Thomas always said it was mentioned in a deed of 1200 and odd,
as a boundary, under the appellation of "the Old Thorn." It is stated,
also, that it is mentioned in some chronicle as _the thorn_ round which
a meeting of insurgent peasantry was held during the reign of King John
(can any readers of "NOTES AND QUERIES" give a reference to the precise
passage?). An etching of this interesting relic has been made by Mr.
Ninham. The involution of its branches, which are all hollow tubes, as
heavy as iron, is most curious; and although the tree is certainly
diminished of late years, it still puts out leaves and berries
vigorously.

    W. J. T.

_Treatise against Equivocation_ (Vol. iv., p. 419.).--Your correspondent
EUPATOR has, in his examination of the MS. of this treatise, overlooked
a title prefixed by Garnet, which furnishes the heading by which the
book is correctly entered in the Catalogue of the Laudian MSS. as _A
Treatise against (not _of_ or _for_) Lying and Fraudulent
Dissimulation_. "Of" was first written, but at once crossed out, and
"against" written _after_ it, _not_ interlined. Of the two errors which
EUPATOR points out, the one was made at the press, by failure in reading
the contraction for "verbo," which is printed correctly at length at p.
43., and the other was a mistake on the part of the transcriber.

    W. D. M.

_Lycian Inscriptions_ (Vol. iv., p. 383.).--As to the double language in
Homer of the gods and men, Heyne and others have thought (ad _Il._ A.
403.) that the one was the old language, the other the modern. See
Clarke ib., who thinks one was the learned name, the other the vulgar:
but gives a scholion of the former opinion. The passages are as follow:

      _Il._                   Gods.              Men.
      [Greek: Alpha] 403.     Briareus           AEgaeon.
      [Greek: Beta] 813.      Tomb of Myrine     Batiea.
      [Greek: Xi] 291.        Chalcis            Cymindis.
      [Greek: Upsilon] 74.    Xanthus            Scamander.

All these words, except one, are plain Greek,--and that one is a word of
men. It is impossible, therefore, that the gods' language could have
been the antiquated Greek language.

In the _Odyssey_ ([Greek: Kappa] 305.) Mercury says that a certain plant
is called _Moly_ by the gods, and that it is very difficult for men to
find. The answer to the question, What do men call it? therefore would
probably have been, that they have no name for it at all. It is an odd
word, not easy to derive, and ending in _u_; which Aristotle says is the
ending of only five words in Greek, and one of those, [Greek: asty], was
obsolete as an appellative in Aristotle's time.

Ichor, though applied in Homer to the gods, he does not say was a word
of the gods; and as it is used in Hippocrates, it is more probably a
dialectic than an antiquated word. Its termination, however is rare; and
in another instance, [Greek: tekmor], was obsolete in Aristotle's time
(_Rhet. init._).

As to the Lycian language, the alphabet is said, in the appendix to
Fellows, to resemble partly the Greek, partly the Zend, and one or two
letters the Etruscan. The language is said (ib. 430.) to resemble the
Zend more than any other known language; but to differ too much to be
considered as a dialect of Zend, and must rank as a separate language.

I would observe, that one of the peculiarities mentioned, as compared
with all the Indo-Germanic languages--namely, the having no consonant at
the end of the masculine or feminine accusative--existed in the old
Latin, as in the Scipionic tombs, "optimo viro, omne Loucana."

Sir Edmund Head, in the _Classical Museum_, No. II., considers the
people to be the Solymi of Homer.

    C. B.

_Alterius Orbis Papa_ (Vol. ii., p. 497.).--In Twysden's _Historical
Vindication of the Church of England_, p. 22. (Cambridge edition, 1847),
I find--

  "After the erection of Canterbury into an archbishopric, the bishops
  of that see were held _quasi alterius orbis papae_, as Urban II. styled
  them."

In a note, William of Malmesbury (_De Gestis Pontif._, lib. i. in
Anselm., p. 223. l. 33.) is referred to as authority for the above
statement. Urban II. was pope from 1087 to 1099.

    C. W. G.

_Carmagnoles_ (Vol. iv., p. 208.).--Your querist W. B. H. will perhaps
accept the following partial solution of his question, which has been
communicated to me by one of your own distinguished correspondents in
France. It is contained in a little volume published by Duellersan under
the following title, _Chansons Nationales et Populaires de France_,
Paris, 1846, 32mo:

  "Cette horrible chanson, la Carmagnole, est un monument curieux de la
  folie demagogique, et nous la donnons pour faire voir avec quelle
  poesie brutale on excitait le peuple. Elle eut une vogue en Aout 1792,
  epoque a laquelle Louis XVI. fut mis au Temple. Elle devint le signal
  et l'accompagnement des joies feroces et des executions sanglantes. On
  dansait la _Carmagnole_ dans les bals; on la dansait au theatre et
  autour de la guillotine. Barrere appelait les discours qu'il
  prononcait a la Convention, _des Carmagnoles_. L'air, qui est
  veritablement entrainant, etait joue en pas redouble dans la musique
  militaire; mais Bonaparte la defendit, ainsi que le _Ca-ira_, lors
  qu'il fut Consul.

  "Cette chanson parut au moment ou les troupes Francaises venaient
  d'entrer triomphantes dans la Savoie et le Piemont. On ignore si la
  musique et la danse de _la Carmagnole_ sont originaires de ce pays."

In the month of January, 1849, the General-in-Chief of the army of
Paris, Changarnier, having taken vigorous measures to prevent new
tumults, the first verse of the original, which commences--

      "Madame Veto avait promis
      De faire egorger tout Paris,"

was thus parodied:

      "Changarnier avait promis
      De faire bruler tout Paris," &c.

    PERIERGUS BIBLIOPHILUS.

_General James Wolfe_ (Vol. iv., p. 271.).--The late Admiral Frank
Sotheron, of Kirklington Hall, near Southwell, Notts, was, I have heard,
related to Wolfe, and possessed a portrait and several letters of his.
Admiral Sotheron died some ten years ago, but his daughter (and only
child) married the present member for Wilts, who afterwards took the
name of Sotheron.

    J. M. W.

I have a portrait of Wolfe in my possession, and, I believe, the
original from which the print, stated to be a scarce and contemporary
one, was taken, which furnishes the frontispiece to the second volume of
the _History of the Canadas_, by the author of _Hochelaga_. It fell,
singularly enough, into my hands a short time previous to the appearance
of the work in question, and I have been enabled since to trace its
possession by parties, and amongst them members of my own family, for a
very lengthened period. The artist I have not been able to discover; but
perhaps some possessor of the print, should the name appear, will afford
this information.

    C. A. P.

  (Great Yarmouth.)

As your pages have lately contained several communications on the
subject of General Wolfe, I send you the following story, which I heard
from a lady now deceased. Some time after Wolfe's death his family
wished to give some memorial of him to the lady who had been engaged to
him, and they consulted her as to the form which it should take. Her
answer was, "A diamond necklace;" and her reason, because she was going
to be married to another person, and such an ornament would be useful.
My informant, whose birth, according to the _Peerage_, was in 1766, had,
in her earlier days, often met this lady, and described her as showing
remains of beauty, but as no wiser than this anecdote would lead us to
suppose her.

    J. C. R.

_Johannes Trithemius_ (Vol. iv., p. 442.).--This noted historian and
divine was born at Trittenheim, in the electorate of Treves, in 1462. He
became abbot of Spanheim about 1482, where he made a rich collection of
manuscript and printed books. In 1506 he was appointed abbot of St.
James at Wurtzbourg. His writings are numerous, and there is an ample
collection of them in the British Museum. In his _Nepiachus_ he gives an
account of his life and studies. He died at Wurtzbourg in 1516. The
learned and judicious Daunou thus characterises the volume _De
scriptoribus ecclesiasticis_: "Malgre beaucoup d'omissions et d'erreurs,
ce livre a ete fort utile a ceux qui ont depuis mieux traite la meme
matiere; on le consulte encore aujourd'hui."

Leland, Bale, Pits, and Wharton, have recorded their obligations to
Trithemius. The venerable Leland quotes him frequently, under the name
of Trittemius, and styles him "homo diligentiae plane maximae nec minoris
lectionis."

    BOLTON CORNEY.

  "John Trytheme was a German Benedictine, and Abbot of Hirsauge, A.D.
  1484. He was the author of _A Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers_,
  several _Letters_, Treatises of _Piety_, of _Doctrine_, and
  _Morality_, other historical works, and _The Chronicle of
  Hirsauge_."--(See Dufresnoy's _Chronological Tables_.)

It would appear that the work _Trithemii Collectanea de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis_ has gone through several editions; and Walch tells us
that "inter omnes ea eminet, quam Jo. Alberto Fabricio debemus." The
following remarks also respecting Trithemius appear in Walch's
_Bibliotheca_ (tom. iii. p. 389.):

  "Incipit Trithemius a Clemente Romano; recenset scriptores 970; ac
  testatur, se in opere hoc conficiendo per septem fere annorum spatium
  elaborasse. Possevinus, Labbeus, atque alii, varios ejus errores
  chronologicos ac historicos notarunt. Quodsi autem rationem temporis
  reputamus, quo Trithemius vixit scripsitque, causa omnino est, cur eum
  ob errata non reprehendamus, sed excusemus atque industriam illius
  laudemus."

Cave, also, in his _Historia Literaria_ (part ii. p. 569.), gives us a
brief account of Trithemius, and of his literary productions.

    E. C. HARRINGTON.

  The Close, Exeter.

The work of John Trittenheim, _De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis_, is held
in high and deserved repute. (See Fabricius, _Biblioth. Latin. Med.
AEtat._, iv. 451.) He died abbot of Wuertzburg, in 1518. The copy of A. W.
H. is the first edition, which was published at Mainz (Moguntia) in
1494.

    C. H.

_Sir William Herschel_ (Vol. ii., p. 391.).--Your correspondent gives
the quotation about the star observed in Virgo, which he supposes
identical with Neptune, quite correctly, except in one very material
point--the observer's name. The passage in question will be found in
Captain W. H. Smyth's _Cycle of Celestial Objects_, vol. ii. p. 264.,
and is extracted from a letter addressed to him by M. Cacciatore of
Palermo, in 1835, many years after the death of Sir William. H. C. K. is
not the first person who has suggested the identity of the objects; but,
as pointed out by Captain Smyth in a paper on Neptune, in the _United
Service Journal_ for 1847, Part II., Neptune must, in 1835, have been
fully 120[degrees] from the position assigned by Cacciatore to the star observed
by him.

    J. S. WARDEN.

  Balica, Oct. 1851.

_Dr. Wm. Wall_ (Vol. iv., p. 347.).--Your decision to exclude any
further contributions upon the question of the "Marriage of
Ecclesiastics" is most judicious. But ought the portion of Mr. HENRY
WALTER'S reply respecting Dr. Wall to pass unnoticed? Had the writer
referred to any of the biographical dictionaries in ordinary use, he
would have discovered that the "well-known Mr. Wall who wrote on
baptism" had conferred on him by the University of Oxford the degree of
D.D., to testify their high opinion of his writings.

In addition to the Doctor's works on the baptismal controversy, two
books, which are not often met with now, were published after his death,
bearing the following titles:--

  "Brief Critical Notes, especially on the various readings of the New
  Testament Books. With a Preface concerning the Texts cited therein
  from the Old Testament, as also concerning the Use of the Septuagint
  Translation. By W. Wall, S.T.P., author of the History of Infant
  Baptism, London, 1730." 8vo., pp. lxiv. 415.

  "Critical Notes on the Old Testament, wherein the present Hebrew Text
  is explained, and in many places amended, from the ancient Versions,
  more particularly from that of the LXXII. Drawn up in the order the
  several Books were written, or may most conveniently be read. To which
  is prefixed a large Introduction, adjusting the Authority of the
  Masoretic Bible, and vindicating it from the objections of Mr.
  Whiston, and the Author of the Grounds and Reasons of the Christian
  Religion. By the late learned William Wall, D.D., Author of the
  History of Infant Baptism. Now first published from his Original
  Manuscript. London, 1734." 2 vols. 8vo. pp. lxi. 307. 354. v.

These are valuable works, explaining many difficult expressions.

    JOHN I. DREDGE.

_Parish Registers_ (Vol. iv., p. 232.).--J. B. is referred for the acts
of parliament relating to "Parish Registers," to Burn's _History of
Parish Registers_, 1829. This work has been out of print fifteen or
sixteen years, but may be seen in many public libraries.

    J. S. B.

_Compositions during the Protectorate_ (Vol. iv., p. 406.).--W. H. L.
will probably find what he wants in a small volume, easily met with,
entitled _A Catalogue of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen that have
compounded for their Estates_, London, 1655, 12mo.; or another edition,
enlarged, Chester, 1733, 8vo. (See _Lowndes_, vol. i. p. 363.)

    H. F.

_General Moyle_ (Vol. iv., p. 443.).--Major General John Moyle, who died
in 1738, and was buried at Rushbrooke, near Bury St. Edmund's, was the
son of the Rev. John Moyle, of Wimborne Minster, co. Dorset, by Mary his
wife, daughter and coheir of Sir Giles Eyre, Kt., one of the Judges of
the Common Pleas. General Moyle, by his wife, who was Isabella daughter
of Sir Robert Davers, of Rushbrooke, Bart., had a family of five sons
and one daughter; the latter married Samuel Horsey, Bath king-at-arms.

    G. A. C.

_Descendants of John of Gaunt_ (Vol. iv., p. 343.).--A. B. may be right
as to there being "some little confusion in Burke's excellent work."
There certainly is no "_little_ confusion" in A. B.'s communication.

Margaret Beaufort, successively Countess of Richmond and Derby, the
mother of King Henry VII., was the only child of John Beaufort, the
first Duke of Somerset.

What can A. B. mean by "Henry, Edmund, and John, successively dukes of
Somerset," to whom he conjectures Margaret Beaufort might have been
sister? There were not three brothers Beaufort successively _dukes_ of
Somerset; nor were there ever three successive dukes of Somerset named
Henry, Edmund and John; though there certainly was a succession of John,
Edmund, and Henry, they being respectively father, uncle, and cousin of
Margaret.

John Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, who had been created Marquis of
Somerset and Dorset, was, on his death (1410), succeeded in the earldom
of Somerset by his eldest son, Henry Beaufort, who dying without issue
(1418), the second son, John Beaufort, succeeded to this earldom. He was
created _Duke_ of Somerset (1443), and on his death without male issue
(1444), the dukedom became extinct; but the earldom of Somerset
descended to his brother, Edmund Beaufort, Marquis of Dorset (the third
son of John Beaufort, Earl of Somerset), who was afterwards (1448)
created Duke of Somerset. He was slain at the battle of St. Alban's
(1455), and was succeeded by his eldest son, Henry Beaufort, who was
beheaded in 1463. He is said to have been succeeded by his next brother,
Edmund Beaufort; but it is doubtful if the fact were so, and the better
opinion seems to be that the dukedom became extinct by the attainder of
Duke Henry in 1463.

"The second and last Duke John," alluded to by A. B., is altogether a
myth: the last Beaufort Duke of Somerset was either Henry or Edmund; and
there was but one Duke John, and he was not the "second and last," but
the _first_ duke.

    C. H. COOPER.

  Cambridge.

_Church of St. Bene't Fink_ (Vol. iv., p. 407.).--I think some account
of the inscriptions, or of their having been transcribed, will be found
in the _Gentleman's Magazine_, as well as of those removed by the
destruction of the church of _St. Michael's, Crooked Lane_, in order to
make the approaches for new London Bridge; there, also, I think I have
seen some account of the inscriptions in the church pulled down for the
erection of the _Bank of England_. The preservation of the monumental
records of the dead has been so frequently suggested in "NOTES AND
QUERIES," that I will not occupy space by urging further arguments in
favour of the scheme proposed for the transcription and preservation of
inscriptions on monuments and grave-stones. The numerous churches which,
in these days, are undergoing alterations and repairs, call for your
continued exertion to effect the object you have already submitted for
the purpose in former numbers. The ancient church of St. Mary, Lambeth,
has just been rebuilt, and many of the monumental tablets will of
necessity be removed from their former sites, and grave-stones may
disappear. The venerable _Ashmole_ lies at the entrance of the old
vestry, under a flat stone; and outside, a short distance from the
window, lies _Tradescant_, under a large altar-tomb in a state of decay!

    G.

When the church of St. Bene't Fink was pulled down, to make room for the
new Royal Exchange in 1844, the monumental tablets, &c. were removed to
the church of St. Peter's-le-Poor in Old Broad Street, to which Parish
the former is now annexed.

    J. R. W.

  Bristol.

_Coins of Vabalathus_ (Vol. iv., pp. 255, 427.).--An article on the
coins of the Zenobia family appeared in the _Revue Numismatique_, 1846,
vol. xi. p. 268. The writer of that article says--

  "Il est impossible de rendre compte du mot [Greek: SROIAS] ou
  [Greek: SRIAS], qui precede, sur quelques pieces, le nom de
  _Vabalathus_. La meme observation s'applique aux medailles Latines
  du meme prince, dont le nom est suivi d'un certain nombre de
  lettres, VCRIMDR ou VCRIIVID auxquelles on s'est efforce
  inutilement de trouver un sens."

    W. W.

_Engraved Portrait_ (Vol. iv., p. 443).--This is the portrait of Daniel
De Foe, and was engraved by W. Sherwin. The verses underneath are--

      "Here you may see an honest face,
      Arm'd against Envy and Disgrace,
      Who lives respected still in spite
      Of those that punish them that write."

It is mentioned in _The Catalogue of English Heads_, by Jos. Ames, p.
57.

    JOHN I. DREDGE.

"_Cleanliness is next to godliness_" (Vol. iv., p. 256.).--The author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews says (ch. x. v. 22.):

  "Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
  having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
  washed with pure water."

It has long been my opinion that the proverb in question arose from the
above text, in which _a pure conscience_, a necessary condition of
_godliness_, is immediately followed by an injunction to _cleanliness_.

    H. T.

_Cozens the Painter_ (Vol. iv., p. 368.).--I would refer your
correspondent, for the few particulars known of him, to Edwards's
_Anecdotes of Painting_, 1808 (in continuation of Horace Walpole's
_Anecdotes_), p. 120.

Cozens's chief patrons were Wm. Beckford, Esq., of Fonthill; G. Baker,
of St. Paul's Churchyard; John Hawkins, Esq., of Bognor; and the Earl of
Harewood (of his time). If your correspondent wishes to see some few
fine specimens of his works, Mr. George Smith, of Hamilton Terrace, and
Charles Sackwille Bale, Esq., of Cambridge Terrace, possess some very
fine ones. Mr. J. Heywood Hawkins has at Bognor his father's collection.

Cozens's fine drawings are very uncommon, and he is now little known,
though one of the fathers of the Water-Colour School, and of the highest
ability. I am not aware of any published portrait of him: your
correspondent's portrait of him by Pine is therefore interesting. Pine
was Cozens's mother's brother.

    FRANCIS GRAVES.

In addition to the opinion ascribed to Mr. Turner, it may be mentioned
that the late John Constable, R.A., spoke of Cozens as "_the_ greatest
of landscape-painters." I cannot at present give a reference to Leslie's
_Life of Constable_, but am sure that this saying occurs there more than
once.

    J. C. R.

_Whig and Tory_ (Vol. iv., pp. 57. 281.).--In addition to what has
appeared in "NOTES AND QUERIES" respecting the etymology of these terms,
I send you a note of what Lingard says on the matter:

  "The celebrated party name _Tory_ is derived from _toringhim_, to
  pursue for the sake of plunder. The name was given to certain parties
  in Ireland, who, refusing to submit to Cromwell, retired into bogs and
  fastnesses, formed bodies of armed men, supporting themselves and
  their followers by the depredations which they committed on the
  occupiers of their estates. They were called _Raperees_ and _Tories_."

  "It was during the reign of Charles II. that the appellations of
  _Whig_ and _Tory_ became permanently affixed to the two great
  political parties.... The first had long been given to the Covenanters
  on the west of Scotland, and was supposed to convey a charge of
  seditious and anti-monarchical principles...."

    PHILIP S. KING.

_Prince Rupert's Drops_ (Vol. iv., pp. 234. 274.).--In your reply to the
Query respecting these drops, you state that it is not certain in what
country they were invented; I may therefore mention that the French call
them _larmes Bataviques_, from the circumstance of their being made in
Holland; from whence some were sent to Paris in 1656, to the Swedish
minister there, M. Chanut.

    PHILIP S. KING.

_Deep Well near Bansted Downs_ (Vol. iv., p. 315.).--I am well
acquainted with the country immediately south of the Bansted Downs, and
can give W. S. G. some information about the wells there.

I know no country where there is so great a scarcity of water. The
nearest stream is a small branch of the Mole, which has its rise some
three miles off, just beyond Merstham (pronounced "Meestrum"). The ponds
are very few and shallow, so that the inhabitants have to rely on wells
for their water. Wells, however, are an expensive luxury, and appertain
only to the better-most dwellings. I know several labourers' cottages
distant upwards of a mile from the nearest well or pond; they use what
water they catch, and when that is gone, shift as they best can,--most
commonly do without. This scarcity of water may be the reason why a
district within fifteen miles of London is so thinly populated.

The country is very hilly, and even the valleys are some height above
the level of London. Woodmansterne is said to be the highest point in
Surrey next to Leith Hill.

Most of the farm-houses and superior cottages have wells, and many of
these are of considerable depth. There is one just at the foot of
Bansted Downs (and consequently in the valley), which is 120 feet deep.
After a dry summer this well is very low, and after a second quite
empty. This is about the general depth of the valley wells. There is one
in the railway valley, below Chipsted Church, some 100 feet deep; I have
never known it dry. Within a stone's throw of this last, the London and
Brighton railway runs in a very deep cutting,--I have been told the
deepest railway cutting in England,--and great fears were entertained
that this deep cutting would drain this and several neighbouring wells.
The only way, however, in which the railway affected the wells, was to
cut right through one, parts of which may still be seen in the
embankment.

It is not always the case that a deep well will drain its shallow
neighbours. At the Feathers Inn, at Merstham, is a well cut in the solid
chalk, 160 feet deep; this was quite out the other day, while two or
three wells not fifty yards off, each thirty feet deep, had plenty of
water.

Of course the wells on the hills are much deeper than those in the
valleys. At a farm called Wood Place, some three miles from Bansted, is
a well 365 feet deep; it is never actually out of water; four pair of
hands are needed to raise the bucket.

At a farm called Portnals, about a mile from Bansted, is the deepest
well I know in these parts; a horse is required to draw the water. It is
some 460 feet, and, I have been told, generally somewhat low. All these
wells are, I believe, in the chalk.

In this part of Surrey are some wells said to be 500, 600, or even 700
feet deep.

W. S. G. may find some resemblance between the above and the one he
wants, else there is no truth in a well.

I fear I am taking more of your space than my subject merits. I will
therefore briefly conclude with a Query.

Where are the deepest wells in England?

    P. M. M.

_Mrs. Mary Anne Clarke_ (Vol. iv., p. 396.).--Is Mrs. Mary Anne Clarke
really dead?

She was alive two years since, and was then living with her son, Colonel
Clarke, somewhere on the Continent. Colonel Clarke is an officer of the
line, and is universally respected.

I obtained the above information from a friend and brother officer of
the Colonel.

    FM.

_Upton Court_ (Vol. iv., p. 315.).--My friend Miss Mitford gives a most
interesting account of Upton Court in the _Ladies' Companion_ for August
1850, which, as I know the place well, I believe to be perfectly
correct. A short extract may not be unwelcome:

  "Fifty years ago a Catholic priest was the sole inhabitant of this
  interesting mansion. His friend, the late Mrs. Lenoir, Christopher
  Smart's daughter, whose books, when taken up, one does not care to put
  down again, wrote some verses to the great oak. Her nieces, whom I am
  proud to call my friends, possess many reliques of that lovely
  Arabella Fermor of whom Pope, in the charming dedication to the most
  charming of his poems, said that 'the character of Belinda, as it was
  now managed, resembled her in nothing but beauty.'

  "Amongst these reliques are her rosary, and a portrait, taken when she
  was twelve or thirteen years of age. The face is most interesting: a
  high, broad forehead; dark eyes, richly fringed and deeply set; a
  straight nose, pouting lips, and a short chin finely rounded. The
  dress is dark and graceful, with a little white turned back about the
  neck and the loose sleeves. Altogether I never saw a more charming
  girlish portrait, with so much of present beauty and so true a promise
  of more,--of that order, too, high and intellectual, which great poets
  love. Her last surviving son died childless in 1769, and the estate
  passed into another family.

  "Yet another interest belongs to Upton; not indeed to the Court, but
  to the Rectory. Poor Blanco White wrote under that roof his first
  work, the well-known _Doblado's Letters_; and the late excellent
  rector, Mr. Bishop, in common with the no less excellent Lord Holland
  and Archbishop Whately, remained, through all that tried and alienated
  other hearts, his fast friend to his last hour."

The portrait of Arabella Fermor is in Reading, purchased at a sale at
Upton Court many years ago, when the property changed hands.

    JULIA R. BOCKETT.

  Southcote Lodge.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Of the value of broadsides, flying sheets, political squibs, popular
ballads, &c. few can doubt; while the advantage of having these snatches
of popular literature, when collected, deposited in some public and
easily accessible library, will be readily admitted by all who may have
had occasion to trespass on the time and attention (readily as they may
be afforded to parties entitled to claim them), of the Master and
Fellows of Magdalene, when requiring to consult the matchless collection
of ballads, penny merriments, and chap books, deposited in their library
by Samuel Pepys. These remarks have been suggested to us by a very
handsome quarto volume entitled _Catalogue of Proclamations, Broadsides,
Ballads, and Poems presented to the Chetham Library_, by J. O.
Halliwell, Esq. As this catalogue is limited to one hundred copies, and
has been printed for private circulation only, we must confine ourselves
to announcing that it contains an enumeration of upwards of three
thousand documents of the classes specified, many of them of very
considerable interest, which the zeal of Mr. Halliwell has enabled him
to gather together, and which his liberality has led him to deposit in
the Chetham Library. We have marked several articles to which we propose
to call the attention of our readers at some future moment; and we have
no doubt that the Halliwell Collection in the Chetham Library, is one
which will hereafter be frequently referred to, and consulted by,
literary men.

If the Popular Mythology of these islands is ever to be fitly recorded,
its most important illustration will be found in the writings of Grimm
and his fellow-labourers. How zealously they are pursuing their search
after the scattered fragments of the great mythological system which
once prevailed in Germany is shown by a new contribution to its history,
which has just been published by J. W. Wolf, under the title of
_Beitraege zur Deutschen Mythologie_: I. _Goetter und Goettinnen_. In this
volume the reader will find not only much that is new and interesting in
connection with the history of the great mythic heroes and heroines, but
very valuable supplements on the subject of Superstitions and Popular
Charms.

Mr. D'Alton, the author of _The History of Drogheda_, is about to
dispose of his Historical, Topographical, and Genealogical MS.
Collections. They occupy upwards of 200 volumes, and comprise, on the
plan of Watt's _Bibliotheca_, copious references to, and extracts from
Records, Registries, Pleadings, Wills, Funeral Monuments, and Manuscript
Pedigrees. They are to be sold wholly, or in lots, as classified at the
commencement of Mr. D'Alton's _Annals of Boyle_.

Messrs. Ellis and Son, watchmakers, of Exeter, have published a very
interesting _Map showing the Time kept by Public Clocks in various Towns
in Great Britain_. Among many other curious notes which may be made on
this subject, we may mention that it is Sunday in Inverness and Glasgow
nearly seventeen minutes earlier than at Plymouth; and it will be 1852
in Liverpool eleven minutes before it will be so in Bristol.

Messrs. Cook and Hockin, of 289. Strand, have prepared a cheap, but very
complete Chemical Chest, to accompany _Stockhardt's Principles of
Chemistry illustrated by Simple Experiments_, recently published by Bohn
in his _Scientific Library_.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

TIMES NEWSPAPER, 1835 to 1840, or any of those years, in Vols. or
Numbers.

FUESSLEIN, JOH. CONRAD, BEYTRAGE ZUR ERLAEUTERUNG DER
KIRCHEN-REFORMATIONS-GESCHICHTE DES SCHWEITZERLANDES. 5 Vols. Zurich,
1741.

THE COMPLAYNT OF SCOTLAND. 7_s._ 6_d._ will be given for a good complete
copy.

SOUTHEY'S EDITION OF COWPER. Vols. X. XII. XIII. XIV.

JOURNAL OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF DUBLIN. Vol. I. Part I. (Several
copies are wanted, and it is believed that many are lying in London or
Dublin.)

MITFORD'S HISTORY OF GREECE. Vol. VI. Cadell, 1822. 8vo.

WILLIS'S ARCHITECTURE OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 15_s._ will be given for a
copy.

FLUDD (ROBERT, M.D.) _alias_ DE FLUCTIBUS, called the Searcher. Any of
his works.

BEHMEN'S (JACOB) GENESIS.

LAW'S APPEAL, &c.

LAW'S APPEAL CASE OF REASON.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage
  free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186.
  Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

PERMANENT ENLARGEMENT OF "NOTES AND QUERIES."--_In compliance with the
suggestion of many of our correspondents, and for the purpose of giving
more ready insertion to the Replies which we receive to their Queries,
we propose to enlarge our Paper permanently to 24 pages; making it 32
pages when occasion requires. This change, called for moreover by the
increase of our correspondence consequent on our increased circulation,
will take place on the 3rd of January next, when we shall commence our_
Fifth Volume. _From that day the price of our paper will be_ 4_d. for
the unstamped, and_ 5_d. for stamped copies. By this arrangement we
shall render unnecessary the double or Sixpenny Numbers now issued
nearly every month; thus avoiding a good deal of occasional confusion,
and rendering the price of the enlarged_ "NOTES AND QUERIES" _for the
whole year very little more than it is at present._

_We have to apologize to many of our correspondents, more especially our
Querists, for the non-insertion of their communications. But we have
been anxious at the close of our Volume to insert as many Replies as
possible. We hope, with the New Year, and our new arrangements, to
render such explanations as the present unnecessary._

_We are unavoidably compelled to omit our usual list of_ REPLIES
RECEIVED.

_Errata._--Page 343, No. 105, for "Beltrus" read "Beltr_ee_s;" for
"Kilbarchum" read "Kilbarch_a_n."




Handsome Christmas Present and New Year's Gift.

  BY AUTHORITY OF THE ROYAL COMMISSIONERS.

  THE COMPLETE OFFICIAL DESCRIPTIVE AND ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE of the
  GREAT EXHIBITION of the WORKS of INDUSTRY of ALL NATIONS, 1851. In
  Three handsome Volumes, price Three Guineas.

    "This Catalogue is the only one that will at all times have the
    power of recalling to recollection the most interesting features
    of the Crystal Palace."--_Athenaeum._

    "We predict for the Official Descriptive and Illustrated Catalogue
    of the Great Exhibition a standard reputation. It has an enduring
    interest in the mass of valuable information of almost every
    description which it contains. Every object in the collection will
    be found noted down and described with the amount of particularity
    due to it."--_Times._

  This Work is also published in Five Parts:--Parts I. and II. price
  10_s._ each; and Parts III. IV. and V. price 15_s._ each.

  2. HUNT'S HANDBOOK TO THE GREAT EXHIBITION. In Two Volumes, price
  6_s._

    "One of the most popular mementoes and histories of the actual
    gathering of the nations."--_Athenaeum._

  3. THE OFFICIAL SMALL CATALOGUE.

    "Finally Corrected and Improved Edition," with INDEXES and PRICED
    LISTS, &c., price 7_s._ 6_d._

  SPICER BROTHERS, Wholesale Stationers. WM. CLOWES AND SONS,
  Printers.

  OFFICIAL CATALOGUE OFFICE, 29. New Bridge Street, Blackfriars; and
  of all Booksellers.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND

      ANNUITY SOCIETY,

  3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

  Founded A.D. 1812.

  _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

  _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

  _Consulting Counsel._--Sir William P. Wood, M.P.,
  Solicitor-General.

  _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

  _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age.  _l._ _s._ _d._

      17    1    14    4
      22    1    18    8
      27    2     4    5
      32    2    10    8
      37    2    18    6
      42    3     8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


PROVIDENT LIFE OFFICE, 50. REGENT STREET. CITY BRANCH: 2. ROYAL EXCHANGE
BUILDINGS.

      Established 1806.
      Policy Holders' Capital, 1,192,818_l._
      Annual Income, 150,000_l._--Bonuses Declared, 743,000_l._
      Claims paid since the Establishment of the Office, 2,001,450_l._

      _President._
      The Right Honourable EARL GREY.

      _Directors._
      The Rev. James Sherman, _Chairman_.
      Henry Blencowe Churchill, Esq., _Deputy-Chairman_.
      Henry B. Alexander, Esq.
      George Dacre, Esq.
      William Judd, Esq.
      Sir Richard D. King, Bart.
      The Hon. Arthur Kinnaird
      Thomas Maugham, Esq.
      William Ostler, Esq.
      Apsley Pellatt, Esq.
      George Round, Esq.
      Frederick Squire, Esq.
      William Henry Stone, Esq.
      Capt. William John Williams.

      J. A. Beaumont, Esq., _Managing Director_.

      _Physician_--John Maclean, M.D. F.S.S., 29. Upper Montague
      Street, Montague Square.

  NINETEEN-TWENTIETHS OF THE PROFITS ARE DIVIDED AMONG THE INSURED.

  Examples of the Extinction of Premiums by the Surrender of Bonuses.

      Date of Policy. 1806
      Sum Insured. _l._2500
      Original Premium. _l._79  10  10 Extinguished
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
          _l._1222   2   0

      Date of Policy. 1811
      Sum Insured. _l._1000
      Original Premium. _l._ 33  19   2 Ditto [Extinguished]
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
           _l._231  17   8

      Date of Policy. 1818
      Sum Insured. _l._1000
      Original Premium. _l._ 34  16  10 Ditto [Extinguished]
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
           _l._114  18  10

  Examples of Bonuses added to other Policies.

       Policy No.  521
       Date. 1807
       Sum Insured.  _l._900
       Bonus added. _l._982  12  1
       Total with Additions to be further increased. _l._1882  12  1

       Policy No. 1174
       Date. 1810
       Sum Insured. _l._1200
       Bonus added. _l._1160   5  6
       Total with Additions to be further increased. _l._2360   5  6

       Policy No. 3392
       Date. 1820
       Sum Insured. _l._5000
       Bonus added. _l._3558  17  8
       Total with Additions to be further increased. _l._8558  17  8

  Prospectuses and full particulars may be obtained upon application
  to the Agents of the Office, in all the principal Towns of the
  United Kingdom, at the City Branch, and at the Head Office, No.
  50. Regent Street.


NEW WORKS AND NEW EDITIONS,

  PUBLISHED BY BLACKIE & SON; LONDON, EDINBURGH, & GLASGOW.

  I.--THE IMPERIAL DICTIONARY, ENGLISH, TECHNOLOGICAL, and
  SCIENTIFIC: adapted to the present State of Literature, Science,
  and Art. Illustrated by upwards of Two Thousand Engravings on
  Wood. In 2 vols., imperial 8vo. cloth, 4_l._ 10_s._

  II.--THE IMPERIAL GAZETTEER; A General Dictionary of Geography,
  Physical, Political, Statistical, and Descriptive, including
  Comprehensive Accounts of the Countries, Cities, Principal Towns,
  Villages, Seas, Lakes, Rivers, Islands, Mountains, Valleys, &c.,
  in the World. With upwards of Seven Hundred Engravings on Wood.
  Now publishing in Parts, 2_s._ 6_d._ each.

  III.--MORTON'S CYCLOPEDIA OF AGRICULTURE, PRACTICAL, and
  SCIENTIFIC: in which the Theory, the Art, and the Business of
  Farming, in all their departments, are thoroughly and practically
  treated. By upwards of Fifty of the most eminent Farmers, Land
  Agents, and Scientific men of the day. Edited by JOHN C. MORTON,
  Editor of the "Agricultural Gazette." With above One Thousand
  Illustrations on Wood and Steel. Publishing in Parts, 2_s._ 6_d._
  each, super-royal, 8vo. Now ready, vol. i. cloth, 37_s._

  IV.--THE POPULAR ENCYCLOPEDIA, or Conversations Lexicon.
  Illustrated by many Hundred Plates and Diagrams. Complete in 14
  half vols. 11_s._ each; or 28 Divisions, 5_s._ each.

  V.--THE IMPERIAL FAMILY BIBLE; Illustrated by a superb series of
  Engravings, from the old masters, and from original designs, by
  JOHN MARTIN, K.L. In 1 vol. imperial 4to. elegantly bound in
  morocco, price 7_l._; or in 38 Parts, 2_s._ 6_d._ each.

  VI.--ITALY, CLASSICAL, HISTORICAL, AND PICTURESQUE: Illustrated in
  a series of views from drawings, by Stanfield, R.A., Roberts,
  R.A., Harding, Prout, Leitch, &c. With Descriptions of the Scenes.
  And an Essay on the Recent History and Present Condition of Italy
  and the Italians, by CAMILLO MAPEI, D.D. Complete in 20 Parts,
  2_s._ 6_d._ each; or 1 vol. half morocco, price 3_l._ 3_s._

  VII.--THE WORKS OF ROBERT BURNS. Complete Illustrated Edition,
  Literary and Pictorial. With numerous Notes. Preceded by Professor
  WILSON'S Essay "On the Genius and Character of Burns." In 25
  Parts, royal 8vo. 1_s._ each; with fifty illustrations.

  VIII.--THE ETTRICK SHEPHERD'S WORKS. With Illustrations. POETICAL
  WORKS, with Autobiography, &c. 5 vols. small 8vo., 3_s._ 6_d._
  each. TALES and SKETCHES, including several Pieces not before
  published. 6 vols. small 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

  IX.--BOOK OF SCOTTISH SONG; a Collection of the best and most
  approved Songs of Scotland, Ancient and Modern. With Critical and
  Historical Notices, and an Essay on Scottish Song. Engraved
  Frontispiece and Title. In 16 Nos., 6_d._ each; Cloth, gilt edges,
  9_s._ Morocco elegant, 11_s._

  X.--BOOK OF SCOTTISH BALLADS; a Comprehensive Collection of the
  Ballads of Scotland. With Illustrative Notes. Engraved
  Frontispiece and Title. In 15 Nos., 6_d._ each; cloth, 9_s._
  Morocco, elegant, 11_s._

  XI.--POEMS AND LYRICS. By ROBERT NICOLL. With a Memoir of the
  Author. Fourth Edition. Price 3_s._ 6_d._

  XII.--RANKE'S HISTORY OF THE PAPACY, POLITICAL, and
  ECCLESIASTICAL, in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries.
  Translated from the latest German Edition, by DAVID DUNDAS SCOTT,
  Esq.; with Notes by the Translator, and an Introductory Essay by
  J. H. MERLE D'AUBIGNE, D.D. Illustrated with Twenty Portraits.
  Complete in 20 Parts, 1_s._ each; 2 vols. cloth, 21_s._

  XIII.--THE TEN YEARS' CONFLICT; being the History of the
  Disruption of the Church of Scotland. By ROBERT BUCHANAN, D.D. 2
  vols. cloth, 21_s._

  XIV.--THE CYCLOPEDIA OF DOMESTIC MEDICINE AND SURGERY. By THOMAS
  ANDREW, M.D. With Engravings on Wood and Steel. Royal 8vo. 18_s._
  cloth; or in 17 Parts, 1_s._ each.

  XV.--THE COMPREHENSIVE GERMAN AND ENGLISH DICTIONARY. In Two
  Parts. German-English, and English-German, By J. J. GERLACH, LL.D.
  Bound, 7_s._ 6_d._

  BLACKIE AND SON: London, Edinburgh, and Glasgow.


CHEAP FOREIGN BOOKS.

  Just published, post free, one stamp,

  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S SECOND-HAND CATALOGUE, No. 4. Literature,
  History, Travels, German Language, Illustrated Books, Art,
  Architecture, and Ornament. 600 Works at very much reduced prices.

  WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S GERMAN BOOK CIRCULARS. New Books and Books
  reduced in price. No. 28. Theology, Classics, Oriental and
  European Languages, General Literature. No. 29. Sciences, Natural
  History, Medicine, Mathematics, &c.

  [Star symbol] Gratis on application.

  WILLIAMS & NORGATE. 14. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.


Cloth 1_s._, pp. 160. by post; 1_s._ 6_d._

  WELSH SKETCHES, chiefly Ecclesiastical, to the Close of the
  Twelfth Century. By the Author of "Proposals for Christian Union."

  "Are written in the same attractive and popular style."--_Notes
  and Queries._

  "Show great research on the part of the Author into the early
  history of the Principality. We can recommend this little work to
  all those who are curious in these matters."--_Carmarthen
  Journal._

  London: JAMES DARLING, Great Queen Street, Lincoln's-inn-fields.


Vols. I. and II. now ready.

  Elegantly bound in ultramarine cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ each.

  GIRLHOOD OF SHAKSPEARE'S HEROINES. A Series of Fifteen Tales. By
  MARY COWDEN CLARKE. Periodically, in One Shilling Books each
  containing a complete Story.

      Vol. I. Price 6_s._
      Tale I. PORTIA; THE HEIRESS OF BELMONT.
      Tale II. THE THANE'S DAUGHTER.
      Tale III. HELENA; THE PHYSICIAN'S ORPHAN.
      Tale IV. DESDEMONA; THE MAGNIFICO'S CHILD.
      Tale V. MEG AND ALICE; THE MERRY MAIDS OF WINDSOR.

      Vol. II. Price 6_s._
      Tale VI. ISABELLA; THE VOTARESS.
      Tale VII. KATHARINA AND BIANCA; THE SHREW, AND THE DEMURE.
      Tale VIII. OPHELIA; THE ROSE OF ELSINORE.
      Tale IX. ROSALIND AND CELIA; THE FRIENDS.
      Tale X. JULIET; THE WHITE DOVE OF VERONA.

      Vol. III. (In progress.)
      Tale XI. BEATRICE AND HERO; THE COUSINS.
      Tale XII. OLIVIA; THE LADY OF ILLYRIA.

  SMITH & CO., 136. Strand; and SIMPKIN & CO., Stationer's Hall Court.


Now ready. Price 25_s._, Second Edition, revised and corrected.

  Dedicated by Special Permission to

  THE (LATE) ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.

  PSALMS AND HYMNS FOR THE SERVICE OF THE CHURCH. The words selected
  by the Very Rev. H. H. MILMAN, D.D., Dean of St. Paul's. The Music
  arranged for Four Voices, but applicable also to Two or One,
  including Chants for the Services, Responses to the Commandments,
  and a Concise SYSTEM OF CHANTING, by J. B. SALE, Musical
  Instructor and Organist to Her Majesty. 4to., neat, in morocco
  cloth, price 25_s._ To be had of Mr. J. B. SALE, 21, Holywell
  Street, Millbank, Westminster, on the receipt of a Post Office
  Order for that amount: and by order, of the principal Booksellers
  and Music Warehouses.

    "A great advance on the works we have hitherto had, connected with
    our Church and Cathedral Service."--_Times._

    "A collection of Psalm Tunes certainly unequalled in this
    country."--_Literary Gazette._

    "One of the best collections of tunes which we have yet seen. Well
    merits the distinguished patronage under which it
    appears."--_Musical World._

    "A collection of Psalms and Hymns, together with a system of
    Chanting of a very superior character to any which has hitherto
    appeared."--_John Bull._

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

  Also, lately published,

  J. B. SALE'S SANCTUS, COMMANDMENTS and CHANTS as performed at the
  Chapel Royal St. James, price 2_s._

  C. LONSDALE, 26. Old Bond Street.


CAB FARE MAP.--H. WALKER'S CAB FARE and GUIDE MAP of LONDON contains all
the principal streets marked in half-miles,--each space adding 4_d._ to
the fare, the proper charge is instantly known; also an abstract of the
Cab Laws, luggage, situation of the cab stands, back fares, lost
articles, &c. Price 1_s._ coloured; post free 2_d._ extra.--1. Gresham
Street West, and all Booksellers.


On the 1st of January, Part I. price 4_s._ of

      A DICTIONARY OF
      GREEK AND ROMAN GEOGRAPHY.
      BY VARIOUS WRITERS.

  Illustrated with Coins, Plans of Cities, Districts and Battles,
  &c.

  EDITED BY WILLIAM SMITH, LL.D., Editor of the Dictionaries of
  "Greek and Roman Antiquities," and of "Biography and Mythology."

  Although for the sake of uniformity, it is called a Dictionary of
  _Greek_ and _Roman_ Geography, it will be in reality a Dictionary
  of _Ancient_ Geography, including even Scriptural Names. At
  present there does not exist, either in the English or in the
  German languages, any work on Ancient Geography sufficiently
  comprehensive and accurate to satisfy the demands of modern
  scholarship. And yet there are few subjects connected with
  antiquity for which we have such ample materials. The discoveries
  of modern travellers, as well as the researches of modern
  scholars, have, within the last few years, added greatly to our
  knowledge of Ancient Geography; and it will be the aim of the
  Editor to present, in the present work, the results of their
  labours in this important branch of Classical Antiquity.

  The work will, of course, not be confined to a barren description
  of the geography of countries and of the sites of places; but it
  will also include an account of the political history, both of
  countries and of cities. An attempt will likewise be made to
  trace, as far as possible, the history of the more important
  buildings of the cities, and to give an account of their present
  condition, wherever they still exist.

  [Star symbol] To appear in Quarterly Parts, and to form One Volume,
  Medium 8vo.

  London: TAYLOR, WALTON, and MABERLY, 28. Upper Gower Street, and
  27. Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row; and JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


BEATSON'S POLITICAL INDEX MODERNISED.

  Just published, in 8vo., price 25_s._ half-bound,

  HAYDN'S BOOK OF DIGNITIES: Containing Rolls of the Official
  Personages of the British Empire, Civil, Ecclesiastical, Judicial,
  Military, Naval, and Municipal, from the Earliest Periods to the
  Present Time; compiled chiefly from the Records of the Public
  Offices. Together with the Sovereigns of Europe, from the
  Foundation of their respective States; the Peerage of England and
  of Great Britain; and numerous other Lists.

    "It is impossible to speak too highly of this stupendous
    repository of historical information."--_John Bull._

    "We should find it difficult to speak too highly of a vast labour
    of this kind, so useful in the benefits it extends to others, so
    modest in the praise it challenges for itself."--_Examiner._

    "It is difficult to exaggerate the usefulness of a compilation
    like this. To all public and official men, and to others engaged
    in various branches of historical research, it will be a book of
    constant reference."--_Morning Post._

    "The 'Book of Dignities' will become a necessary volume in all
    public offices, and will be found in most libraries a valuable
    book of reference, in affording information of a kind not
    elsewhere collected together, while it may be relied on as recent
    and authentic."--_Literary Gazette._

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.


Valuable and Curious Library of the late Edward Drummond Hay, Esq.

  MESSRS. S. LEIGH SOTHEBY & JOHN WILKINSON, Auctioneers of Literary
  Property and Works illustrative of the Fine Arts, will SELL by
  AUCTION, at their House, 3. Wellington Street, Strand, on MONDAY,
  December 22d., 1851, and following Day, at 1 o'Clock precisely, a
  very Valuable Collection of Books, including the Second Portion of
  the Library of the late Edward Drummond Hay, Esq., comprising
  numerous Rare and Curious Articles in Theological and Historical
  Literature, Works relating to the early History of America,
  curious Voyages and Travels, Old Poetry, &c., and containing,
  among others of importance, Capt. (John) Davis's Worldes
  Hydrographical Description, 1595, containing his Three Voyages to
  the Northern Ocean, the Presentation Copy to Prince Henry, with
  Autograph Note of the Writer; De Bry's Voyages, Three Parts,
  1590-2, the Plates finished in Gold and Silver, for the purpose of
  Presentation; a large Copy of T. Coryate's Crudities, 1611, with
  his Crambe and Odcombian Banquet: Rare Pieces, by Nicolas Breton,
  Tom Nash, John Heywood, Geo. Whetstone, &c. Also, Copies of King
  Edward VI.'s (1549 and 1552) and Queen Elizabeth's Editions of the
  Prayer-Book, 1559; with other Interesting Books in Black Letter.
  Sets of the Historical Society and the Parker Society
  Publications, &c.

  May be viewed two days prior, and Catalogues had of

  MESSRS. PARKER, Oxford; DEIGHTON, Cambridge; LANGBRIDGE,
  Birmingham; HODGES and SMITH, Dublin; BLACKWOOD, Edinburgh; and at
  the place of Sale. If in the country, on receipt of four postage
  stamps.


H. NOEL HUMPHREYS' NEW WORK.

  Now ready, in super-royal 8vo., price 28_s._ handsomely bound in
  cloth, gilt edges, with 12 beautiful Chromo-lithographic
  illustrations, &c.

  TEN CENTURIES OF ART; its Progress in Europe from the Ninth to the
  Nineteenth Century; with a Glance at the Artistic Productions of
  Classical Antiquity, and Considerations on the probable influence
  of the Great Exhibition, and on the present state and future
  prospects of Art in Great Britain. By H. NOEL HUMPHREYS.

  By the same Author,

  ANCIENT COINS AND MEDALS, with numerous Examples of Rare and
  exquisite Greek and Roman Coins executed in actual Relief, and in
  their respective Medals. Second Edition. Price 25_s._ bound.

  GRANT & GRIFFITH, corner of St. Paul's Churchyard.


Just published, Fcap. 8vo. cloth, price 6_s._

  SERMONS on the DOCTRINES and MEANS of GRACE, and on the Seven
  Words from the Cross. By GEORGE TREVOR, M.A., Canon of York.

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


THE QUARTERLY REVIEW. No. CLXXIX. ADVERTISEMENTS and BILLS for the
forthcoming Number must be forwarded to the Publisher by the 22nd
instant.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


Nearly ready in 1 vol. post 8vo., illustrated with Maps.

  INDIA IN GREECE, or TRUTH in MYTHOLOGY, by E. POCOCKE, Esq. This
  work, containing the earliest History of Greece drawn from
  original sources, treats of the Colonization of that Country from
  North Western India; of the Buddhistic Propaganda, the Tartarian
  Mission, and the Wars of the Grand Lama in Hellas. Corresponding
  Maps of India and Greece, exhibit the exact parent tribes and
  districts of the latter country--in Cashmir, Thibet, Tartary,
  Afghanistan, and North Western India. This geographical basis
  leads the way to a thorough revision of Early Hellenic History,
  whereby the Cyclopes, Autochthones, Erectheus, Cecrops,
  Corybantes, Cabeiri, and a long list of mythologic agents are at
  once placed in the category of History. This work, equally adapted
  to the general reader and the scholar, corroborates in the most
  interesting way the Scriptural Accounts of the Hebrew Settlements
  of the Children of Israel in Palestine, and demonstrates their
  wars with the Tartar and Rajpoot tribes of that country.

  JOHN J. GRIFFIN & CO., 53. Baker Street, London.

  RICHARD GRIFFIN & CO., Glasgow.


This day, Octavo, 10_s._ 6_d._

  MANUAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE. Edited by the Rev. C. G. NICOLAY,
  F.R.G.S. Part the First, containing

  MATHEMATICAL GEOGRAPHY, by M. O'BRIEN, M.A., F.R.S., Professor of
  Natural Philosophy and Astronomy in King's College, London.

  PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY, by D. T. ANSTED, M.A., F.R.S., Professor of
  Geology in King's College, London.

  CHARTOGRAPHY, by J. R. JACKSON, F.R.S., late Secretary of the
  Royal Geographical Society.

  THEORY OF DESCRIPTION AND GEOGRAPHICAL TERMINOLOGY, by Rev. C. G.
  NICOLAY, F.R.G.S., Librarian of King's College, London.

  Also (to accompany the "Manual of Geographical Science"), 5_s._

  ATLAS OF PHYSICAL AND HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY. Engraved by J. W.
  LOWRY, under the direction of Professor ANSTED and Rev. C. G.
  NICOLAY.

  London: JOHN W. PARKER & SON, West Strand.


THE BEST IS THE CHEAPEST.

      The Best Congou Tea             3_s._ 8_d._ per lb.
      The Best Souchong Tea           4_s._ 4_d._    "
      The Best Gunpowder Tea          5_s._ 8_d._    "
      The Best Old Mocha Coffee       1_s._ 4_d._    "
      The Best West India Coffee      1_s._ 4_d._    "
      The Fine True Ripe Rich
          Rare Souchong Tea           4_s._ 0_d._    "

  40_s._ worth or upwards sent CARRIAGE FREE to any part of England by

  PHILLIPS & CO., TEA MERCHANTS, No. 8. King William Street, City,
  London.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London: and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, December 20. 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-IV]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 88  | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No. 89  | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No. 90  | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No. 91  | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 92  | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No. 93  | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No. 94  | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No. 95  | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No. 96  | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      | Vol. IV No. 109 | Nov. 29, 1851      | 417-430 | PG # 39233 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 110 | Dec.  6, 1851      | 433-460 | PG # 39338 |
      | Vol. IV No. 111 | Dec. 13, 1851      | 465-478 | PG # 39393 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number
112, December 20, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, DEC 20, 1851 ***

***** This file should be named 39438.txt or 39438.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/4/3/39438/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
