The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Captain of Industry, by Upton Sinclair

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: A Captain of Industry
       Being the Story of a Civilized Man

Author: Upton Sinclair

Release Date: April 23, 2012 [EBook #39516]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY ***




Produced by David E. Brown, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









  A Captain of Industry
  BEING
  _The Story of a Civilized Man_

  BY
  UPTON SINCLAIR

  AUTHOR OF "THE JUNGLE," ETC.

  GIRARD, KANSAS
  THE APPEAL TO REASON
  1906


  COPYRIGHT, 1906,
  BY J. A. WAYLAND.

  _All rights reserved._




A CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY




PREFACE


This little story was written nearly five years ago. The verdict upon it
was that it was "unpublishable," and so I put it away until I should be
in position to publish it myself.

Recently I read it over, and got an interesting vision of how the times
have changed in five years. I put it away a revolutionary document; I
took it out a quiet and rather obvious statement of generally accepted
views. In reading the story, one should bear in mind that it was written
before any of the "literature of exposure" had appeared; that its writer
drew nothing from Mr. Steffens' probing of political corruption, nor
from Miss Tarbell's analysis of the railroad rebate, nor from Mr.
Lawson's expose of the inner life of "Frenzied Finance."

                                                                    U.S.




A CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY




I


I purpose in this chronicle to tell the story of A CIVILIZED MAN:
casting aside all Dreams and Airy Imaginations, and dealing with that
humble Reality which lies at our doorsteps.




II


Every proverb, every slang phrase and colloquialism, is what one might
call a petrified inspiration. Once upon a time it was a living thing, a
lightning flash in some man's soul; and now it glides off our tongue
without our ever thinking of its meaning. So, when the event transpired
which marks the beginning of my story, the newspapers one and all
remarked that Robert van Rensselaer was born with a silver spoon in his
mouth.

Into the particular circumstances of the event it is not necessary to
go, furthermore than to say that the arrival occasioned considerable
discomfort, to the annoyance of my hero's mother, who had never
experienced any discomfort before. His father, Mr. Chauncey van
Rensselaer, was a respected member of our metropolitan high society,
combining the major and minor _desiderata_ of wealth and good-breeding,
and residing in a twentieth-century palace at number four thousand
eleven hundred and forty-four Fifth Avenue. At the time of the opening
of our story van Rensselaer _pere_ had fled from the scene of the
trouble and was passing the time playing billiards with some sympathetic
friends, and when the telephone-bell rang they opened some champagne and
drank to the health of van Rensselaer _fils_. Later on, when the father
stood in the darkened apartment and gazed upon the red and purple mite
of life, proud emotions swelled high in his heart, and he vowed that he
would make a gentleman of Robert van Rensselaer,--a gentleman after the
pattern of his father.

At the outset of the career of my hero I have to note the amount of
attention which he received from the press, and from an anxious public.
Mr. Chauncey van Rensselaer was wealthy, according to New York and Fifth
Avenue standards, and Baby van Rensselaer was provided with an
introductory outfit of costumes at an estimated cost of seventeen
thousand dollars. I have a file of van Rensselaer clippings, and would
quote the elaborate descriptions, and preserve them to a grateful
posterity; but in the meantime Master Robert van Rensselaer would be
grown up. I pass on to the time when he was a growing boy, with two
governesses, and several tutors, and a groom, and such other attendants
as every boy has to have.




III


Many lads would have been spoiled by so much attention; and so it is
only fair to say at the outset that "Robbie" was never spoiled; that to
the end of his days he was what is known as "a good fellow," and that it
was only when he could not have what he wanted that anger ever appeared
in his eyes.

Before many more years he went away to a great rich school, followed by
the prayers of a family, and by the valet and the groom. There he had a
suite of rooms, and two horses, and a pair of dogs with pedigrees longer
than his own; and there he learned to smoke a brand of choice
cigarettes, and to play poker, and to take a proper interest in
race-track doings. There also, just when he was ready to come away and
to take a great college by storm, Robbie met with an exciting
adventure. This is a work of realism, and works of realism always go
into detail as to such matters; and so it must be explained that Robbie
fell desperately in love with a pretty girl who lived in the country
near the school; and that Robbie was young and handsome and wealthy and
witty, and by no means disposed to put up with not having his own way;
and that he had it; and that when he came to leave school, the girl fled
from home and followed him; and that there were some blissful months in
the city, and then some complications; and that when the crisis came
Robbie was just on the point of getting married when the curiosity of
his father was excited by his heavy financial demands; and, finally,
that Mr. Chauncey van Rensselaer and Mr. Robert van Rensselaer held an
interview in the former's study.

"Now, Robbie," said he, "how long has this been going on?"

"About a year, sir," said Robbie, gazing at the floor.

"A year? Humph! And why didn't you tell me about it when you first got
into trouble?"

"I--I didn't like to," said Robbie.

"To be sure," said the father, "boys have no business in such scrapes;
but still, when you get in them, it is your duty to tell me. And so you
want to get married?"

"I--I love her," said the other, turning various shades of red as he
found the words sounding queer.

"But, Robbie," protested van Rensselaer _pere_, "one doesn't marry all
the women one loves."

Then, after a little pause, the father continued gravely, "Now, my boy,
tell me where she is, and I'll arrange it for you."

Robbie started. "You won't be cross to her?" he pleaded.

"Of course not," said the father. "I am never cross with any one. It
will all be settled happily, I promise you."

And so a day or two later it was announced that Robbie was going abroad
for a year's tour; and when he sought Daisy to bid her good-by, it was
reported that Daisy had left for the West--a circumstance which caused
Robbie several days' anxiety.




IV


My hero had gone abroad with a congenial friend a little older than
himself, and the two stayed considerably over their time and enjoyed
themselves immensely. They were plentifully provided with money, and
Robbie had been told that he might do anything he liked, except get
married. Therefore they wandered through all the cities of Europe, and
saw all the beautiful things of the past, and all the gay things of the
present. They stopped at the best hotels, and everywhere they went men
bowed before them, and fled to do their bidding. Also there were many
beautiful women who did their best to make Robbie happy. Robert was
always a favorite with the girls, being a generous-hearted boy; he
always paid for what he got, and paid the very highest prices in the
market. He hired a pretty little yacht and took his friend and some
congenial ladies for a beautiful trip upon the Mediterranean; and the
sky was blue and the air warm, and Robbie stretched himself upon the
deck, and basked in the sunlight and imbibed the soft fragrance of
cigars and perfumes, and opened his heart and was happy as never in his
life before.

After which the two travellers turned homeward again. There was some
thought of Robbie's going to college; in fact, he hired chambers and
started, at some expense. But it was only for a year, for Robbie had
seen too much of the world to go back into a college chrysalis, and when
it was evident that he could not get through his exams, he quit and came
back to New York to stay.




V


And now you may behold him fairly settled at the task that fate had set
before him,--that of being a gentleman like his father. No suggestions
were offered--he managed it all in his own way. He took a suite of
rooms, and furnished them so that they were a joy to the few eyes that
ever beheld them, and were described by the society journals as one of
the great educational influences of the city. Also he joined some of the
clubs, and took a box at the opera, and did everything else that was
necessary to a young man of his station. It must be understood that
Robbie moved in the highest "circles," and was invited to dinner-parties
and balls where only a choice two dozen could go. He had a reputation as
a golfer and polo player, and was one of Newport's most far-famed
yachtsmen; but of course it was upon his automobile records that his
reputation really rested. He was daily to be seen speeding about the
metropolis in his favorite machine, _The Green Ghost_, and now and then
he sent his valet to court to pay his fines. On the one unfortunate
occasion when he killed a little boy, the parents of the child were made
happy forever by Robbie's princely munificence.

Also Robbie was making a reputation as a clubman and _bon vivant_. He
knew a great deal about the world by that time; in fact, he knew
everything there was to know about it; he had watched men, and
understood them thoroughly, and all their ways. I would not have it
imagined that he was a cynic, having already stated that he was the
best-hearted fellow in the world; but he had a certain dry manner which
was not to be imitated, and when he told an anecdote all the world
stopped to listen. Robbie's stories were on all sorts of themes; but of
course telling the truth about a man does not include telling his
stories, even in the most realistic of biographies.

I would not have any one get the idea that my hero was bad; on the
contrary, he was a member of a church whose orthodoxy and respectability
were beyond cavil, and every Sunday morning he escorted some exquisitely
gowned young lady of his set to listen to the famous eloquence of the
rector, the Reverend Doctor Lettuce Spray. Also whenever the church gave
a fair for the benefit of the Fiji Islanders, Robbie bought up all the
shares left over in the raffles, and allowed the young ladies to pin
bouquets in his button-hole. In addition he actually taught
Sunday-school for six whole weeks, at a time when he was desperately
enamoured of a certain young lady who did likewise; bearing bravely all
the chaffing on the subject, he put away _Les OEuvres de T. Gautier_
from his table and primed up every Saturday night and taught little boys
how the good Lord made the fleece of Gideon to stay dry, and caused the
soldiers to fall down to drink out of the stream, and did other unusual
things calculated to impress little boys. Nothing came of this
Sunday-school adventure, however, for van Rensselaer _pere_ was of the
opinion that the young lady was nothing like the match Robbie ought to
make; and so the young man's affections returned to an elegantly
furnished flat on the West Side, where there was a liberal stock of
champagne and fine cigars, and two young ladies of Robbie's
acquaintance. Three or four evenings every week you might have seen his
automobile, and the automobiles of several friends, drawn up before the
door of this apartment-house, and might have heard evidence to the fact
that Robbie was happy, as so good-hearted a young fellow deserved to
be.




VI


Enough has been told about Mr. Robert van Rensselaer's early period to
indicate how those pleasant days were passed. Including the suite, the
flat, and the clubs, the automobile, the yacht, and the polo stud, our
friend's total expenses came to something in the neighborhood of three
hundred thousand a year. And since, if he had been a master-poet, or an
inspired musician, or a prophet with a new message for mankind, society
would have paid about one one-thousandth of that sum to keep him alive,
it is apparent that he was considered by society to be equivalent to one
thousand such hypothetical persons.

This idyllic existence continued for about three years all together; and
then one bright winter day Robbie was invited to pay a call upon his
father at his office, where the two had a long and serious
conversation.

"Now, Robbie," said van Rensselaer senior, "I haven't objected to your
wild oats. That's every young fellow's right, and you haven't gone
beyond the limit. I have always meant to give my son everything a
gentleman ought to have; but now I think it's about time you'd had
enough--don't you?"

"Um-m," said Robbie, meditatively, "I hadn't thought about it."

"You know," said van Rensselaer _pere_, "the life of man isn't all play.
We have some serious duties in the world--we owe something to society."

"Yes," said Robbie, "I suppose so. But it's the hell of a nuisance."

"It may seem so," said the other; "but one can get interested in the
end."

"Perhaps so," admitted Robbie, dubiously.

"What I mean," said the father, "is that it's time you got ready to take
your place in the world. You've seen life pretty much, and you know what
I mean. You can't always be your father's son; you'll have to be
yourself. I may die some day, and then somebody'll have to take over my
affairs. Then, too, you might want to marry; you've wanted to twice
already, you know" (Robbie blushed), "and if you have a family, you'll
find they'll expect from you pretty much what you've had from me. The
life of man, my boy, is a battle; and there comes a time when every one
has to fight it."

Robbie had never known his father to be philosophical before, and found
it a curious experience; their talk was prolonged late into the
afternoon, and by that time Robbie had expressed his willingness to make
an effort to perform some of his duties to society.




VII


Robbie's father was president and chief stockholder of a certain vast
manufacturing establishment; he was also a capitalist of national
reputation, and a man whose hand was often felt by the stock markets of
the world. Robbie knew about these things vaguely, and was not uncurious
to know more; and so he took to rising at ten o'clock in the morning,
and to turning his automobile down-townward; and his clubs saw him less
and less often, and heard his merry laugh almost never.

For a strange change came over Robbie. I do not know how I can better
explain the phenomenon than by his father's words already quoted--that
he was learning that the life of man is a battle. Formerly all that he
had known had been the play side of it. When one goes in for a game of
golf, he lays out all his cleverness and skill, and gets nothing but a
silver cup and some newspaper clippings for the trouble; but when he
plays at stocks, he gets real prizes of hard cash and negotiable
securities.

Mr. Robert van Rensselaer had set to work to learn the rules of this new
game; and as he was a clever fellow, and had, besides, all the capital
any one could need, it came about quickly that his name was one men
reckoned with. He carried out some strokes that perplexed his adoring
father, and it was not very long before the latter ceased to have to
sign checks to the credit of his son's bank account. Before five years
were past "young van Rensselaer" had taken his seat at the
council-boards of several great corporations, and the things that he
said there were always attended to; or if they were not he was apt to
turn elsewhere, and in such cases it was generally not long before some
one was sorry.

And of course this could not take place without producing a change in
him. To be sure, he was still "Robbie" to his old friends, and still as
good-hearted a fellow as ever lived; to be sure, likewise, he still
kept the yacht, and the automobile, and the flat. But before this he had
never had an enemy, and now he had thousands; and every day his time was
given up to a desperate hand-to-hand combat, as grim as any jungle ever
saw. And so his mouth became set and his brow knit; and since he no
longer had his way with absolute regularity, his temper was not so sweet
as before.

It is of importance to explain this, because our friend was much in the
papers in those days, and secured a great deal of notoriety through an
unfortunate exhibition of ill temper. It happened at a time when he had
been for over ten years the new man we have pictured, and had supplanted
his father as the president of a large and important manufacturing
concern. The reader will perhaps divine that I refer to the historic
Hungerville Steel Mills, and to the occasion of the great Hungerville
strike that once shook the country.




VIII


The Hungerville Mills Company was one of the creations of the financial
genius of van Rensselaer senior; the mills had existed before, but they
had been run by several rival companies, which were always at war with
each other, with the consequence that their stock was a by-word among
men. But one day a rumor went flying through Wall Street, and then the
stocks of those companies began to climb the ladder two steps at a time.
And when they had once risen they stayed risen, and stood before the
world like prosperity upon a monument. Robert van Rensselaer had quietly
secured a controlling interest in them; and a few weeks later their
affairs were combined, and the career of the Hungerville Mills Company
began.

There was war, of course, from the very beginning, a war of rates that
broke the smaller mills by the dozen. The company nearly killed itself,
and came still nearer to killing its employees. It ran for months at a
loss, and on money furnished by the grim, far-seeing president; until at
last came the time when the rivals went to smash, and afterward prices
went soaring, and the Hungerville Company was safe.

The mill employees had helped to bear these trials; and so they
afterward submitted a new schedule, asking twenty per cent raise. They
got five per cent, and the world seemed rosy indeed. But very soon the
price of steel billets, the standard of the wages, began to go down, as
fast as the prices of all other steel things rose; and men noticed how
the new tariff act made the duty on billets so very low, and wondered if
the Company had known anything about it.

It was several years after all this that there came the dreadful winter
when the snow lay two feet deep in the streets, and the price of coal
went five per cent higher a month; and then the Hungerville Company, in
the person of its new president, began to be pestered by delegations
from this union and that union, a very annoying thing to the president,
who was new at the business. No one must imagine, of course, that he was
harsh in the matter. I might quote the experience of the good clergyman
who had been persuaded by the unions to plead for them, and narrate how
the president told him several capital stories, and finally begged off
because he had an engagement to a poker party that night, and laughingly
promised the clergyman all his winnings to help the poor along. And what
could a good clergyman say to that--especially as Mr. van Rensselaer had
only a few months ago donated to the same church a wonderful window
representing the miracle of the loaves and fishes?




IX


The dreadful winter passed by without change, and without the promised
rise in the price of billets. The Hungerville Savings Bank suspended
business, because deposits were so few; and the Hungerville constables
had their hands full preventing incendiary speeches to the excited
crowds that filled the Hungerville saloons. But all through the long
panting summer the giant mills toiled on, turning out their tens of
thousands of dollars and thousands of tons of steel every day. The
delegations could no longer see the president, for the _Aurora_, the
magnificent single-sticker built for Robert van Rensselaer at a cost of
two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, was in those days electrifying
the country by her wonderful performances at Newport.

And then came the chill days of autumn and the prospect of another
dreadful winter, with the price of billets three per cent lower yet.
Mr. Robert van Rensselaer's palatial steam yacht, the _Comet_, was about
to start on a trip down the coast of Florida, when he was called to
Hungerville by an urgent telegram, saying that the crisis was at hand.

And truly there was some bad feeling--even the president could see that;
when one walked about the streets of Hungerville, he saw pale, sickly
children, bent and haggard women, and men glaring at him from under
lowering brows. He saw houses out of repair, and starving people being
turned away from them. He saw angry crowds harangued by wild-eyed men,
in Polish and other strange tongues.

These things the president noticed as his carriage whirled through the
streets, but they did not daunt him, and after a long and angry
conference the delegates of the unions came back to report that all
concessions had been refused. The next morning men read in the papers
that the unions had demanded a final conference, and that if nothing was
granted, then there would be a strike, and a war to the end.




X


In the first place, the president was in an angry mood when he went to
that conference. The sailing of the _Comet_ had had to be postponed yet
another day, and besides that a stone had been flung at his head only
five minutes before. I mention the stone particularly because, as I have
said, an unfortunate incident occurred at the conference.

They sat at a long table one October afternoon,--eight men, seven of
them pale and trembling, fingering their hats and gazing about them
nervously, with long agony written on their faces, a certain hunted look
that sportsmen know, but do not heed.

And Mr. Robert van Rensselaer--it has been some time since we have
looked at him. He was a gentleman of forty now, grown somewhat portly
and a little florid, but not too much so. He had always been a man of
distinction--you would have taken him for a diplomat, or a general, at
the very least.

He was a little pale just then about the lips, and he began the
conference in a tone whose calmness any one could have told was forced.
He began at the beginning--he explained the losses of the mills, and how
they were barely established now. He mentioned the new machinery, and
showed the cost of it. He laid before them a great mass of papers, and
made plain how the new machinery had increased the output and been
equivalent to a raise. He went on to the price of billets, he showed the
state of the market with elaborately marshalled figures, and proved what
the price must soon be. To all of which, a speech of nearly two hours,
the men listened fixedly.

Afterward one of the delegates, a little wiry, black-bearded Hungarian,
took up the question. He wandered from the point at once, discussing the
price of food, and the condition of the workingmen, much to the
president's annoyance. The latter tried to bring him back to the point
at issue--he returned to the papers again, and they argued back and
forth for a long time. Several times Mr. van Rensselaer choked down an
angry word.

"You talk to me about the condition of the workingmen," he exclaimed,
tapping on the table with his pencil. "But how can I help the condition
of the workingmen? You say his wages are not living wages--but who can
decide a question such as that? What one man can live on, another
cannot. What if the workingmen spend much of their wages in
intemperance, and then tell me they cannot live? What--" But then the
president stopped, and frowning with annoyance, went on in a different
voice: "But there is no use arguing about such questions as that! I have
tried to explain to you the state of the market, and just what the
Company can do. I can do nothing more. You must remember that we have
trials, also, and that ruin is possible for companies, too. The laws of
economy apply to companies just as well as men; there are living wages
for companies--"

The president stopped, and immediately the argumentative delegate
observed, "We do not see any signs that the Company is afflicted with
poverty."

The president gazed at him sharply. "Hey?" he asked.

"I say," repeated the man in a louder voice, "that anybody can go
through this town and see what is happening to the workingmen. I know of
a child that died yesterday of hunger, but I don't read that any of the
officers of the Company are suffering from want."

A flush shot over the president's face. "Do you mean to be impertinent?"
he cried.

"I mean nothing of the kind," said the man, amid breathless silence.
"But you have not hesitated to talk of the workingman's intemperance--"

And Mr. Robert van Rensselaer clutched the table. "Now," he cried, "this
thing's gone far enough, and we'll settle it right now! You might as
well quit your nonsense and understand this,--that the Hungerville Mills
belong to Robert van Rensselaer, and not to a union, or to anybody else;
and that they're going to be run the way Robert van Rensselaer chooses
they shall be run; that they're run for his profit, that the wages they
pay are the wages he chooses to pay, and that anybody who doesn't like
it is welcome to go wherever else it happens to suit him! And you go out
and give _that_ as my message, and, damn it, don't you ever come up here
into my office to insult me again!"

Then he stopped, purple with rage; and for half a minute the members of
the union stared at him and at each other. Finally they arose and made
their way from the room, leaving the president glaring at the closed
door.




XI


When van Rensselaer ceased pacing the room, he went to the table and
wrote an order closing the mills. Then he sent two telegrams, one to the
governor and one to the sheriff, telling them that violence was
threatened, calling upon them to enforce the law, and declaring that all
damages would fall upon the county. After that he rang for his manager.

"Mr. Grinder," he said, "I have closed the mills, and I intend to leave
them in your charge. You will get three hundred private detectives, or
three thousand, as may be necessary, to protect the property; and you
will set to work to gather new hands, and in one week the mills will be
running again. Let there be no shilly-shallying about it; I mean to put
an end to this nonsense once and for all time: the mills are to be run,
and run at once, if it takes all the troops in the state to do it. And
that is all,--only that the members of the union are under no
circumstances to be taken back except as individuals. I bid you good
afternoon."

So he put on his coat and left the building to enter his carriage. A
fine rain was falling, and he buttoned his coat tightly and sat gazing
fixedly ahead while he was whirled down the street. Suddenly, however,
the carriage stopped, and he came out of his revery and saw that the way
was obstructed by a crowd.

They were opposite a dilapidated house, whose pitiful furniture had all
been deposited upon the sidewalk; two half-starved, shivering children
clung to an old bed that men were dragging out of the door, and a woman
was crouching by the doorway, with a baby in her arms, crying
hysterically above the hoarse murmurs.

Then suddenly the bystanders saw who was in the carriage. A yell went
up: "It's van Rensselaer! van Rensselaer!" Like a wave the mob surged
about him. Hoots and hisses filled the air. The men shook their fists,
the women shrilled abuse, and some one flung a stone. The president
leaned forward to the coachman. "Drive on!" he shouted. "Drive on!"

The man hesitated, gazing at the crowd in front and back at his master.
"Drive on!" yelled the latter, again.

And so the coachman lashed the horses, and forward they bounded like
mad. Several of the crowd were knocked down; the rest scattered in
terror; and away down the street sped the carriage, amid a rain of
missiles and a din of curses.




XII


Mr. Robert van Rensselaer drove on to the depot, where stood his private
car; as he sped away to the city he first took something to drink, and
then sat smoking and meditating until the depot was reached. Here he
heard street voices: "Extra! Extra!" and bought a paper. He stepped into
his automobile, with the word "Home," and then settled back to read the
news. There was the whole scene of the conference, with the
embellishments of the usual kind, and the story of the strike
resolutions and the beginning of rioting. There were also some savage
editorials--it was a "yellow" journal. Mr. Robert van Rensselaer read
them and smiled.

He arrived at his residence,--which, it should be added, was no longer a
little apartment, but a palatial mansion just a few blocks above the
paternal one. As he was still meditating about the strike, it was with
a start that he came back to himself when the butler, who opened the
door for him, remarked:--

"I beg pardon, sir. There's a lady in the parlor to see you."

Mr. van Rensselaer opened his eyes. "A lady?" he said.

"A lady, I presume, sir," said the butler.

"What's her name?"

"She didn't give any name, sir. She just said she must see you; and she
would not take any refusal, sir."

"Humph!" said the other. "I'll go in."

And so in he went and gazed at the woman, who wore a heavy veil. She
rose up and flung it aside, disclosing a face ghastly white, and so like
a death's head that the other started back.

"Do you know me?" she asked.

"Er--no," said Mr. van Rensselaer.

"You really don't know me, Robbie?"

And then suddenly he gave a gasp, and cried, "Daisy!"

"Yes," said the other, "Daisy."

They sat for a full minute gazing at each other: she at a well-filled
face and waist-coat; he at a trembling skeleton.

"Well?" said he, suddenly; "what do you want?"

"Nothing much," she replied. "I'm dying, you know, Robbie."

"What's the matter?" asked he.

"Consumption."

"Humph! It's been a long time. What have you been doing?"

"I've been living up north--in Albany. I took another name, you know, as
soon as I left New York. There's a child, Robbie."

"Oh!" exclaimed the other. "Sure enough! A boy?"

"No, a girl."

"Humph! Must be--let's see--twelve years old now."

"Thirteen, Robbie. That's what I've come to see you about."

"So I guessed. Is she here--in New York?"

"No; she's up in Albany--with some kind people. I couldn't bear to bring
her; but I--I--"

The woman stopped and gazed into his eyes a moment. Then she went on
swiftly, stretching out her lean arms to him. "Do something for her,
Robbie, won't you? That's what I want. I'm not for this world long, and
I can't help her, but you can. I've led a hard life, but she hasn't an
idea of it; she has the locket you gave me, but I've kept the secret
from her, and she doesn't even know her father's name. I've never
bothered you, Robbie; but do for her what you might have done for me."

"I imagine the old gentleman did pretty well by you, didn't he?" said
the other in a matter-of-fact way.

"I'm not complaining," said she. "Only promise you'll find her and do
something for her. It won't hurt you--do promise me, do."

The woman's voice quivered, and she leaned forward in the chair,
steadying her shaking form. The other, always a kind-hearted man, was
touched. "I will, Daisy," he said, "I will."

"You promise me?" gasped the woman.

"Yes, I promise you."

All right," said she, starting to rise. "That's all I want. You won't
have any trouble in finding her. Her name--her--"

And then suddenly she staggered. She lurched backward, grasping at the
chair, and turned white, a horrible sound coming from her throat. The
man leaped forward and caught her. She lay limp in his arms. He shouted
for help, and when the butler came, sent him on the run for a cab.

"Take her around the corner to the hospital," he commanded.

So they bore out the gasping form; and Mr. Robert van Rensselaer went
slowly and thoughtfully upstairs. "Devilish annoying," he mused. "How
shall I find the girl after that?"

When the butler came back he inquired anxiously. "She was dead before we
got there, sir," said the man.




XIII


The death of "Daisy" came to seem more and more annoying the more Robert
van Rensselaer thought it over. Open-handed man as he was, he would have
thought nothing of sending the girl a few thousand dollars; but now all
kinds of trouble might result from an attempt to do it. There were no
means of identification about the body; and if he were to ask the police
to find the woman's child, how long would it be then before scandal was
busy? There are so many people ready to believe evil about a wealthy
man; and besides, there were hundreds who had known about Daisy. To be
sure, they never thought of it, at this late date; but how long would it
take them to put two and two together, and to have the whole town
gabbling and winking? And if he were to turn the matter over to private
detectives, he would lay himself equally open to suspicion. One can
never tell about such men, he mused--they might find out the story, and
then anything could happen.

It was by no means pleasant to think of one's own flesh and blood
suffering poverty. But then van Rensselaer reflected that people would
probably take care of her; and that in any case she had never been used
to wealth, and would not feel the difference; also that if he sent her
money it would very probably serve but to teach her extravagance and
lead her into temptation. So it would seem to be his duty to let the
whole matter drop and forget it.




XIV


These things he was meditating while with the assistance of his valet he
was donning a dress-suit; afterward he descended and entered his
automobile, and in half an hour they reached the dock. It was then
nearing sundown, and the rain was gone, and the river was golden. Van
Rensselaer drank in the fresh sea breeze as he alighted, and moved
toward the waiting _Comet_. Steam was pouring out from the funnels of
the yacht, and the captain stood at the gang-plank.

"All ready, sir," he said.

"Every one on board?" inquired the owner.

"Half an hour ago, sir."

"Very well. Cast off."

And then, amid the shouting of orders, Mr. Robert van Rensselaer moved
forward to the stern, where a dozen ladies and gentlemen were seated,
wrapped warmly in coats and shawls, and enjoying the beautiful scene.
They greeted him with laughter and merry welcome; they had cause to be
a happy party, for in America there was no host like Robert van
Rensselaer.

And his guests were worthy of him. Here was the peerless Mrs.
Dyemandust, mistress of seventy-two millions, and of all society; here
was Mrs. Miner-Gold, worth fifty-seven and a half in her own name; here
was Victor de Vere, leader in the smart set and wittiest man in town;
here was Pidgin of the great Steal Trust, and Mergem, owner of forty-two
railroads. Here was Miss Paragon, the _debutante_, about whom the town
was mad, and here was his Grace the Duc de Petitebourse, the
distinguished French visitor, who cried out that Miss Paragon was
"_ravissante--un miracle!_" It is boldness merely to name such company
in a novel.

"And oh, by the way," asks Mrs. Dyemandust, suddenly, "how did you
settle the strike?"

"Strike?" echoes Mr. Robert van Rensselaer (he had forgotten it
completely), "there are no strikes on the _Comet_."




XV


At nine o'clock that evening the guests of the yacht, being then twenty
miles off Sandy Hook, sat down to dinner in the saloon. Mr. van
Rensselaer's banquets were things that one did not soon forget; as also
was his dining saloon.

There were two state apartments in the _Comet_; the one with which we
have now to do was lit with a blaze of electric lights, set amid
flashing crystal and silver. One of its walls was occupied by a great
buffet, dazzling with the same radiance; and the other three were
occupied by life-size paintings, brilliant with the rich colors that
only great artists dare. The subject was the Decameron--the beautiful
gardens with the elegant ladies and gentlemen clad in all the splendor
of the time, and hovering above them the immortal figures that peopled
their dreams, the airy pageant of a poet's fancy.

And the table! Mr. Robert van Rensselaer was not merely an American
millionnaire, he was a man of exquisite culture, a traveller and a
connoisseur. Every _piece-de-service_ upon his table was of individual
design, numbers of them the work of the celebrated Germain. The
_surtout-de-table_ was a magnificent creation in glittering silver and
gold--"_d' apres Meissonier, XVIII^{e} siecle_." At either end were
golden baskets filled with Indian orchids of priceless beauty. At every
place were hand-painted menus upon satin, promising a delicate and
unique repast.

The wines of Mr. Robert van Rensselaer were one of the problems of
metropolitan society; he got them from abroad, from an unknown estate of
his own--if indeed he did not get them by means of a compact with the
devil. Suffice it to say that a man or woman in New York would give up
any other engagement for some of the wine of the president of the
Hungerville Mills Company; and that when people asked him any questions
about it, he merely smiled charmingly and said, "_On ne parle pas de
cela!_"

After the soup he served a bottle of a wonderful Madeira, and then by
way of a prelude, so to speak, a taste of a dry Sicilian wine, for the
secret of which a certain bank president was known to have offered a
prize. The _premier service_ was a Burgundy,--_type cote de Nuits_,--a
wine of a distinctive taste, approaching a Bordeaux; rich, full of fire,
a little _enveloppe_, but of the greatest delicacy.

The second service, with the roast, was a champagne, not the kind that
one buys for money, but the kind that haunts one's dreams. With the
_entremets_ was a Bordeaux--_Saint Estephe_. Then there was another
champagne, and with the dessert a port, a new port of a deep, grand
purple. His Grace the Duc de Petitebourse raised it on high and gazed
upon it long, the company listening with interest for his sentiments,
for his Grace was a famous gourmet. "_Magnifique!_" he observed,
meditatively. "_C'est a'un gout savoureux--a'une grande rondeur! Corse,
mon Dieu!_"

Such were the wines. There remains only to mention the little anteroom
from which a hidden quartet sent ravishing strains. As to the company,
one could not describe that--one could not describe even the dinner gown
of Mrs. Dyemandust within the limits of a single chapter. And as for the
conversation, when you bring together the elite of the earth, and warm
their souls with a wine from heaven, perhaps there are authors who could
write conversation for them, but I cannot.




XVI


At midnight the guests went up on deck. It was cool, but a heavenly
night, the stars like diamonds, and the sea rolling gently; the yacht
sped swiftly onward, throwing aside the water with a faint, lulling
splash, as of a fountain. Warm wraps were brought, and the guests sat
conversing and gazing out over the water; afterward some of them rose in
couples and began pacing up and down the deck. Mr. Robert van
Rensselaer, the host, was with Miss Paragon, the "_ravissante_"; but it
was not very long before Miss Paragon felt chilly, and so the two went
down into the main saloon.

A wonderful apartment was the great saloon of the _Comet_; but we have
to do with only the Oriental corner of it, with its divans, its precious
silks and draperies, and its lamp, with the faint, soft glow. Miss
Paragon, a dark, languishing brunette, with long, black lashes and a
seductive gaze, sank down upon the divan with a sigh. She was clad in
glowing red, a soft filmy stuff of wonderful beauty; and with her snowy
arms and her perfect neck and shoulders, she made a picture not to be
gazed upon too steadily. And Mr. Robert van Rensselaer bent toward her
in soft conversation, feeding his hungry eyes; Mr. van Rensselaer had
drunk a great deal of his own precious wine.

There were those who did not see the idyllic side of this affair, who
did not think of Miss Paragon as the tender, soft-hearted young person,
but who believed that she knew quite well what she was doing. Certainly
Robbie was not going in with his eyes shut, having argued the subject
out with his father. Miss Paragon was hardly up to his standard,
financially; but then Robbie argued that he was by this time wealthy
enough himself to count beauty as something.

So his voice became lower and lower, and his words more and more tender;
and Miss Paragon gazed upon him languishingly, until at last he
ventured to take her hand. She did not resist, and the touch of it made
his pulses leap, and made him eloquent. He told her how long he had
watched her, and how charming he had thought her; with his arm half
about her, and half sunk upon one knee, he went on to reveal what he
could no longer hide--that he loved her with all his soul. And as the
wonderful, the incomparable Miss Paragon, with all her ravishing beauty,
whispered her reply, he pressed her to his heart in ecstasy, and kissed
her upon her cheeks and lips.

When the merry company descended, van Rensselaer was pouring some wine
from a decanter that stood on the centre-table. A few minutes later,
when every one was gathered there, the host took Mr. de Vere, the
celebrated wit, aside, and said things that made the celebrated wit
first stare, and then slap his thigh; and afterward he made an
irresistible speech which convulsed the company; and while the host
stood blushing like a schoolboy, overwhelmed with all the applause,
they opened more champagne, and drank far into the night to the health
of the future Mrs. Robert van Rensselaer. It was dawn when at last they
parted, and the sky was paling over the shores of Maryland, past which
the _Comet_ was speeding on her southward way.




XVII


After that the cruise of the _Comet_ was a sort of preliminary
honeymoon; and never did a gayer, happier party sail upon the rolling
deep, nor was there ever a happier bridegroom-to-be than Robbie. All day
long he fed his eyes upon the radiant vision, and whispered to himself
that she was his. And so they steamed down the Florida coast, and at
last came to Palm Beach, and went ashore; there he found a telegram
awaiting him, signed by the superintendent of the Hungerville Mills.

  "MR. R. VAN RENSSELAER,
    "Palm Beach, Florida.

  "The trouble is over and the strike broken. Damage has been
  repaired, and the mills are moving as usual. Have retained chiefly
  non-union men. Newspapers virulent.

                                                          "GRINDER."

And Mr. van Rensselaer folded the telegram, and put it in his pocket,
and smiled. "Damn the newspapers," he said meditatively, and sent his
valet to procure some. When he got them he sat on the deck and read them
while the cool sea breeze fanned his forehead.

There had been quite a time at Hungerville, so it appeared. The strikers
had held meetings; the whole town had been in an uproar. Strange as it
might seem, a considerable part of the press had taken the side of the
men. There had been no violence, however, until strange faces began to
appear in the town, and some old abandoned freight cars outside the
mills were burned. Then a force of five hundred detectives were rushed
into the mills, and a high fence was put up, with loopholes. On the
third day the Company sent up a car load of non-union men--men who had
been out of work for a year, since the closing of the mills the
Hungerville Company had beaten down. Instantly the town was in an
uproar, and in spite of all precautions the "scabs" were stoned and
beaten. The detectives fired upon the mob, killing three men, a woman,
and two children, and wounding a dozen more; and that same night, the
sheriff having appealed to the governor, the first companies of militia
arrived.

Following that were three days of furious excitement; on several
occasions a pitched battle all but occurred. Twice the soldiers fired on
the mob, killing several, and one militiaman was stabbed in the dark.
But the Company insisted upon starting the mills; and the strikers being
without money, and many of them half-dead with starvation, they gave up
in scores. At last reports the union had been on the point of abandoning
the strike, so that its members might secure what few places were left.

Then Mr. Robert van Rensselaer read his telegram again, and smiled.

"Tell me, dearest," said Miss Paragon, "what good news have you heard?"

"That you will soon be mine," he answered her.




XVIII


The wedding came off about four months later, after Miss Paragon's Paris
trousseau had safely arrived. Just how to describe such a wedding in
reasonable space is a problem, for the plans of it were described in the
newspapers weeks beforehand,--all the decorations and preparations, as
well as the ancestry, possessions, and accomplishments of both bride and
groom. The Associated Press sent out two descriptions of the wedding
gown,--one technical, by an expert, and one imaginative, by a
sympathetic artist. On the day before the wedding the Fifth Avenue
church--the church where "Robbie" had taught Sunday-school, and had for
thirty years listened to the edifying sermons of the Reverend Doctor
Lettuce Spray, the church, with all its marvellous riot of flowers--was
pictured with pen and pencil, and after the great event the front pages
of all the New York papers were given up to telling an eager and
expectant people everything about it that could be described or
imagined. By that time, of course, the radical press had forgotten all
its vehemence about Hungerville, and Mr. Robert van Rensselaer was again
the noted financier, the prominent social light, the eminent citizen,
and the inimitable _raconteur_. After the couple were safely married,
and had spent a long honeymoon upon the _Comet_, and drunk the full cup
of their bliss, I remember reading in the New York papers an address
which our Robbie had delivered before the Young Men's Mohammedan
Association of Podunk, the theme being industrial brotherhood and the
community of interest between capital and labor.




XIX


And now will the reader kindly imagine that four or five years more have
sped by; and that Mrs. Robert van Rensselaer is a mother of two
children, and a proud and majestic social queen,--_a grande
dame_,--wearing serenely the crown of her exalted station; and that Mr.
van Rensselaer is more than ever a power in the financial circles of the
country, a man able to make governors and senators by the signing of his
pen. His affairs have prospered steadily, fortunes springing up at his
command like fruit trees beneath the hand of a Hindoo conjurer. He has
organized a great corporation of the rivals of his Company for the
preventing of ruinous competition; and he has done other things that
have left Wall Street equally aghast.

I should venture upon this portion of my hero's career with great
trepidation, feeling dubious of my ability to conduct him safely amid
the labyrinths of "the street"; but fortunately this story has been told
by experts as to whose authority there can be no question, and I avail
myself of the opportunity to quote from their narrative. The language of
them is somewhat technical, to be sure; but every branch of human
science has to have a vocabulary of its own, and the seeker of knowledge
has to master it. All van Rensselaer's life in these days was Wall
Street life, and it is necessary to give some idea of what manner of
life that was.

In Jabbergrab, "Heroes of Finance," p. 1492, one reads as follows:--

"The way that Robert van Rensselaer defended the stock on a certain
occasion is still one of the stories of the town. He was in the act of
stepping off the _Aurora_ on that immortal Tuesday--after sailing the
race of his life--when a messenger handed him a telegram informing him
that the bears, evidently underrating the speed of his yacht, had begun
one more savage onslaught upon Kalamazoo Airship. There was plainly a
conspiracy--the stock was going down by the point. Van Rensselaer
immediately wired his brokers to take all the seller's options they
could get, and likewise to buy the market bare of all cash stock; so
that by the time his special reached New York he was the owner of pretty
nearly the whole of K. A. except some he was quite sure would not
appear.

"Van Rensselaer was angry, for K. A. was a pet child of his. He had been
meditating all the way to the city, and when he arrived, the bear-houses
received orders to turn the stock, to buy cash from the cornering party
and sell back on buyer's options of a month, the object of which game
was that the bears, knowing that van Rensselaer was the defender of the
stock, would conclude that he was short of cash, selling for ready money
and buying to keep his corner by an option. The trick worked to
perfection; the cash stock was taken up by van Rensselaer's own buyers,
and the bears, taking new courage, fell upon the stock, and van
Rensselaer purchased options in blocks of five and ten thousand, until
the bears stopped short from sheer exhaustion.

"And of course he had the money ready, and laughed gleefully while he
sprung the trap. The options matured, and behold there was no K. A. on
the market! The corner was the kind that one dreams of--the price went
up by bounds; it began with 110, and before the market closed men were
offering 190, and all in vain. There were sixty thousand shares to be
delivered to van Rensselaer, sixty thousand shares that had been sold
short at 110, and that now could not be covered at 190!

"They came to him and begged for mercy; and he, generously, told them
that they could not have the stock at 190, but that they might
compromise and gain time, at the cost of five per cent per day on the
par value of the stock. They, not having yet seen through the trick he
had played them, and thinking that a break must soon come, were glad to
accept. They paid the interest for ten days, and then the corner was as
tight as ever; and in the end they paid him 260 for the stock, and thus
he made two hundred dollars a share on sixty thousand shares. It was
long before the bears ever interfered again with the pet stock of Robert
van Rensselaer!"




XX


On the day of that curious "compromise," our friend and his victims had
been arguing till late in the evening; and then van Rensselaer had taken
a cab and driven up town. Feeling the need of fresh air and movement, he
had done something unusual with him--gotten out and strolled along upper
Broadway.

It was after the dinner hour at home, and he was bending his steps
toward his club; but passing a brilliantly lighted restaurant, from
which strains of music poured, he yielded to a sudden impulse and went
in.

It was an unusual adventure to our hero; for it was rather a flashy
restaurant, with gayly dressed women in it and men smoking. He watched
them awhile, and then turned to study the menu.

Famous as were his banquets, van Rensselaer himself was a man of very
simple tastes, all his splendor coming from his desire to please other
people. At present he ordered a cocktail, and sipped it meditatively
while the waiter placed before him a plate of raw oysters, of a delicate
and palatable variety. Before he ate them he ordered the next course,
some sweetbreads and a quail on toast, fresh asparagus, and artichokes
prepared in a special way; the waiter listened carefully to the
description of exactly how the sweetbreads were to be cooked, and
exactly the kind of sauce desired with the asparagus. "And bring me a
pint of _Chambertin_," added the guest; "the best you have."

While the waiter departed Mr. Robert van Rensselaer carefully tasted the
oysters. The sweetbreads, when they came, proved to be correct, the wine
was better than he had hoped, and so he felt quite pleased with himself.
Now and then during the repast he would pause to breathe and gaze round
him; he was growing rather stout, unfortunately, and at his meals he
felt it. But he finished at last and smacked his lips, and leaned far
back in his chair and began to light a cigar.

The cigars of Robert van Rensselaer were, like everything else that he
used, of his own importation; the aroma of them was a thing ambrosial,
and so our friend half closed his eyes and felt very happy indeed. With
the wine stirring in his blood, and his stomach purring contentedly,
what more could a civilized man desire?

There was but one thing; as Mr. van Rensselaer was gazing about the
room, he suddenly espied it. His eye was arrested at a table across the
way, where sat two women. One of them was a very stout woman, with
yellow hair and many jewels. But the other--he had never seen anything
like her before. She was a young girl--not out of her teens--and of a
wonderful delicate beauty. She was plainly dressed, and pale; but her
skin was like finely tinted marble, and her face--van Rensselaer could
simply not take his eyes away from her face.

And then suddenly the woman saw his gaze, and smiled. He saw her nudge
the girl with her foot, and the girl looked up at him; then she turned
scarlet, and gazed down at her plate. Van Rensselaer's heart beat
faster, and he finished his demi-tasse rather quickly and threw away his
cigar. When he saw that the women were ready to leave, he beckoned to
the waiter, and after glancing at his check, gave him a twenty-dollar
bill and told him to keep the change. Then he took his overcoat and
strolled slowly out.

The women were just in front of him, and he came up with them at the
corner; they turned and strolled down a side street.

"Your friend seems a little shy," he said, laughing, as he put himself
by the young girl's side, and gently took her arm.

"Just a little," replied the woman. "She has only been in New York a few
days. Miss Harrison, Mr.--er--"

"Mr. Green," said the other.

"Mr. Green," repeated the woman, with a smile, "and Mrs. Lynch,
myself."

So they were happily introduced. "And where are you going?" asked Mr.
Green.

"We were just on our way home," said Mrs. Lynch.

They strolled on down the street; the man felt the soft arm trembling in
his, but the girl said nothing, and never raised her eyes when he spoke
to her. Mrs. Lynch kept up the conversation until they reached a brown
stone house. The curtains were drawn, but one could see chinks of light,
and as the woman opened the door sounds of merriment broke upon the ear.
The door of the parlor was open, but they passed by, and into a rear
room, lighted by a dim lamp; they shut the door, and then everything was
quiet.

"Make yourselves at home," said Mrs. Lynch, taking off her hat and
wraps. Mr. Green did likewise, and sat down upon the sofa.

The girl seated herself. She was still pale and trembling, but Mrs.
Lynch did not notice it, conversing lightly with her new acquaintance.
Suddenly, however, she arose, remarking, "I have something to attend
to, if you'll excuse me." So, frowning down the girl's attempt to
remonstrate, she disappeared, shutting the door.




XXI


There was a little silence, and then Mr. Green went over and sat down by
the girl. "Tell me," he said, "what is the matter?" She buried her face
in her hands and shuddered. "Tell me," he repeated again, in a tender
voice. "Trust me, won't you?"

And suddenly she looked up at him, the tears streaming from her eyes.
"Oh," she pleaded, "have mercy on me! I can't do it--I can't! You don't
know how miserable I am."

Robbie--one is moved intuitively to call him "Robbie" again at such a
time, even though his hair is now an iron-gray--Robbie was gazing at the
perfect face, and thinking that he had never seen anything so wonderful
in his life before. "Listen," he said very gently. "You have no reason
to be afraid of me. Tell me what is the matter, tell me how you come to
be in such a place as this."

The girl gazed at him with her frightened eyes; she choked back a sob.
"I have only been here a few hours," she said. "And I cannot stay--oh, I
cannot!"

"Tell me about it," said he.

She sat kneading her hands together nervously. "I came from the
country," she said. "It is the old story--it will not interest you. My
father was dead, and my mother dead, and then I had no money, and had to
work. And then I loved a young man--"

She made a sudden gesture of despair, and stopped. "Go on," said the
other, tenderly.

"It was only last week that I saw him last," she said, "and now I shall
never see him again. He begged me to go and live with him--that was in
the beginning. He was very rich, and so his parents would not let him
marry me. But I loved him, so I did not care; I only wanted to be with
him. That was a year ago; and then he went away and left me--he said
his parents had found it out. I heard he had gone to New York, and I
followed him--spent all I owned to come. And of course I could not find
him; and I could find nothing to do--I walked the streets all last
night, and the night before. And then this was all that there was
left--I was nearly dead."

The girl had flushed with excitement as she talked, and became more
beautiful than ever. The other led her on; she told him all, for his was
the first sympathetic voice she had heard. And Robbie talked to her as
the Robbie of old had talked to women, gently, beautifully, with
infinite tact, and sympathy, and grace. He was a handsome man and a
brilliant man, and the girl forgot first her terror, and then her
despair, and then her sorrow. No one disturbed them; they talked for an
hour, for two hours, and with more and more understanding. Robbie's
heart was beating faster and faster. She was not only a beautiful girl,
she was a beautiful soul--a pearl in the mud, delicate and precious.
And so he went on and on, pouring out his sympathy, and drawing out her
whole heart. The time sped on yet faster, midnight came, and by that
time Robbie had ventured to take her hand in his, and to sit down beside
her on the sofa. He was trembling like a boy again, was Robbie, his
whole being was on fire; and there had come a new blush to the girl's
cheek, too.

"And listen to me," he was saying in a low whisper; "you do not know how
you have touched my heart, how much I admire you and wish to help you.
You are so beautiful,--I have never seen any one so beautiful,--and
I--ah, we could go far away from all this horror, and you need never
know of it, or hear of it again. I would take care of you and watch over
you. You should have everything to make you happy, for I love you, oh, I
cannot tell you how I love you! This is a dreadful place to say it; but
what does it matter what these people think? They cannot understand, but
we need not care. Ah, I wish you to be mine! I do not care how, but I
will never let you suffer any harm. And oh, you must know that I will
never let you leave me!"

And so he went on, swiftly, breathlessly, eloquently; and first he
ventured to put his arms about her; and then to kiss her; and when he
saw that she was trembling, and that tears of emotion had risen to her
eyes, he clasped her to him passionately.

And so another hour fled by; and when at last there came a tap upon the
door, the girl sat upon Robbie's lap with her face buried in his
shoulder. "And now," said Robbie, as Mrs. Lynch entered, "come and sit
down, and let us settle."




XXII


After that Mary Harrison--such was her name--was soon installed in a
pretty little flat up in Harlem; and Robbie, a happy and guileless boy
once more, was to be found there not infrequently. We must content
ourselves with this brief mention of the subject, and hurry back with
our hero to the tedious affairs of Wall Street.

For events moved swiftly in that part of the town; and even before the
Kalamazoo Airship corner had been settled Robert van Rensselaer was
busily planning the great coup of his life,--the smashing of
Transatlantic and Suburban. About that desperate and historical campaign
it is necessary that the reader should be told in detail.

There are men in Wall Street, gamblers pure and simple, who will bull or
bear any stock out of which they think they can get anything; and again
there are also legitimate manipulators. A legitimate manipulator of
stocks, in the view of Robert van Rensselaer, was a man who studied the
financial and economic conditions of the world, and aimed to drive
prices where they ought to go. If a man could see deeply enough, and
bear only unsound stocks and over-produced commodities, he might be
considered as a useful servant of society--and what would be no less
pleasant, the eternal laws of the universe would work with him in all
his trading.

The story of the great Transatlantic and Suburban Railroad battle--the
most sanguinary of all the conflicts of our hero, and one which Wall
Street men will never forget while they live--the reader may find
narrated in Jabbergrab, p. 1906, as follows:--

"It was the same marvellous grasp of conditions and of deep movements,
men say. Van Rensselaer had been watching T. & S. for over a year, and
watching the people who were engineering it. He had studied every phase
of the problem and in the end he pricked a bubble that was shedding a
rainbow effulgence upon mankind, and that had deceived some of the
keenest financiers of the country.

"In the first place Robert van Rensselaer had distrusted the T. & S.
people, knowing some inside facts about them. Then he had studied the
future of the line, its management, its plans, its huge issues of stock,
which men whispered must be watered even while they bought it up like
mad; and then from certain secret information about conferences, of
which no one was supposed to know, from certain suspicious movements in
the market as well, van Rensselaer became sure that the T. & S.
financiers were prepared for a great boom in the stock. He was perfectly
willing,--he helped them along,--for the more they inflated it, the
better could he manage what he meant to do. Only when he thought they
were about exhausted, he turned to the other side; and so began the
battle of the giants."




XXIII


No one knew that van Rensselaer was the man who was causing the trouble
to T. & S., so our historian goes on to assure us. One of his qualities
was his mastership of concealment: he had brokers all over Wall Street,
and often they were bidding against each other without knowing it. Those
on the outside saw merely that T. & S. had gone up in a way that beat
all telling, and that then it had found a steady price and was
marvellously active; those on the inside knew a little more; they knew
that somebody was selling short, but who it was, there was only one man
in the world that knew.

These things are complicated, and they are tedious; but they have to be
understood, for they have to do with a crisis in the life of Robert van
Rensselaer. For our friend was not a man who played at stocks; he never
went in until he was sure he was right, and then he went in for all he
was worth. Though as yet the market had not the least idea of it, he was
stripped for a battle to the death with the supporters of Transatlantic
and Suburban. Let the reader plunge boldly in,--and take our word for it
that there is a path through the wilderness of the narrative.

It was on Tuesday that van Rensselaer had begun, taking "seller's
options" of three days, which amounted to a gigantic bet that in three
days, by more and more selling, he could lower the price of the stock.
As a matter of fact he meant to give them no three days; he meant that
T. & S. was to go down on Wednesday, the first real day of battle.

It was a situation like that in the K. A. corner, with the difference
that nobody could think of cornering T. & S. Its stock was all over the
country, it had been issued ten millions at a time, and what van
Rensselaer and his opponents could secure was comparatively little; it
was the market, the spectators of the battle, who were to award the
prize of victory at the end. And as we have said, our hero had, or
believed he had, the "eternal laws of nature" on his side. "It's coming
down!" said van Rensselaer, grimly; "down! down!"




XXIV


The powers that stood behind T. & S. held a meeting that Tuesday
afternoon and formed a syndicate. The unknown person who was "bearing"
the stock must be whipped into line without a moment's delay, they
agreed; and on the morrow they arranged to buy up one hundred and fifty
thousand shares of T. & S. and see if he could stand that.

Van Rensselaer was prepared to stand a good deal. On Tuesday, the market
being strong, he had sold out every share of stock he owned, including
even his K. A. holdings, including even all his interest in the great
steel corporation he had made; and likewise he had borrowed upon his
credit every dollar that he dared. All this cash was at his broker's,
and on Wednesday morning when the market opened he was standing in his
private office by the ticker, with his one trusted clerk at hand to
telephone his orders.

The struggle opened slowly, the two giants sparring and feeling each
other's strength. The syndicate brokers called loudly for T. & S., but
van Rensselaer waited and watched. Some was sold, but it was not his; he
was waiting to see if the price would not go up yet higher, to make his
enemies bolder, and himself safer. And about eleven o'clock it did
start. T. & S. had opened at 155, and trading brisk; five thousand
shares had been sold, and then the price went to 155-1/2 to 156-1/2.
Then again it went on to 158, and there it stopped. Evidently that was
as high as the enemy cared to send it; and after a while van Rensselaer
sent his orders,--two thousand shares to five different brokers. T. & S.
wavered, went to 157-5/8, then rallied; sales fifteen thousand. Robert
sent out again; offers were still being made, and his agents took them.
In the board-room one might have seen a frantic crowd of shrieking,
gesticulating men about the T. & S. post; such trading had not been
seen for months--something was surely "up." As yet it was not perceived
that the bull movement was a defensive one, and wild rumors flew about:
the Ghoul and Castoria interests were fighting for the road; Mergem was
going to run it to Alaska. T. & S. had never touched such a point
before--surely it could not stay there. And yet it did stay there, while
offer after offer was made. It was not till noon that it started down;
and by that time the syndicate had bought its one hundred and fifty
thousand shares, of which van Rensselaer had sold them one hundred and
thirty thousand.

And now his brokers were shouting offers, and the price was settling
steadily. The syndicate was again in hurried consultation; it was
evident by this time that some powerful foe was against them in full
force. Their peril was imminent and deadly; for the moment that the
street perceived a bear attack, alarm would spread; and after that
thousands would watch in wild uncertainty, and a single point might
bring the panic, might fling thousands and hundreds of thousands of
shares upon one side of the trembling balance. With only a few minutes'
discussing, the syndicate pledged three hundred thousand more.

The market was in a frenzy; T. & S. went to 157-1/2, and there held. The
brokers of the syndicate were making the board-room ring with their
shouts; and van Rensselaer, calm and ready, sold them all they wanted,
and every single time that they let up, began to bear the stock. The
result was that its value swayed back and forth, now gaining and now
losing a point, the trading in the meantime being furious. The meaning
of it all was fast becoming plain,--that some conspirators were trying
to break the stock, and that those conspirators were of the giants.
Robert van Rensselaer was calculated to be worth some twenty million
dollars at that day; and that meant that at the present price of the
stock he was in a position to buy about a million and a quarter shares.
Whether his enemies could go that far he did not know; but he sat
grimly and watched the ticker, while the fierce battle raged and sounds
of frenzied excitement came up from the street below.

So the hours crawled by, the three long weary hours more; and one by one
he hurled his blows, and one by one they came to nothing. He was not a
nervous man, and he did not drum the table; but his brow darkened and he
swore softly. He was staking all that he owned against the unknown power
of his opponents; and if he did not break them with his last offer, he
would be without a dollar in the world.

And so came the last few dreadful minutes of that ever memorable day of
frenzy. There were a dozen brokers shouting his gigantic offers; there
was one case where twenty thousand shares changed hands in one block. He
emptied his quiver, he made the market reel and men turn white with
terror; but his every order was snapped up on the instant, and T. & S.
never gave an inch! And so the moment of closing came; and the dreadful
day was at an end.




XXV


Robert van Rensselaer paced his office, his hands behind his back. He
had no more money, but he was not frightened; his trust was in the
eternal laws of nature,--and besides, he had one or two more cards to
play. He was walking up and down meditatively, talking to himself half
aloud. "I think," he was saying, "that I've gotten all the best of the
pickings; and so it really won't do so much harm if I let them in."

He rang for his secretary and sent five telephone messages. Four of them
were to friends of his, Wall Street plungers who had generally worked
and fought with him; and the fifth was to Mr. Chauncey van Rensselaer.

It was only a few minutes before the first four were in his office,
breathless and wild. "Well," said van Rensselaer, "what do you think of
it?"

"Never saw anything like it," cried one of them; it was Shrike, the
famous wheat plunger. "Never in my life! Who do you think it is? And
what'll come of it?"

"That's what I sent for you for," was van Rensselaer's reply. "Sit
down."

And then he talked to them. "I know who's in this, but I'm not at
liberty to tell. But I know that they're going to win out, and I'm going
to jump on to-morrow morning with every cent I have and help make it a
smash-up. I know who's back of the T. & S. people,--it's Smith and
Shark, in particular,--and I know just what they're good for. I know T.
& S. pretty well, too, and it's hanging on the very verge. It's damned
inflated stuff--you know that, as well as I do; and the street's just
ready to jump on the losing side. The ring that's been making this fight
is going to get most of it; but I'm going to get some, and I'm asking
you in so as to make it a sure thing. We've only got to pile on to it,
you know, and then suddenly let the street find out that it's us. The
tumble will come in three seconds after that."

It was several hours before those four gentlemen went out of van
Rensselaer's office. They talked the situation over in all its phases:
the weak points about the T. & S. road, and the rumors that might be
used; the impossibility of their being caught in a corner; the fact that
thousands of stockholders were hoping for a rise, and trembling in
uncertainty and terror at the thought of a fall; the resources of Smith
and Shark and the T. & S. financiers; their own resources, and the
weight of their names. In the end the agreement was to buy all the T. &
S. offered in the morning, and at the hour of eleven jump in and pound
it into the dust.




XXVI


So they left, and in a few minutes more our hero was in his automobile
and speeding rapidly up town. He entered his club-house, and went to a
private room, into which shortly after there came hobbling an aged,
red-nosed, and gouty old aristocrat, swearing furiously and demanding,
"What in the devil did you want me here for, anyhow?"

It was Mr. Chauncey van Rensselaer.

"Well," said the son, after dutifully helping him to a chair, "what do
you think of it?"

"That's not answering my question," growled the other. "But Lord,
Robbie, I've had a day of it! Do you know I hold five thousand of T. &
S.? And I've just been crazy all day, waiting--waiting--"

Humph!" said Robert, with a smile. "Waiting for what?"

"Why, haven't you got any?" cried the other. "Don't you know who's in
that syndicate?"

"Yes," said Robbie; "it's the T. & S. gang, and Smith and Shark, I
supposed."

"Yes," said the other, "just so; and they mean business, too, I can tell
you. You'll see this stock up in the 200's to-morrow. Who do you suppose
are those fools that are fighting them?"

"I don't suppose," said Robbie, "I know."

"And who are they?"

"There aren't any 'they.'"

"How do you mean?"

"I mean there's only one man."

"What! And who is it?"

"It's Robert van Rensselaer."

And the old gentleman leapt from his chair, in spite of his gout. "Good
God, Robbie!" he cried. "You're mad!"

"No," said Robbie; "it's a fact."

"But you're ruined!"

"Oh, no, not quite, Governor. (Robbie always had called him Governor.)
I've spent every cent I own, but not quite ruined; for I'm going to be
the richest man in New York City to-morrow at about two minutes past
eleven o'clock in the morning. I'm going to have every cent that the T.
& S. people and Smith and Shark can beg or borrow, and the bank accounts
of several hundred lambs besides, including my aged and beloved daddy!"

The aged and beloved daddy was gasping for breath. "You're lost,
Robbie!" he cried. "It can't be! How can you do it without money?"

"I've just arranged a syndicate," laughed Robbie.

"But without money?"

"They don't know I've no money," said he, cheerfully. "But I'm going to
get some more, just for safety, from you."

"Humph!" said Mr. Chauncey van Rensselaer, laconically.

"In the first place," said the other man, "you're going to sell those
shares to-morrow morning at ten o'clock; and in the second you're going
to sell short on T. & S. all you find takers for; and about eleven
o'clock you're going to see the sky fall down and hit the earth."

"What's going to cause it?"

"For one thing, your being there selling short. You old Wall Street
rounders are like vultures about a carcass--people will only have to see
you hobbling down town, and they'll know there's a smash-up coming; and
if you whisper you're selling T. & S. it'll come right then."

"There's something in that," admitted the old gentleman, after some
hesitation.

"But that's not the thing I want to see you about," laughed Robbie. "The
main thing is still to come. It is that you're going to make me a
present right away of a couple of million dollars."

Mr. Chauncey van Rensselaer bounced slightly in his chair, and his eyes
were very wide open.

"Two millions, at least," reiterated Robbie, seeing that he was
speechless. "And _give_ it, not lend it. If I asked you to lend it, then
I'd have to go into all kinds of explanations, and I couldn't ever make
you see the thing as plainly as I do. All I say is that I've been a
good boy and supported myself for thirteen years without ever striking
my old daddy for a cent; and that now I want it and want it bad. You're
going to die some day, and then you'll leave it all to me. And by that
time it'll be of no use in the world to me; for if this stroke fails,
it'll be too little, and if it succeeds, it won't be anything at all.
And so I want you to give it to me now."

Mr. Chauncey van Rensselaer took a long, long breath; then he sat
forward and drew up to the table. "Robbie," he said, "tell me about this
business. Tell me all."

"First I want the two millions."

"Confound you," observed the other. "Don't you know if you want 'em,
you'll get 'em? But go on now, and tell me about the thing, and don't be
a fool."

And so Robbie told him; and before the end of it the elder gentleman was
rubbing his hands. Afterwards he hobbled out of the room and mailed a
note to his brokers, ordering them to sell his T. & S. holdings at the
opening price; also he wrote instructing his bankers that Mr. Robert van
Rensselaer was to draw on his credit for three million dollars.

       *       *       *       *       *

And in the meantime Mr. Robert van Rensselaer was still pacing up and
down the room, his hands behind his back, and a very pleasant look upon
his mellow countenance. He was at that moment, beyond question, the
happiest and the contentedest man in New York: when all of a sudden
there was a knock on the door, and an attendant entered.

"A note for you, sir," he said. "It's marked 'Urgent.'"

And our friend took it; he waited until the man had gone, and then he
opened it, and read this:--

  "MR. ROBERT VAN RENSSELAER:

  "Dear Sir,--Will you kindly request our friend Mr. Green to call
  this evening upon a matter of the utmost possible urgency to him at
  the house of his old friend Mrs. Lynch?"




XXVII


It would not profit to produce the remarks of Robert van Rensselaer upon
reading the note. Possibly the reader had imagined that he was through
with Mrs. Lynch; certainly, at any rate, Mr. Van Rensselaer had imagined
it. But one of the disadvantages about some of the pleasant things of
life is this fact that, when we wish to forget them, they are not always
willing to forget us.

Who had written the letter and what was the purpose of it was a problem
which our hero pondered for many hours,--hours which he spent either in
pacing up and down the room, or in sitting motionless in a chair, with
hands clenched and eyes fixed upon vacancy.

When finally he came to a decision, it was evidently a desperate one,
for his brow was black and his eyes shone. He strode out of the room,
and a moment or so later was whirling up town in a cab. Before long he
got out and walked, and when the cab had disappeared, he called another,
and entering that drove to the residence of Mary Harrison.

She was clad in a pink silk gown, and her cheeks were bright with
happiness; she was so altogether wonderful that Robert van Rensselaer's
frown half melted, in spite of himself, as he walked into the room. The
frown did not go so fast, however, that she failed to note it.

"What's the matter?" she cried.

And his frown came back again. "Mary," he said abruptly, "we've got to
part."

The girl gave a start. "What do you mean?" she cried.

"I mean just what I say," he answered. "We've got to part." And then
seeing the ghastly pallor that came over her, he drew her to him and
went and sat down on the sofa. "Listen to me, Mary," he said more
gently; "you're a good girl, and I have no fear to tell you the whole
truth. I know that you have nothing to do with it; but I've gotten into
serious trouble, and there is only one way in the world to save myself."

"What do you mean, Jim?" she panted. (Jim was the name she had been
taught to call him.)

"Mary," said he, "you know that I'm a married man, don't you?"

"Yes," she said, "but what--"

"And that I'm a very rich man? Well, Mrs. Lynch has set to work to
blackmail me."

The girl shrunk back. "You--what!" she panted.

"It's true," said he; "I've had to pay her several thousand dollars
already."

"Good heavens!" cried the girl. "It can't be so!"

"It is," replied he. "And it means only one thing,--that we've got to
part forever."




XXVIII


Mary Harrison was reeling like a drunken person; she clutched at a
chair. "Jim," she gasped, "what's to become of me?"

"You know that I'll always see that you are taken care of," he began.

"I don't--I don't mean that," she cried. "But, oh--I love you--I can't
do without you! Where in Heaven's name am I to go?" and she flung
herself upon him with a passionate cry. "What am I to do?" she cried,
again and again. "How can I bear it?"

He strove to calm her. "Listen," he whispered, "don't take it so hard.
Perhaps you may forget me--please don't act like that."

She was shuddering convulsively. "No, no!" she cried. "It would kill
me--it would!" And then suddenly she leapt to her feet, her eyes
blazing. "I'll kill that woman!" she panted. "That's what I'll do!"

The man drew her to him again, striving to calm her. "No, no, Mary," he
said. "That will only make it worse for me. If you love me, you must
give me up. That is the only way."

She sat there, white and trembling, moaning to herself. She smoothed the
beautiful hair back from her forehead, and sat staring in front of her
with a dazed expression.

"Give you up!" she whispered hoarsely. "Give you up!"

Her companion felt extremely uncomfortable; naturally, a good-hearted
man does not like to make a woman suffer, especially a woman whom he
still loves. He had made up his mind, however, and he meant to carry it
through. He let her lean on his bosom and sob away her grief.

"And can't I ever see you--even just a little bit?" she moaned.

"No," he said firmly. "Can you not see, Mary, that there is no place in
the world where I could keep you that that woman could not track me to?
She has found me out and tracked me here already and she could ruin me,
Mary, drive me to kill myself."

The other shuddered. "No," she said, "you must not do that. You are
right, and I must make the sacrifice. I will go--I can bear it, I guess.
But oh, Jim, I never really loved any one but you, and I never shall."

"I shall never forget you," said he. "And I will give you all you need,
Mary,--you won't have to worry about money." But the girl scarcely heard
him; she was not thinking about money.

"And where will you go?" he asked finally.

"I don't know," said she. "I have no home. Where should I go? I suppose
I'll go back where I came from--back to Albany."

Robert van Rensselaer looked at her; the name Albany brought back a
sudden memory to him. "Well, I declare," he said, "you did not tell me
you came from Albany." He hesitated a moment and then went on, "Perhaps,
maybe, you know a girl there--But I don't know her name," he added, with
a slight laugh.

"Then I'm afraid I couldn't tell you," said the other, answering his
smile. "But I knew very few people there. I never knew any one at all
until after my mother went away some years ago."

"Went away?" asked the other. "I thought you said she died."

"She must have died, for she was very ill," said the girl. "But I don't
know what became of her--she never came back."

The man was gazing at her in surprise. "Never came back?" he echoed; and
then he added, "What was your mother's name?"

"Helen," said she; and he sunk back.

"Ah, it was an awful thing," went on the girl, her voice trembling.
"Poor, dear mother, how hard she worked to take care of me--and how good
she was! She worked herself to death, Jim, that's the truth."

"What was the matter with her?"

"She had consumption," said the girl, and she saw him start. "What's the
matter?" she asked.

"Nothing," said he, "that is--it's just a queer coincidence; but what
was your father's name?"

"I never knew anything about my father," said the girl. "Mother never
told me; but I always suspected that he had not married her--that is--"

She stopped again, for his manner was strange; then, however, she went
on. "I think he was rich," she said, "and very handsome and good. She
gave me a locket with his picture that she said only he would have the
key to open; she had lost the one he gave her."

And again she stopped; a ghastly, ashen pallor had come over the face of
Robert van Rensselaer; he leaned close to her, his eyes, his whole face,
looming large with horror. His hand shook like an autumn leaf as he
stretched it out to her. "A locket! a locket!" he gasped. "My God! Have
you got it?"

"Yes," cried the girl, in astonishment, and she went to the bureau. She
held it to him as he ran toward her, and he took one glance at it and
staggered back like a man struck to the heart with a knife. He gave one
wild, horrible cry, and clutched his hands to his head, and reeled, and
would have fallen.

But Mary had sprung to him in terror. "Jim! Jim!" she cried, "what is
it?" She would have caught him, but he shrunk from her touch as from a
wild beast. "No! no!" he screamed, and crouched in the corner with eyes
of dreadful fear. "No! go back!"

"But, Jim," cried the girl, "what is it? What is the matter?"

The man had sunk down on his knees, shaking convulsively. "O my God!" he
was gasping, "O my God!"

Mary sprang to him again, and flung her arms about him. "Jim! Jim!" she
cried hysterically, "you must tell me what it is--you must--you must!
Do you know who my father was?"

"Yes," he gasped, writhing, "I know--I know!"

"And who was he? Who? Tell me!"

He choked and caught his breath again; but he could not say the words.
As he felt the warmth of her breath and the pressure of her arms about
him, it sent a sudden shudder through his frame, and he flung her away
with a force that sent her reeling across the floor. Then he staggered
to his feet, and with a moan he rushed to the door. He caught one
glimpse of the girl's face, and then fled madly down the steps.

Outside his cab was waiting. He did not see it, and started away; but
the driver shouted to him, and that brought him to his senses for an
instant. He leaped in.

"Drive! drive!" he panted.

"Where to?" asked the man.

"Anywhere," he screamed. "Drive!"

And so they whirled away down the street, van Rensselaer crouching in a
corner, writhing and twisting his hands together.

There was a thought that came over him every few seconds like a spasm
and made him cry out. He could not bear it very long; he shouted to the
driver to stop, and sprang out, and flung him some money. They were in a
deserted portion of the park, and he turned and fled away into the
darkness.




XXIX


And meanwhile Mary was left alone in the ghastly silence of the room,
crouching in the corner like a hunted animal. Her face was ashen, and
her eyes distended; in her quivering hands she clutched the locket.

She was staring at it and staring at it, in terror, powerless to move.
She wished to open it; but ten minutes must have gone before she rose
and groped her way across the room. She found a chisel and knelt down
upon the floor, and worked in frenzied fear to force it. Her hands were
like a drunkard's, and she cut herself again and again; but then
suddenly the cover flew off, and she pounced upon it.

One glance she took; and then it fell to the ground from her helpless
grasp, and she staggered backward, with a shuddering moan, against the
wall. She swayed there an instant, and then like a flash she turned and
fled across the room. She fumbled for an instant in a drawer of the
desk; then a pistol shot rang out, and she sunk down in a quivering heap
upon the floor, her brains spattered out upon the carpet.




XXX


Wall Street was crowded long before nine o'clock that Thursday morning
with a jostling, shouting mob of men; the gallery of the exchange was
packed; the curb outside was thronged. The London quotations were on
every tongue, and suspense and terror on every face, in the very air.
All knew that the crisis of the combat had come, that one way or other
all would now soon be known.

Through this crowd Robert van Rensselaer pushed his way. Nobody heeded
him, nobody knew him; his clothing was soiled and muddy, his hat broken
and jammed down upon his head. His face was inflamed, his eyes
blood-shot, and he reeled and groped about him as he walked. He was
drunk.

He made his way up to his office, staggered in, and sunk into a chair.
"Get me some whiskey," he panted to his secretary. "Hurry up!"

The latter was staring at him in amazement. "Some whiskey!" he shouted
again. "Don't you hear? And shut the door, and don't let any one come in
here. Quick!"

The man turned and vanished, and van Rensselaer sat in the chair,
staring in front of him with his wild eyes. He had made his way down
town like a man in a dream; one idea had possessed him and driven
him--he muttered it to himself as he walked: "Wall Street! Wall Street!
Ten o'clock!"

Now he turned suddenly and looked at the ticker, then rose and staggered
to it and leaned there, swaying. He read the early reports, and then
glanced at the clock. It was ten minutes to ten.

"Ah!" he panted. "Safe!"

The secretary returned, and the other seized the bottle he brought and
drank from it. Then he said: "I wrote Jones and Co. yesterday to turn
three millions over to my brokers. See that it's done. And tell the
brokers to sell T. & S., and sell it just as fast as they can, until
it's every cent gone. And then you come back here, and don't let any one
into this room--not a soul, mind you, not a soul. Do you understand?"

"I understand," said the man, and went away, lost in wonder. The first
thing he did was to order his own broker to cover some T. & S. of his
own; the secretary had never seen van Rensselaer lose his nerve before.

And meanwhile van Rensselaer was kneading his hands and muttering, his
eyes fixed upon the creeping clock, and the bottle of liquor on the
table by his side. So the minutes passed by, and the hands passed the
stroke of ten.




XXXI


It was worth going down into that seething crowd to see the floor of the
exchange at that moment. A thousand men were swaying about one spot of
it, and at the instant of ten they broke into a deafening chorus of
yells.

Transatlantic and Suburban! Transatlantic and Suburban! There was no
other stock thought of that day--there were many of the smaller firms
that had closed their doors, not daring to do business on such a market.
And those who hung over the ticker read nothing but T. &
S.,--157-1/4--157-1/2--157-3/8,--and so on and on. The fluctuating of T.
& S. was the swaying of two monsters that wrestled in a death embrace;
and van Rensselaer, as he fed his eyes upon it, was himself a free man
once more. Horror haunted him no longer; the excitement drove the fumes
of the liquor from his brain, and he was drunk, but with the battle
ecstasy. To him every figure meant a blow, as with a war-axe, at foes of
his; he could fancy that this stroke was his father's, and that his own,
and that Shrike's, and so on. He clenched his hands and muttered
swiftly, as one watching a fight: "Give it to them! Down with them! Down
with them!" And meanwhile the ticker raced on: T. & S. 100--157-1/2; T.
& S. 500--157-5/8; T. & S. 3000--157-3/8; T. & S. 10,000--157-1/4; and
so almost without a pause. Down below in the street shrieked a frantic
mob; it was like looking into a huge well packed full of writhing
bodies.

So half an hour crept by, and T. & S. still stood the onslaught; van
Rensselaer had gotten help, but evidently so had the syndicate. It was
as if Wall Street had divided into two armies, and vowed no quarter. And
they fought on; the time crept along to 10.45; T. & S. was moving at
last--it was 157-3/4, the highest mark of the day! Van Rensselaer took
another great gulp of the liquor and pounded his bell.

"Listen to me," he said swiftly to the breathless clerk. "The crisis has
come--go outside as fast as you can and tell somebody that the Arkansas
legislature has doubled the freight rates on the T. & S. There'll be a
dozen people doing the same. And then wait five minutes--not a second
more, do you hear? and let it out that I am breaking T. & S., and that
the Governor's with me, and Shrike, and the rest of them."

The man nodded and disappeared, and van Rensselaer turned once more to
the ticker. There was a moment's pause, and he went to the window and
stared out. Then it began again--T. & S. still holding. Van Rensselaer
knew that the ticker was some minutes behind the market, and he cursed
with impatience. Then he took a pencil and began figuring, as well as he
could, with his trembling hands.

He had put twenty-seven million dollars into this thing; he had bought
the margins of something like a million and three-quarters shares. That
was more shares than were in existence, actually; but under Wall
Street's systems of speculating that is a common enough state of
affairs. The fact that impressed him was that every point that T. & S.
went down he stood to win a million and three-quarters of dollars from
the men he had been fighting. And if instead it went up, and stayed up
the time limit, he owed the same sum instead. And then suddenly the
ticker clicked again; it was five minutes of eleven, and T. & S. still
holding,--157-5/8--157-3/8--157-1/2. He could bear the thing no more; he
drained the bottle and sprang out of the door. In a few moments more he
was on the street.




XXXII


There were thousands of men flying this way and that, wild-eyed and
shrieking. Van Rensselaer caught a phrase here and there,--"freight
rates--ruin them--the van Rensselaers--Shrike." And meanwhile he was
hurrying on his way to the board-room. He was a member and was admitted
to the bedlam, to the edge of that writhing, hysterical mass of men who
were crushing each other, breathless in their efforts to reach the
trading-post. Van Rensselaer gazed at the figure of the stock--it was
157! He heard the same exclamations here that he had heard
outside,--"freight rates--the van Rensselaers,"--and all the rest; and
then suddenly he saw near him a huge ox of a man, waving a paper in one
hand and bellowing in a voice that rang above the whole uproar. It was
one of van Rensselaer's own brokers, the best of them; and as van
Rensselaer heard him his heart stood still. The moment had come!

"I offer twenty thousand three-day sellers! T. & S. twenty
thousand!--one fifty-seven! one fifty-seven! Twenty thousand three-day
sellers--one fifty-six and seven-eighths! one fifty-six and
three-quarters!"

And then again the roar swelled up and drowned him. Men were screaming
from a hundred places: "One thousand at one fifty-six and a half!
Thirty-five hundred at one fifty-six! one fifty-six! one fifty-five and
a half!"

And van Rensselaer, mad, drunk, and blind with passion, shook his hands
in the air and screamed in frenzy, "Down! down with them! Down! Jump on
them! Pound them! _Go on! go on!_" He knew now that it was victory; he
could feel it in the air--the panic, the wild, raging, mad tornado that
uproots all things on its way. It had begun--it had begun! There were no
more takers--the enemy was retreating--the rout was on! And so he yelled
and laughed in delirium; and the crowd, crushed tightly about the post,
went mad likewise, with terror or joy, as the case might be. There were
men there who were losing a million with every point--the millions that
van Rensselaer was winning. And they saw defeat and ruin glaring at them
with fiery eyes. So they raged and screamed for some one to buy T. &
S.--to buy it at one fifty-six! to buy it at one fifty-five! to buy it
at one fifty-three! And there was no longer any one to buy it at any
price.

So it was that the hurricane burst, in all its fury; it was not a panic,
it was chaos and destruction let loose. The stock was "turned" at last;
its supporters beaten; and the public, the great terror-stricken public,
plunged in to overwhelm it. The price went no longer by fractions, no
longer even by points; it went by three points, by five points, by ten
points. Its speed was regulated by nothing but the time it took
electricity to spread the panic through the whole country, for messages
to come in bidding brokers to sell at any price. And in the meantime,
of course, there stood van Rensselaer's bull-voiced agent hammering it
down by five and by ten points at a bound with his twenty thousand
shares to sell.

The mad frenzy had gone on until van Rensselaer could no longer bear the
strain, and backed out of the crowd and sat down and laughed and sobbed
like an overwrought child. It was half an hour before he could command
himself again; and then T. & S. was at seventy-six, and finding takers
at last! That meant that the "shorts" were "covering," buying the stock
they needed, and reaping their rewards; and so the awful panic at last
was coming to an end. Van Rensselaer had estimated the true value of T.
& S. at ninety, and so he sought out his brokers and bade them buy all
there was to be had.




XXXIII


Our hero made his way out of the crush, jostling past men who were
crying and men who were cursing, men who were tearing their hair and men
who were shaking their fists at the sky--all of them men who had lost
all they owned in the world and saw ruin and starvation ahead of them.
It was a fearful, a hellish scene; but van Rensselaer did not heed it,
he had emotions enough of his own. They were emotions not easy to
describe--emotions of a man who has made seventy or eighty dollars a
share upon a million or two of shares, and who has been made the
wealthiest man in New York in half an hour. Van Rensselaer the elder
came hobbling into the office a few moments later and flung his arms
about his son. "Robbie!" he gasped, "Robbie!" and could say no more, for
he was choking. Shrike and the other three were close behind him, and
the five gentlemen went beside themselves with rejoicing--now singing,
now laughing, now dancing about, now falling on each other's necks.

I have said five; for van Rensselaer the younger, strange to say, joined
them but halfway. Now he would sit back in the chair and laugh
nervously, while his father told over the unthinkable sums he had
gained, and his heart throbbed with exultation; but then a few seconds
later he would be sitting staring in front of him, his quivering hands
wandering aimlessly about. "Poor Robbie!" said the fond father; "it's
easy to see he's done up. Here, have a drop." He was surprised to see
Robbie gulp down the contents of a flask at one draught.

For now the strain was over, the dreadful pressure gone; and Robert van
Rensselaer's nervousness was suddenly coming back. While the others were
still at the stage where it was possible for them to embrace each other,
he arose and excused himself and went out.

He went down to the street, where men were still crying aloud in their
grief, and staggered away. He went on aimlessly, bending his brows and
clenching his hands, and wrestling in his soul to keep before him the
fact that he was the richest man in New York. But he could not do it;
and then suddenly, with a wild, desperate resolve, he sprang into a cab
and shouted an address.

He was at the river-side in a few minutes, and there lay the _Comet_. It
was a wild day on the river; a gale had been raging, and the waves were
high even in the bay; but Robert van Rensselaer thought nothing of that
as he rushed on board and called for the captain. "Steam up!" he
shouted. "Put off the instant you are able."

The captain stared at him in consternation. "To go where?" he cried.

"To put to sea," answered the other.

"But the storm! Surely--"

"Curse the storm!" the man yelled. "Put to sea, I tell you, and get me
out of this town. Do you understand? Why don't you start?"

"But half the crew is away, Mr. van Rensselaer; and provisions--"

"I told you to get ready!" yelled Robbie. "Get ready! Do as I tell you,
and don't argue with me. Get on board what you can, only leave this
place the first instant you have steam up. Now go on!"

And he turned and staggered into the cabin. While men rushed about on
the deck, and the fires burned bright below, he sat with another bottle
of liquor before him; and when at last the _Comet_ slipped away from her
dock, he was sunk against the table in a drunken stupor.




XXXIV


And he lay there, knowing nothing, while the engines throbbed and the
vessel ploughed its way down the stormy bay. It was only when she
plunged out into the open sea, and the giant waves smote upon her, that
at least he gazed up again, brought to himself by a lurch of the vessel
that flung him to the floor.

He staggered to his feet, clinging to the table. Everything was reeling
about him; the yacht stood nearly upon her beam-ends as she climbed on
the waves. The din of the sea was deafening, indescribable; for a moment
the man knew not where he was.

Then the captain entered. "We are off, sir," he said grimly; "where do
you wish to go?"

"I don't care," answered the other. "Go where you please--only let me
alone."

"All right, sir," said the captain. "We shall keep on to the northeast,
it is safest to face the storm. We shall be off the banks by to-morrow
morning."

With those words he turned and left, shaking his head. He had heard that
the owner of the _Comet_ had made millions in Wall Street that day; but
this looked as if he must have lost them.

Meanwhile van Rensselaer crouched by the table, alone with his horror.

The afternoon sped on, the sun sank, and darkness came, and with it a
new fury to the storm. All the while he was either crouching in a chair
and shuddering, or rolling about the cabin floor in his stupor. All
through the night he knew nothing of what was going on; nothing of the
seething billows that swept past them, tossing the yacht high up on
their mountain crests, or crashing down upon her bow with deadly shock;
nothing of the captain's vigil and fear, of the toil of the four men at
the wheel who fought to hold the yacht's prow against the storm.

He heeded nothing at all until there came all at once a shock, and a
grinding noise of something that tore through the vessel's heart. Then
he gazed up stupidly, feeling that her motion had changed, that she was
rolling from side to side, that the blows of the waves were fiercer.

Then the cabin door burst suddenly open, and the captain rushed in.
"We've broke our shaft!" he panted. "The engines are wrecked!"

Van Rensselaer gazed at him out of his dull eyes. "Hey?" he asked.

"We've broke our shaft!" roared the other, above the noise of the storm.

"Well, what of that?" demanded van Rensselaer. "What do I care?"

"We are helpless!" yelled the captain, "Helpless! Don't you
understand?--we are adrift--we will go on the rocks!"

Van Rensselaer stood clinging to the table, staring; he was repeating
the words, half to himself, as if the meaning of them were not yet clear
in his clouded brain. "Helpless! adrift! go on the rocks!" And then,
suddenly seeing the wild look in the captain's eyes, he sprang at him,
screaming: "We don't want to go on the rocks! No; you are mad! Do
something! Stop her!"

The other saw that he was drunk; but fear was sobering van Rensselaer
fast, as excitement had done once before. "Where are we?" he cried.
"Where are we?"

An awful blow shook the vessel; she reeled and staggered, and the two
waited in fright; then, as she righted herself, the captain answered:
"We are off the coast of Maine--about fifty miles off. But we are
drifting; and we can do nothing at all. If help does not come, we are
lost."

"Help must come!" screamed van Rensselaer. He understood clearly at
last. "You are crazy! It cannot be!"

And he started toward the companionway, the captain at his side. As he
tried to open the door, however, he stooped, appalled at the wildness of
the night. It was black outside; but the wind was a fierce living thing
that smote him in the face, and the hissing spray stung like hail. Van
Rensselaer stared out only long enough to see a rocket start out from
the deck and cleave its way into the sky, and then he reeled back into
the cabin.

The man was now aware of his situation, and every emotion was gone but
terror. He staggered about, flung this way and that with the tossing of
the yacht, raising his clenched hands in the air, and screaming in
frantic fear: "My God, my God! It can't be! It's a lie! Save us! What
shall we do?"--and so on, until the captain turned in sheer disgust and
went back to the deck and his duty.

But that van Rensselaer did not even know--he raced on back and forth,
crazed and raving. All was dead in him now but the wild beast--if,
indeed, there had ever been anything else alive in him. He wanted to
live--he wanted to get on the land--he was worth a hundred million
dollars--he--_he!_ and was he to be drowned like a prisoned rat in a
cage? His cries rang above all the storm; he called on God--he wept--he
prayed--he cursed; and all the while the mad storm roared on, howling
outside like some savage beast that was fighting to get at him, and
driving the little vessel on before it to its doom. There was no one to
hear him, the prisoned rat in the cage, though he foamed at the mouth in
his frenzy.




XXXV


So an hour or two went by; up above the dawn broke and the daylight
came. Van Rensselaer was still howling, though so weak that he could
scarcely stagger, when the cabin door was flung wide again, and the
captain, white, and with set lips, came in. "It is all over, sir," he
said. "We are lost."

The owner's eyes were glaring like a maniac's. "What do you mean?" he
shrieked.

"Come up and see," was the reply, and van Rensselaer rushed blindly to
the deck. Clinging to the companionway door, he stared about him, dazed
at first, and realizing nothing but his own horror. A mad chaos was
about him; the yacht was like a bubble tossed about by the gigantic
seas; the waves were like mountains around her. Down into a great valley
she sank, down--down--plunging, and van Rensselaer gasped in fear; and
then a great rolling mountain came sweeping down over her, and up she
rose--higher and higher--to the very crest, and sped along with the
speed of an express train, the mad waters seething and hissing and
roaring and thundering around her.

From the mountain top van Rensselaer gazed about him--and his cries died
in his throat. Not half a mile away, right upon them, as it looked, was
the shore--the wild, lonely, horrible shore--the shore with the jagged
rocks and the merciless iron cliffs--and destruction, imminent and
inevitable!

The sight took the last atom of the soul out of van Rensselaer. He
whimpered, he wailed, he would have fallen down upon the deck and
grovelled but that instinct made him cling to his support. To stand
there alive and safe, and be swept thus to death, foot by foot! To be
helpless in the grip of these grim, relentless forces; it was too much,
it was too much! It made him hysterical, it turned him into a beast,
into a fool. He screamed, he laughed, he sobbed; but the words he spoke
no longer had meaning.

His eyes were fixed upon the black rocks before them; as they came
nearer he heard the sounds made by the mountains of water hurled against
them,--a sound far-reaching, all-pervading, elemental, cosmic. Only once
he turned elsewhere, to see the crew flinging out their anchors in a
last vain hope; to see the yacht whirl round as they caught, to see the
waves lift her up, and sweep her on, and snap the cables like so many
threads.

Then again he perceived that the crew was trying to get out one of the
boats; and he bounded to the spot, and waited. He did not help, he clung
to the davits. But the instant the boat touched the water, he struck one
of the men out of the way and leaped in. Several followed, and there was
a cry, "Enough!" and they pushed off, and were whirled away from the
yacht. An instant later a breaking wave struck them a glancing blow,
and over they went.

Van Rensselaer came to the surface, strangling and gasping, still in his
frenzy of fear. The boat was near, and he struck out and caught it.
There was another man close to him, a sailor, stretching out his hands
to him; as the waves tossed them about he touched van Rensselaer's foot
and gripped it. The other kicked at him madly, in frantic rage--kicked
him off, and kicked him down. So he clung alone to the storm-tossed
life-boat.

It was a fearful struggle: the waves choked him, stunned him, half
drowned him; but he hung like mad, and fought to keep his head above the
water, while the sea was sweeping him nearer and nearer to the iron
shore. He was staring at it wildly, a monstrous enemy with open mouth,
and huge jagged teeth that gaped at him. They were looming high above
him now; the roaring of the breakers swelled in his ears, in his soul,
dazing him, appalling him, poor shivering mite of life that he was. And
then suddenly he felt himself sinking--downward, deep down in a valley;
he felt himself tossed and rocked, swaying as if in a tree-top; and then
upwards he started--higher--higher--right to the boiling crest, the
hovering, poising crest. He screamed, he writhed, it was like some
hideous nightmare, terrifying to the soul. But the wave seized him--he
felt it seize him; and it started--slowly--then faster, then faster
yet--with the speed of a cannon ball--and hurled him, smote him, upon
the jagged rocks. It battered his face, it broke his limbs, it crushed
his skull like an egg-shell; and so the last spark of his hungry life
went out of him.




XXXVI


I share in Ruskin's distrust of the "pathetic fallacy"; and I have no
intention of implying that the waves had any sentiments whatever in
connection with Robert van Rensselaer. It was purely an accident that
they kept him in their grasp, and beat him against the cliff all day;
that one by one they rushed up to seize him, and spent all their force
in hurling him, in pounding him, until he had lost all semblance of a
man; it was not until night, and when the wind died out, that they
washed him on down the shore, and sought out a little cove and bore him
to the sandy edge.

It was a still spot; there was no voice but the waves' voice, and all
night long they called to each other on the beach, and tossed the body
back and forth in the silver moonlight. When the morning broke it was
swollen and purple, and it lay half hidden in the sand.

The sun came up and still it was there, unheeded save by innumerable
small creatures that walked awkwardly, bearing long weapons in the air.
One of them soon climbed upon the face and fastened its claws in the
lips; and others came quickly, for it was choice prey. Was it not true
that for twoscore years and more the earth had been searched for things
rare and precious enough to help make up the body of Robert van
Rensselaer? Think of the hogs-heads of rare wines that had been poured
into it! Of the boxes of priceless cigars that had flavored it! Of the
terrapin, and the venison, and the ducks--the strangely spiced
sauces--the infinity of sweetmeats--the pink satin menus, full of
elegant French names! Had not thousands of men labored daily to fetch
and prepare these things, to serve them upon crystal and silver before
that precious body--and to clothe it and to house it, and to smooth all
its paths through the world? And now it lay at last upon the sand, to
be devoured by a swarm of hungry crabs!

So another day came, and in the afternoon two fishing boats rowed by,
and one of the fishermen espied the body. He landed with his companion,
shouting to the other boat that there must have been a wreck, and to go
on up the shore and look for it.

Then he went toward the body, or what there was of it. The clothing was
still intact, and so he searched in the pockets, pulling out first of
all a marvellous gold watch that had cost eighteen hundred dollars in
Geneva. That interested him, of course, and he went on in haste, and
found a wallet, with plenty of money, and with some cards in it. They
were blurred, but one could still make out the name on them, and the
fisherman gave a cry, "Good God! this says Robert van Rensselaer!"

"Who's Robert van Rensselaer?" demanded the other, wonderingly.

"You never heard of him? Why, he's the richest man in the country."

The speaker was gazing down, awe-stricken, at the body; but his
companion merely moved away a little. "He smells like the devil,
anyhow," said he.




XXXVII


It was not long before the other boat came back to tell of the wreck of
the _Comet_, and of the finding of several more bodies. And so in a few
hours the news reached New York, causing another panic in Wall Street,
and dreadful grief in the bereaved family of the unfortunate
millionnaire. Before night the newspapers reported that the remains
(their own phrase!) of Robert van Rensselaer were on their way to the
city by special train.

They were received in state, of course; and two days later there was a
most solemn and impressive funeral, many columns of description of which
I might quote, were it not that this story is too long already. Suffice
it to say that the ceremony was held in the great Fifth Avenue Church,
and that it was attended by all the wealth and fashion of our
metropolis; and that the Reverend Doctor Lettuce Spray preached the
most eloquent of all his sermons upon the text, "Blessed are the
millionnaires, for they have inherited the earth, and you can't get it
away from them."




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

  Text in italics is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Captain of Industry, by Upton Sinclair

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY ***

***** This file should be named 39516.txt or 39516.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/5/1/39516/

Produced by David E. Brown, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
