The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Church In Politics--Americans Beware!, by
M. M. Mangasarian

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Church In Politics--Americans Beware!

Author: M. M. Mangasarian

Release Date: May 5, 2012 [EBook #39622]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHURCH IN POLITICS ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Paula Franzini and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  Speak without being afraid that the wind will carry
  away your words and sow them in fresh soils.
                                           --_Zola._


          The Church in Politics--
                       Americans, Beware!


             A Lecture Delivered Before
             the Independent Religious
             Society, Orchestra Hall,
             Chicago, Sunday at 11 A. M.

                   [Decoration]


       By
  M. M. MANGASARIAN




           _The mass of the law-abiding and respectable
           citizens is virtually agnostic. Where its
           agnosticism is not reasoned out, it is
           habitual and unconcerned. The orderly,
           honest, duty-doing people who never think
           about religion one way or the other form by
           far the largest class in the community._

                           --_David Christy Murray._




  The Church in Politics--
                 Americans, Beware!


In his letter on religion in politics, President Roosevelt takes the
position, I believe, that we may look forward to the day when a
Catholic, for instance, may be nominated and elected to the presidency
of the United States of America. He also intimates that to refuse to
vote for a Catholic on account of his religion would be bigotry! The
Lutheran, Baptist and Presbyterian bodies have, if I am not mistaken,
officially protested against the president's pronouncement. These
Protestant churches declare that it is not fair to call them bigots for
objecting to a Catholic for president.

Speaking only in the capacity of a private citizen, it is my opinion
that, according to the Constitution, a Catholic is not eligible to be a
candidate for president. Neither is a sincere and consistent Christian
of any other denomination. Nor is a believing Jew. The Constitution
explicitly ignores the religious interests of the nation; it does not
even so much as mention the name of God. Had the document been created
by infidels it could not have been more indifferent to the subject of
church or religion. The Constitution is a downright secular instrument,
having as its end one, and only one, object--the rights of man. But the
supreme end of the church is God, not man; or man for God. There is
then, between the church and the Constitution, an irreconcilable
difference. It is because of this that the United Presbyterians, for
instance, who have a membership of about a million, refuse even to take
part in elections, much less to accept office under a government that
deliberately ignores the Christian religion, as well as every other
religion. I submit that the United Presbyterians are quite consistent,
and that they deserve the respect of all who hold that courage and
sincerity are better than ambiguity and inconsistency. A Christian,
therefore, can accept a nomination to the presidency, for instance, only
by either stultifying himself and belittling his church, or by
disregarding the Constitution, its spirit as well as its letter.

Nor would it be "bigotry" to contend that a Protestant or a Catholic
candidate, to whom God is first and country second, should under no
circumstances be voted into presidential power and influence. Even as it
would not be an act of intolerance to deny the presidency of this
country to a foreign-born citizen, it would not be intolerant to deny it
to Catholics, for example. They are simply not eligible. Both Protestant
and Catholic ought to say, when invited to the office, that they can not
conscientiously swear to maintain a Constitution which fails in its
duties to the Creator, and that if elected they will obey God rather
than the Constitution, for a Christian can not serve two masters,
neither can he be a Christian and not a Christian at the same time. I am
going to quote a page from the history of modern France, to show that
that is precisely what the Catholic, at least, does when he comes into
power--he obeys God, that is to say, the church, and forgets all about
the Constitution, that is to say, the rights of man.

France has been a turbulent country. Its political weather has been more
frequently stormy than fair. It makes one nervous, almost, to read the
history of France--it is so sensational. Its pages are lit up with the
lightning. It is a sad and shocking story of intrigues, plots,
conspiracies, treason, machination, finesse,--of manoeuvre and scandal,
of sudden strokes and startling surprises, which have alternately cooled
and heated the brain of the nation, and which have cultivated in the
people the unhealthy craving for excitement.

Let it be admitted that the temperament of the people, its irritability
or impetuosity, is in a measure responsible for this. But this in itself
is not enough to explain the terrible punishments and misfortunes which
have fallen upon that nation. You are all familiar with the remark of
one of her great statesmen, Gambetta: "The enemy, it is clericalism."

Another statesman, Paul Bert, said: "It is not our domestic discords;
it is not England; nor even the trained German legions, that constitute
the greatest menace to Frenchmen and the prosperity of France, still
bleeding from her wounds, _but the man in black_." Did these statesmen
speak the truth? We shall ask history to answer the question. This much,
however, we can say without consulting history, that today the French
republic and the Catholic church are at swords' points. After trying to
pull together, church and state have separated--are completely divorced,
and each suspects and fears the other. Let us try to explain the
strained relations between Rome and the French republic by a reference
to the events in France from the time of the second republic to the
Franco-Prussian war.

In 1848, after many attempts to maintain the monarchy, France returned
to the republican form of government. The Catholic church, always
powerful in the country, and having great interests at stake, to the
surprise of the nation, welcomed the republic with enthusiasm. The
Archbishop of Cambrai, the bishops of Gap, of Chalons, of Nancy, and the
Catholic periodicals, _l'Univers_, the _Moniteur_, etc., declared that
the republican form of government was of divine origin, and that there
were no other three words in all the world more sacred than the words
"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity." In all the churches high mass was
celebrated, and a _Te Deum_ chanted in honor of the new regime. "There
are no more devoted and sincere republicans in France than the
Catholics," wrote Veuillot in _l'Univers_, the organ of the church. In
asking you to keep this in mind, I also request you to note that the
Catholic church in America seems to be today just as devoted to the
American republic as the French Catholics professed to be to the
republic of 1848. But let us not forget that this same clergy, during
the reign of the first Napoleon, introduced the following questions and
answers into every church catechism in use throughout the land:

_Question:_ Why are we under obligations to our emperor?

_Answer:_ Because, in the first place, God, who creates empires and
distributes them according to his pleasure, in blessing our emperor,
both in peace and war, has set him over us as our sovereign, and has
made him the image of himself upon the earth. To honor and serve the
emperor is then to honor and serve God.

_Question:_ Are there not special reasons why we are most profoundly
indebted to Napoleon the First, our emperor?

_Answer:_ Yes. For in difficult circumstances, he is the man whom God
has raised up to re-establish the public worship of the holy religion of
our fathers, and to be our protector.... He has become the anointed of
the Lord by the consecration of the pope, the head of the Church
Universal.

_Question:_ What shall be thought of those who fail in their respect to
our emperor?

_Answer:_ According to the Apostle Paul, those who resist the appointed
powers shall receive eternal damnation to their souls.[A]

    [A] _Catechisme a L'Usage de Tantes Les Eglises de L'Empire
    Francais._

Of course, when the first Napoleon fell, the Catholic church quickly
withdrew from circulation the catechism from which I have been quoting.
It was after considerable effort that I was able to secure a copy of the
work. The infallible church, then, was for Napoleon, heart and soul, as
long as he was in power. Without any conscientious scruples whatever,
the church hailed the tyrant, whose profession was wholesale murder for
his own glory--as the "image of God on earth!" In those days it meant
"damnation" not to accept Napoleon as the anointed of heaven. Such a
guide is the church!

But at last the church professed to be converted to liberty.

Now we are in a position to appreciate the sudden and complete change of
front on the part of the French clergy. From staunch imperialists they
had been converted, judging by their professions, to the principles of
the French revolution. An era of peace and brotherhood seemed to open
before that much troubled country. Priest and magistrate had both buried
the hatchet; church and school would now, after endless disputation,
co-operate in the work of education, and the vicar of Christ and the
president of the republic shall join hands in the service of the people.
The new republic promised all this. The skies were serene and clear, and
the church bells rang in honor of the era that had just dawned.

Having inaugurated the republic, the next business before the country
was the election of a president. The Catholic church, having disarmed
all suspicion and given tangible proofs of its conversion to
republicanism, succeeded in nominating its own candidate to the
presidency. This was Louis Napoleon, the nephew of the great Napoleon.
To elect its nominee, the church engaged in a most active campaign;
sermons were delivered in every church; a house to house canvass was
undertaken, and even the confessional was utilized to secure votes for
"the Star of France," as they called Napoleon.

On election day, each priest led his parishioners to the voting booth
and saw that the ballots were properly deposited. The result was that
Louis Napoleon was elected by 5,534,520 votes, out of a total of
7,426,252 votes cast. That is to say, he had a majority of nearly three
millions.

What made Louis Napoleon a favorite with the church? To answer that
question we shall have to step onto the stage and peep behind the
scenes. But to see what was transpiring behind the scenes in France we
shall have to go to Rome.

About the time we are now speaking of, the papal states in Italy were up
in arms against the pope, who at this time still enjoyed his temporal
power. He was still both priest and king. He had his own soldiers, his
own generals, his cannons, guns and powder. He went to war; collected
taxes, administered the courts, and possessed all the prerogatives of a
secular sovereign. He was, of course, besides all this, also the vicar
of Christ on earth. Unfortunately, like any other sovereign of those
days, the pope oppressed his subjects, and it was to put an end to their
grievances that the Italian states revolted, and made an attempt to
establish a republic in Rome. No doubt our own example in this country,
as well as that of the French, encouraged the Italians in their efforts
to free themselves from oppression. The republican movement spread
rapidly--like the rushing waters of a reservoir that had at last broken
loose. The whole peninsula was athrill with new aspirations. The
Italians remembered the days of their pagan ancestors and took heart.
The charmed and charming words, "Liberty! Constitution!" were upon every
lip. Soon the heavens would beam with the radiant star of Garibaldi. The
movement was so irresistible that the pope, Pius IX, was compelled to
make terms with the leaders. It was agreed that, henceforth, the
country, instead of being governed exclusively by the clergy, as
heretofore, should be governed by two chambers, the members to one of
which should be appointed by the pope; the members to the other should
be elected by the people. The two chambers, however, as was to be
expected, could not get along together. The priests were not used to
obeying, they were used to commanding. They obeyed only God. Moreover,
the secular members undertook to interfere in church matters, which the
priests would not tolerate, although they themselves never refrained
from interfering in secular matters. The deliberations became anarchic
in parliament. The priests declared they represented God and could never
be in the wrong. Whoever they may have meant by the word "God," he was
invariably on the side of the priests. This, the other members declared,
was not fair, as it tied up their hands and made them as helpless as the
delegates to a Russian _Douma_ are today. Things went from bad to worse;
murders became daily occurrences. The pope, fearing assassination, fled
from Rome. His departure was hailed with joy. Rome unfurled the
republican flag from the dome of St. Peter's. The pope was a fugitive.
Rome was free.

To crush this republican movement and restore the runaway pope to his
throne, the church needed an agent. The agent must be strong enough to
strangle the Italian republic and to recover for the pope his temporal
power. Spain was too decrepit to be summoned to the task. Austria had
already too much of Italy in her grip; the only nation that could
disinterestedly fight for the pope would be France.

Observe now the double role which the church was playing: In France she
was an ardent republican, in Italy she anathematized the republic as a
blasphemy against God. In France she was ringing bells in honor of the
rights of man, in Rome she was firing shot and shell into the Italian
republicans. In France the republic was of divine origin, in Italy, it
was the work of the devil. Let us state it frankly, the church was a
republican in France, not from love but from policy. History will
confirm our statement.

But we have not yet answered why Louis Napoleon was such a favorite with
the church. On the eve of the elections in France, Napoleon, who was one
of the candidates for the presidency, sent a letter to the _nuncio_ of
the pope in Paris, in which he expressed his personal opinion, an
opinion which at the time looked quite harmless, that, for the peace of
Italy and the prestige of the Catholic world, the temporal power of the
pope should be maintained. Few people were reflective enough to suspect
that there was in those words a pledge on the part of the candidate to
employ, if elected to the presidency, the resources of France in the
service of Rome.

Naturally enough, not long after his election, the church called upon
Napoleon to fulfill his promise. But to make a promise is very much
easier than to fulfill it. How was the president going to persuade the
French to make war upon a sister republic? It was clearly to the
interest of the French to have the republican form of government spread.
But it was to the interest of the church to overthrow the Italian
republic and restore the pope to the vatican. The French must,
therefore, prefer the interest of the pope to the interest of their own
country. Americans beware!

On the 30th of March, 1849, Louis Napoleon succeeded in getting a
favorable vote from the assembly upon the following proposition: "If for
the maintenance of the integrity of the Kingdom of Piedmont, and for the
preservation of the interests and honor of France, the executive power
shall deem it necessary for the enforcement of its negotiations to
occupy temporarily any given point in Italy, the national assembly shall
lend him its cordial and effective support."[B] A short time after,
Napoleon dispatched to Rome a force under the command of Oudinat, with
secret instructions to reseat the pope on his apostolic as well as
temporal throne. On the 30th of April the French republican army opened
fire on the Italian republicans defending Rome. The French were
repulsed. When the news of the disaster to the French forces reached
Paris it threw the country into a state of delirium. Scarcely anybody
not in the conspiracy had suspected that the innocent looking measure
presented to the assembly by the president of the republic really
authorized the declaration of war against Italy; and no one so much as
imagined that "a given point in Italy" meant Rome, or that "the
interests and the honor of France" required the restoration of the
principle of absolutism in Italy. But it was too late; the assembly had
been caught in a trap. The disgrace and the defeat were matters of fact
which could not be undone.

    [B] _L'Eglise et La France._ O. Jouvin, page 22.

A moment ago I called attention to the double role of the church. I now
ask you to see how the church was trying to drag the French nation into
the same insincerity and duplicity. Think of a nation which had created
the Revolution, which had overthrown the monarchy, and had inscribed
upon its banner "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity"--think of such a nation
going to war against one of its neighbors for following its example! The
creators of liberty were urged to become its assassins. Into this
ludicrous, absurd, nay, infamous role, was the French republic dragged
by Napoleon and the power that had made him president of the republic.
Americans beware!

On the 29th of June the French forces made a second attack upon Rome,
putting the republicans to rout and restoring the pope to the vatican,
whence a short time before he had fled to a place of safety. The French
republic has now destroyed the Italian republic. The words, "Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity," shall no longer be heard in Rome. The republican
flag has been taken down from St. Peter's. The pope is king again.
Mazzini, Armellini, Saffi, Garibaldi and their colleagues, become
exiles. France refuses them an asylum. France, the country of the
Revolution, of the rights of man, of the republic with its glorious
motto, "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity"--refuses to shelter the Italian
republicans! It was to the interest of France to give these men the hand
of fellowship; it would have been to the honor and glory of France to
have opened her doors to these deliverers of an oppressed nation, but it
was not to the interest of the church, and the church comes first;
France must be sacrificed to Rome. Americans beware!

The Italian patriots crossed the channel and found in Protestant England
the asylum which the country that had introduced the republic into
modern Europe denied them.

It was then that our great friend, George Jacob Holyoake, opened his
heart and his home to the patriots of Italy. For many years and at
frequent intervals both Mazzini and Garibaldi were his guests, and he
helped to win for them the friendship of generous men who raised the
funds to continue the rebellion, which was ultimately crowned with
success.

              Pioneers! O, Pioneers!

I can not think of these brave men and their work without recalling
Whitman's bugle call:

              Pioneers! O, Pioneers!
      Till with sound of trumpet,
Far, far off the daybreak call--hark, how loud and clear I hear it wind,
Swift! to the head of the army!--swift! spring to your places,
              Pioneers! O, Pioneers!

But let us proceed:

One day, somewhere about 1852, the people of France, when they rose in
the morning, found that their republic had disappeared. Not only was the
Italian republic no more, but the French republic had gone too. The same
power that had driven the republicans out of Rome had driven them out of
France. As if by a sponge, the free institutions of the country and the
constitution, were wiped out by one sweep of the hand. The first places
which, after this _coup d'etat_, Napoleon III visited, were the
churches. He walked up to the altar in each church which he visited on
his triumphal journey through France, and knelt down for prayer and
worship. How did the clergy receive him? What did they say to this
betrayer of the nation, this traitor, who had violated his solemn oath?
Let me reproduce the words of the oath which Napoleon took on the day of
his inauguration as president of the republic:

"In the presence of God and before the people of France, I solemnly
swear to remain faithful to the democratic republic, one and
indivisible, and to fulfill all the duties which the Constitution
imposes upon me."

What did the church say to this man who had trampled the Constitution of
the country under his feet, and had commanded French soldiers to fire
upon Italian republicans in the streets of Rome, and upon French
republicans in the streets of Paris? History has preserved the exact
words of bishops and cardinals addressed to Napoleon, the usurper: "You,
sire, have re-established the principle of authority, as indispensable
to the church as it is to the state." Again, "How can we worthily
express our gratitude to a sovereign who has done so much for religion!"
and the bishop of Grenoble proceeds to enumerate the services of
Napoleon to the church: The restoration of the Pantheon to the church,
which an impious government had converted to secular uses by dedicating
it to the atheist poets and philosophers of France; the creation of a
national fund for the saying of mass for the indigent poor; the
appointment of chaplains on all vessels flying the imperial flag; the
suggestion of a pension for aged priests; the granting of perfect
liberty of action to the ministers of the church, which liberty of
action the church will use to confirm the principle of authority and to
teach the nation submission to the government and its laws. "Behold,"
cries the bishop, after enumerating these benefits, "our reason for the
gratitude we feel." The Cardinal of Bourges, the bishops of Marseilles,
of Frejus, of Aix, of Bordeaux, of Poitiers, and, in fact, of every
important diocese in the country, in the same way praised Napoleon, the
emperor, and declared he was the special messenger of heaven, and the
saviour of Christianity, "whom God will never forsake, because in the
hour when God's vicar on earth was in trouble, he saved him from his
enemies."

They called Napoleon a Constantine, a Charlemagne. And the same clergy
who, a few years ago, had pronounced the words, "Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity," as the holiest in all the world were now busy erasing them
from the public buildings and monuments of the country. If the republic
was after "God's own heart," if the rights of man were first proclaimed
from Calvary, as the clergy declared during the republic, why did they
make almost a saint of the man who restored oppression and absolutism in
France? Were they not sincere when they published in the papers that
there were not in all France more loyal republicans than the Catholics?
The interest of the church required the overthrow of the French
republic, as it did of the Italian, and the interest of the church is
first. Already in France people were displaying banners on which were
inscribed the words, "God save Rome and France." Rome first. Americans
beware!

On the 16th of October, Napoleon entered the palace of the Tuileries as
emperor. The cheers and cries of the populace, congregated in the
gardens and shouting "_Vive l'Empereur_," brought him out upon the
balcony. He stood between King Jerome upon his left, and the Archbishop
of Paris upon his right. On that same day Victor Hugo fled from Paris
for his life. The archbishop in the palace with Napoleon; Victor Hugo in
exile! My countrymen, beware!

Under the Napoleonic regime the schools rapidly passed into the hands of
the clergy. France had labored sincerely and made many sacrifices to
reform the schools and to oust the priest--the priest who had declared
that "the brains of young Frenchmen should be pinched, if necessary, to
make them obedient to the authority of the church." Michelet, the
glorious Michelet, was deposed from his chair in the College of France
and a clerical given his post. The same fate overtook Vacherot and
Renan. No professors in the Sorbonne, or in any institution, who did not
bow to the pope and his creature on the throne of France, were permitted
to teach. Secret orders and religious schools sprang up everywhere like
mushrooms over-night. The emissaries and the missionaries of the faith
became exceedingly busy in the acquisition of property. In a small town,
suddenly, as it were, a few beggarly monks and nuns make their
appearance; they have not where to lay their heads; the community has to
provide them with the necessaries of life. A short time after, this same
religious colony is in possession of the finest establishments in the
town, with long bank accounts to their credit. Wealth flows into their
coffers from rich widows and dying millionaires. Every faithful Catholic
leaves his estate to the parish priest, or to some religious order.
Property accumulates by leaps and jumps. What happens in one town
happens in every other; the country is overrun with the agents of a
foreign power. The church is making hay while the sun shines. As some of
the principles of free government were still in force, even with
Napoleon on the throne, these religious orders were asked to obey the
law and secure a permit before pursuing their vocation. They answered
that the church was above the state, and that they must obey God rather
than men. The emperor advised them, from policy, at least, to apply for
a license, which would certainly be given to them, but it is of no use.
"We are citizens of heaven," declared the monks and priests, "we do not
obey laws, we make them." What! Shall the bride of Christ wait upon the
secular powers for permission to serve God! Abomination! the church that
can elect a president and afterwards elevate him to the throne, can
afford to dispense with the laws as it did with the constitution. Under
the republic it was "Long live France," with the Catholics in power it
is "Long live Rome and France."

Encouraged by the flatteries of the church, Napoleon invited the pope to
Paris to place the crown upon his head, even as a former pope had
crowned his uncle, the first Napoleon, in the church of _Notre Dame_.
The pope was beside himself with joy. The opportunity had come for the
vicar of Christ to ask for greater concessions from France--yes, from
that infidel France, which had converted the Church of St. Genevieve
into a Pantheon for atheist poets and philosophers. He sent word to the
emperor that he would be glad to go to Paris to crown the faithful son
of the church, but--but, the other Catholic sovereigns would not like
it. It would make them jealous. Could not, therefore, Napoleon come to
Rome to be crowned in St. Peter's cathedral? But the emperor realized
that if he went to Rome, he would never be thought as big a man as the
first Napoleon, who not only brought the vicar of Christ to Paris, but
who also took the crown from his hands and placed it himself upon his
own head. He wrote an autograph letter, which he sent to the pope by a
clerical messenger of great influence, urging the pope to come to Paris.
Then the pope threw aside the mask and opened his heart to the emperor:
Yes, I will come; you have done much for the church, for our holy
religion, but I will not come until you have altogether purged the
country of every kind of heresy. How could the emperor expect the vicar
of Christ to set his foot upon a soil where Protestant and Jew enjoyed
equal freedom of worship with the Catholic--listen to that; how could
the pope visit a country that allowed freedom of thought and speech, and
of the press; that allowed civil marriages; that did not legally compel
everybody to go to mass on Sundays; that did not punish with pains and
penalties all those who departed from the Catholic faith? Let the
emperor exalt Catholicism over all the sects,--make it _the_ religion of
the state, abolish civil marriages, refuse freedom of assembly to
heretics; and then will the tiara of the pope lend its _eclat_ to the
crown of the emperor. And this is the church that shortly before had
pledged its word of honor to the principles of the republic--"Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity!" See what happens to the republic when the
Catholics are in power. "The lamb and the lion shall lie down together."
Yes? But what will happen to the lamb? The divine church and a merely
human Constitution can co-exist in the same country only on one
condition--the "divine" shall swallow up the human. This is what has
happened in Spain; this is what has happened in Italy; this is what
happened in France under the Catholic regime, and this is, in our
opinion, what will happen in America, should Rome ever come to be
installed at the White House in Washington! "Ah," you say, "the
Catholics will never do in America the things they have done in Europe."
No? Are there two kinds of Catholics? Is the Church of Rome divided? Is
there any reason why they should hesitate to sacrifice America, if need
be, to the "Glory of God," if they did not hesitate to sacrifice France?
At any rate, all one can do is to give warning and to point to the
lesson of history. More than that no one can do, at present, at least.

In this connection, I must make an explanation. I respect the right of
my neighbor to be a Catholic. I am ready to fight for the protection of
his liberties as I am for my own. It gives me real pleasure to admit
also that there are sincere, brave, noble and pure minded men and women
in all the churches. What I am trying to do is to prove, by citing
history, that a supernatural order and a merely human state can not pull
together. The attempt has always resulted disastrously. The church is
supernatural, the state is human. Either the one or the other must rule.
If the church submits to the state, it ceases to be divine, for how can
a divine institution be subject to a man-made state? It would be like
asking God to obey man. Besides, a state is made up of Jews,
unbelievers, heretics, Turks and pagans, as well as of Christians. How
can such a state make laws for Christians?

If, on the other hand, the state would be subject to the church, there
will only be the church. We will in that event have no further use for
freedom, for instance, as we would not know what to do with it, since we
can not use it to criticise or disagree with the church, or help to
build up a new church. When we have God for a teacher, or his vicar on
earth to rule us, what would liberty be good for? It follows then, that
the Catholic church can not consistently be subject to any secular
power, being a "divine" institution. This statement can not be
successfully controverted, and if so, we call the attention of the
president of the United States to it, as well as of all those who
believe that it is possible to have Rome in the White House and be a
republic at the same time.

Nor should people complain because I am so earnest about this matter. If
it is a virtue in the Catholics to labor night and day to convert this
country to their faith, as they say they are doing, why is it improper
in me to try to protect the free institutions of the country? I have
not said anything against Catholicism which Cardinal Gibbons has not
said against what he calls the infidels. In one of his recent letters he
declared that no agnostic or atheist should be given office in this
country. Why may a cardinal stand up for his church, and not I for the
secular state? If the framers of the Constitution desired only
Christians, or believers in a church of some kind as office holders,
they would not have left the name of the deity out of the nation's
charter. According to the Constitution, the only persons really eligible
to office are the infidels, or at any rate, those only who are willing
to place the interests of the country above even those of God or church.
Are Catholics willing to do that? We ask once more, are Catholics
willing to do that?

And we do not have to ask the future to answer that question. The past
has answered it in unmistakable fashion. What today is the difference
between Austria, for instance, and America? In Catholic or religious
Austria, the interest of the church is above the rights of man. It is
well for religion to be free, but it is not free in Austria; it is well
for thought and speech to be free, but they are not free in Austria.
Why? Because the interests of the church come first. In secular America,
religion is free, thought and speech are free. Why? The rights of man
come first in a secular state. The church has the power to make an
America out of Austria. But will she do it? Yet if she had the power to
make an Austria out of America would she hesitate to do it? Americans
beware!

But let us return to Napoleon III and Pius IX. Encouraged and emboldened
by his successes, and his increasing power over the emperor, as well as
by his command of the resources of France for his own throne, Pius IX
about this time promulgated the famous dogma of the infallibility of the
pope. Until then, the church, or ecclesiastical councils, shared
infallibility with the pope, but henceforth the pope alone shall be
infallible, and councils and conclaves would no longer be needed to
decide religious questions. Thus, to the principle of absolutism was
given a new endorsement. As soon as he became infallible, the pope
announced a new dogma--the immaculate conception of the virgin. The
church had never held that Mary herself, like her divine son, was born
of the Holy Ghost, but Pope Pius declared she was, and his word became
the belief of the church universal. About this time Mary began to appear
to shepherds and young girls in the fields, confirming the word of the
pope that she was born of the Holy Ghost.

At the commencement of 1854 there appeared a pamphlet by an abbot who
was not yet ready to accept the virgin birth of Mary. The writer charged
that a certain woman of Grenoble was personating the Virgin Mother of
God in these reputed appearances to shepherds and young people. Mlle. de
Lamerliere, the accused woman, sued the abbot for defamation of
character. To the profound regret of the church, the young lady lost her
suit. From that time, her name became "The Apparition!" The church gave
her a famous advocate, Berryer, to appeal the case; the abbot was
defended by Jules Favre. The higher court of Grenoble confirmed the
decision of the lower court, which under ordinary circumstances would
have put an end to the new dogma. But it did not. The church was in
politics and had therefore many ways of getting over a little
embarrassment like that.

But the church did more than promulgate new dogmas. About this time, in
Bologna, the little child of a Jew, Martara, suddenly disappeared from
home. Careful search by the distracted father proved that the priests
had carried him off to bring him up as a Roman Catholic. The
anti-clerical party poured forth hot shot at a church that would steal,
not only the goods, but also the children, whenever it had the power to
break into people's homes. Even the emperor pleaded with the pope for
the return of the child to its outraged parents. But it was all in vain.
The church, the Holy Catholic church, was in the saddle, and she would
ride the nation to please herself. The pope replied that as this was a
matter pertaining to the salvation of the child's soul it was a
spiritual question, and therefore beyond the jurisdiction of the state.
Shortly after another boy disappeared precisely in the same manner, and
was discovered in the Catholic seminary. The French ambassador pleaded
with the pope as before, but the church was a divine institution, and
the secular authorities were guilty of impertinence in attempting to
criticise her conduct or to give her advice. It was impossible to live
next door to such a power peaceably. In every Catholic country there
were two kingdoms, the one within the other; two sovereigns, the one the
rival of the other. And the result was, as we said it would be a moment
ago, the "divine" church swallowed up the secular state whenever it
could.

In 1864 Pius IX issued his famous encyclical, in which he boldly
condemned the "pernicious" doctrine of the rights of man. For the
edification of Americans who hope some day to see a Catholic in the
White House at Washington, let us quote one or two passages from this
papal bull:

"We (the pope) can not pass over in silence the audacity of those who
teach that except in matters pertaining to the church, the decrees of
the Apostolic See are not binding upon the conscience." Which means that
the pope must be obeyed in secular as well as in religious matters.
Americans beware!

"There are also those who have the audacity to declare that the supreme
authority given by Jesus Christ to the Apostolic See is subject to the
secular authorities," which means that the pope is the real head of the
nation as well as of the church and that she will not obey any man-made
constitutions.

"_Our predecessor_ of blessed memory, Gregory XVI, described as a
madness[C] the doctrine of liberty of conscience and of worship," which
means that with the Catholic church in power there will be only one
church. Then the encyclical proceeds to enumerate the errors which all
Catholics condemn:

   [C] _De delire._

Error XVIII. To say that Protestantism is a branch of the true Christian
church, and that a Protestant could be as pleasing to God as a Catholic.

Error XXI. That the Catholic church has no right to call itself the only
true church.

Error XXIV. That the church has no right to resort to force.

Error XXVII. That the holy ministers of the church have no right to
interfere in matters temporal (this proves the charge that the Catholic
church is in politics).

Error XXXVI. That there can be state churches in any country other than
the Catholic church.

Error XLVII. That the schools should be independent of the authority of
the church.

Error LV. That the state ought to be separated from the church.[D]

    [D] _Encyclique Addressee par N. S. P. Le Pope Pie IX._ For the
    sake of brevity we have not translated the above passages in
    their entirety, but their _meaning_ has not been sacrificed to
    brevity.

There is much in the passages quoted to make every lover of free
institutions to ponder over seriously and long.

But let us hasten to the concluding chapter of that period in history
reaching from 1848 to 1870, with which we have been dealing. The third
Napoleon began to realize that after all he was a mere figure-head in
the empire which he had created by violating his own oath and abrogating
the constitution. The real sovereign of the French was Pope Pius IX. In
other words, the relation between pope and emperor was that which the
bible suggests should exist between husband and wife. The pope was the
husband, the emperor was the wife, and, as commanded in the bible, a
wife must obey her husband. Napoleon more than once made attempts to
free himself from the ever-tightening grip of the pope, but only to find
that he was helpless. For instance he had written to the pope about
reforms in the papal states, urging the Holy Father to curb the abuses
of the clergy and to introduce modern methods in the government of his
territory. But he was compelled to apologize for presuming to give
advice to the vicar of Christ. On another occasion, the emperor was
foolish enough to suggest that Frenchmen must obey the laws of their own
country before those of a foreign power. Did he mean Rome, by "a foreign
power?" He was clearly made to understand that the Catholics in France
were first the subjects of the pope, and then the subjects of the
emperor. Despite these failures to free himself from the authority of
the church, the signs of insubordination on the part of the emperor
increased. Napoleon's principal weakness was vacillation. He never
finished an undertaking. His resolutions were like fire-rockets, they
fell to the ground as soon as they shot up in the air. Vacillation means
weakness. Napoleon after all was like clay in the hands of the pope. The
pope had made him, and the pope could unmake him.

To be just to the emperor, we must also make allowances for the
influence which the queen, Empress Eugenie, exerted over him. She was a
Spaniard, very worldly, and yet very pious. She was one of those women
to whom the priest was God in miniature.

Strange as it may seem, Napoleon's son, on the other hand, the prince
and presumptive heir to the throne, at whose birth the pope had sent
Eugenie the golden rose, was an avowed free thinker. Napoleon now sided
with his queen, and now with his son. He had no mind of his own. It was
in one of his independent moods that he decided to make a final effort
to shake off Rome from his shoulders. He entered into a secret
arrangement with Victor Emmanuel of Italy, who was then seeking to seize
Rome as the capital of United Italy, to help humiliate Pius IX. Napoleon
promised to let Garibaldi march upon Rome. From the moment that the
Catholics discovered this plot to rob the pope of the city of Rome,
Napoleon was doomed. The church not only showed its displeasure plainly,
but it made it also evident that it would not accept any apologies this
time. Napoleon's resolution sickened again. He became alarmed for his
throne. He saw the sword of Damocles hanging over his head by a single
hair. He hastened to explain, but the priests who had called him a
Constantine, and a Charlemagne, now called him a Nero, and a Pontius
Pilate. Like Judas, he had betrayed his master. It was in the vain hope
of once more swinging around the Catholic world to his support that the
emperor tapped the resources of his country to advance the Catholic
faith. Bent upon this errand he sent an expedition to Syria, another to
China, another to Mexico. Everywhere France must become the defender of
the Catholic church. It was not to the interest of France to waste its
substance in a sort of Catholic crusade, tramping from east to west, for
the glory of the church, but it was only by sacrificing France to the
vatican that Napoleon hoped to change the frown of the pope into a
smile. Finally it occurred to the emperor that a war with Germany, the
rising Protestant power of the north, would restore his popularity with
the church. He would humiliate Germany, overthrow the iron chancellor,
and convert Berlin into a Catholic capital.

Such a conquest would give Catholicism an immense prestige, and it would
make of Napoleon really another Charlemagne. The war was declared. It
was an act of sheer madness. The whole nation was going to be thrown
into the mouth of the cannon to please Rome and to regain her favor for
France. But it was survive or perish with Napoleon.

He did not have the shadow of a foundation for a quarrel with Germany.
That country was willing to withdraw the candidacy of a Hohenzollern for
the Spanish throne. But Napoleon demanded more. France had been injured,
he declared, and Germany must be punished for it. It must be stated that
Napoleon counted on the co-operation of the King of Italy in the attack
upon Germany. But when the war was declared Victor Emmanuel demanded
that before he can send an Italian army to the aid of the French,
Napoleon must recall his soldiers from Rome. The French were still
keeping an army in Rome to maintain the pope upon his throne. Victor
Emmanuel asked the French to vacate Rome. This Napoleon was willing
enough to do, but the Catholics in France threatened to "boycott" the
emperor if he left the pope to his fate. It was a critical situation.
The Italians would not budge unless the French soldiers were recalled
from Rome, and the French would not support the emperor if they were. In
the meantime, the victorious Germans were before the walls of Sedan.
Anon, the cannon's roar was heard in the streets of Paris. A wave of
blood, red and palpitating, was sweeping onward upon the fair land of
France. The nation was upon her knees, mangled, bleeding, torn, ruined.
The "faithful" were marching the streets with "God save Rome and
France." It was too late. The church in politics cost France the
slaughter of her armies, the criminal waste of her savings, the
destruction of her cities, the loss of two of her provinces--Alsace and
Lorraine--and imposed upon her a blood tax, the enormity of which was
appalling. Americans beware!

And if France did not go the way of Spain, it was because, when she
returned to the republican form of government once more, she put no
faith in the professions of loyalty to the republic by the priests, and
refused to consider their candidate to the presidency. By ousting the
church from politics in France, that unhappy country has recovered her
health, has entered the path of peace and progress, and is today one of
the freest and foremost nations of the world.

What can the church do for a people? Look at Spain.

What can a country do without the church? Look at regenerated France.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:


  In general every effort has been made to replicate the original text as
  faithfully as possible, which may include some instances of no longer
  standard or incorrect spelling, grammar, hyphenation and punctuation.
  The use of accents on non-English words was irregular and mostly absent;
  this has not been altered. Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  The following changes were made to repair apparently typographical
  errors:

  p. 4  "irritability or impetuousity" impetuousity changed to impetuosity
  p. 10 "The words, "Liberty, Equality," Fraternity,"" extra " removed
  p. 15 "Could not, therefore, Napoelon" Napoelon changed to Napoleon
  p. 16 "If the church submtis"  submtis changed to submits
  p. 19 "the true Christion church" Christion changed to Christian
  p. 20 "has not been sacrificed to brevity[.]" period inserted






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Church In Politics--Americans
Beware!, by M. M. Mangasarian

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHURCH IN POLITICS ***

***** This file should be named 39622.txt or 39622.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/6/2/39622/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Paula Franzini and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
