Project Gutenberg's North American Stone Implements, by Charles Rau

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: North American Stone Implements

Author: Charles Rau

Release Date: May 13, 2012 [EBook #39686]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH AMERICAN STONE IMPLEMENTS ***




Produced by K Nordquist, JoAnn Greenwood, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  NORTH AMERICAN STONE IMPLEMENTS.

  BY

  CHARLES RAU.

  REPRINTED FROM THE REPORT OF THE SMITHSONIAN
  INSTITUTION FOR 1872.

  WASHINGTON:
  GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
  1873.




NORTH AMERICAN STONE IMPLEMENTS.

BY CHARLES RAU.


The division of the European stone age into a period of chipped stone,
and a succeeding one of ground or polished stone, or, into the
palaeolithic and neolithic periods, seems to be fully borne out by
facts, and is likely to remain an uncontroverted basis for future
investigation in Europe. In North America chipped as well as ground
implements are abundant; yet they occur promiscuously, and thus far
cannot be referred respectively to certain epochs in the development
of the aborigines of the country. Archaeological investigation in North
America, however, is but of recent date, and a careful examination of
our caves and drift-beds possibly may lead to results similar to those
obtained in Europe. When in the latter part of the world man lived
contemporaneously with the now extinct large pachydermatous and
carnivorous animals, he used unground flint tools of rude workmanship,
which were superseded in the later stages of the European stone age,
comprising the neolithic period, by more finished articles of flint
and other stone, many of which were brought into final shape by the
processes of grinding and polishing. In North America stone implements
likewise have been found associated with the osseous remains of
extinct animals; yet these implements, it appears, differed in no wise
from those in use among the aborigines at the period of their first
intercourse with the whites.

In the year 1839, the late Dr. Albert C. Koch discovered in the bottom
of the Bourbeuse River, in Gasconade County, Missouri, the remains of
a _Mastodon giganteus_ under very peculiar circumstances. The greater
portion of the bones appeared more or less burned, and there was
sufficient evidence that the fire had been kindled by human agency,
and with the design of killing the huge creature, which had been found
mired in the mud, and in an entirely helpless condition. The animal's
fore and hind legs, untouched by the fire, were in a perpendicular
position, with the toes attached to the feet, showing that the ground
in which the animal had sunk, now a grayish-colored clay, was in a
plastic condition when the occurrence took place. Those portions of
the skeleton, however, which had been exposed above the surface of the
clay, were partially consumed by the fire, and a layer of wood-ashes
and charred bones, varying in thickness from two to six inches,
indicated that the burning had been continued for some length of time.
The fire appeared to have been most destructive around the head of the
animal. Mingled with the ashes and bones was a large number of broken
pieces of rock, which evidently had been carried to the spot from the
bank of the Bourbeuse River to be hurled at the animal. But the
burning and hurling of stones, it seems, did not satisfy the
assailants of the mastodon; for Dr. Koch found among the ashes, bones,
and rocks _several stone arrow-heads, a spear-head, and some stone
axes_, which were taken out in the presence of a number of witnesses,
consisting of the people of the neighborhood, who had been attracted
by the novelty of the excavation. The layer of ashes and bones was
covered by strata of alluvial deposits, consisting of clay, sand, and
soil, from eight to nine feet thick, which form the bottom of the
Bourbeuse River in general.

About one year after this excavation, Dr. Koch found at another place,
in Benton County, Missouri, in the bottom of the Pomme de Terre River,
about ten miles above its junction with the Osage, _several stone
arrow-heads_ mingled with the bones of a nearly entire skeleton of the
Missourium. The two arrow-heads found with the bones "were in such a
position as to furnish evidence still more conclusive, perhaps, than
in the other case, of their being of equal, if not older date, than
the bones themselves; for, besides that they were found in a layer of
vegetable mold which was covered by twenty feet in thickness of
alternate layers of sand, clay, and gravel, one of the arrow-heads lay
underneath the thigh-bone of the skeleton, the bone actually resting
in contact upon it, so that it could not have been brought thither
after the deposit of the bone; a fact which I was careful thoroughly
to investigate."[1]

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

It affords me particular satisfaction to present in Fig. 1 a full-size
drawing of the last-named arrow-head, which is still in the possession
of Mrs. Elizabeth Koch, of Saint Louis, the widow of the discoverer.
The drawing was made after a photograph, for which I am indebted to
Mrs. Koch. It will be noticed that the point, one of the barbs, and a
corner of the stem of this arrow-head--if it really was an arrow-head,
and not the armature of a javelin or spear--are broken off; but there
remains enough of it to make out its original shape, which is exactly
that of similar weapons used by the aborigines in historical times.
The specimen in question, which, as I presume, was found by Dr. Koch
in its present mutilated shape, consists of a light-brown, somewhat
mottled flint.[2]

In referring to these discoveries of Dr. Koch, and some other
indications of the high antiquity of man in America, Sir John Lubbock
concludes that "there does not as yet appear to be any satisfactory
proof that man co-existed in America with the Mammoth and
Mastodon."[3] Yet, it may be expected, almost with certainty, that the
results of future investigations in North America will fully
corroborate Dr. Koch's discoveries, and vindicate the truthfulness of
his statements. Indeed, some facts have come to light during the late
geological survey of Illinois, which confirm, in a general way, the
conclusions arrived at by the above-named explorer. According to this
survey, the blue clays at the base of the drift contain fragments of
wood and trunks of trees, but no fossil remains of animals; but the
brown clays above, underlying the Loess, contain remains of the
Mammoth, the Mastodon, and the Peccary; and bones of the Mastodon were
found in a bed of "local drift," near Alton, underlying the Loess _in
situ_ above, and also _in the same horizon, stone axes and flint
spear-heads_, indicating the co-existence of the human race with the
extinct mammalia of the Quaternary period.[4]

It must not be overlooked that both Dr. Koch and the Illinois survey
mention flint arrow and spear-heads as well as stone axes as being
associated, directly or indirectly, with the remains of extinct animals.
These stone axes undoubtedly were _ground_ implements; for, had they
differed in any way from the ordinary Indian manufactures of the same
class, the fact certainly would have been noticed by the observers. Thus
far, then, we are not entitled to speak of a North American palaeolithic
and neolithic period. In the new world, therefore, the human
contemporary of the Mastodon and the Mammoth, it would seem, was more
advanced in the manufacture of stone weapons than his savage brother of
the European drift period, a circumstance which favors the view that the
extinct large mammalia ceased to exist at a later epoch in America than
in Europe. The remarks of Lieutenant-Colonel C. H. Smith on this point
are of interest. "Over a considerable part of the eastern side of the
great (American) mountain ridge," he says, "more particularly where
ancient lakes have been converted into morasses, or have been filled by
alluvials, organic remains of above thirty species of mammals, of the
same orders and genera, in some cases of the same species, (as in
Europe,) have been discovered, demonstrating their existence in a
contemporary era with those of the old continent, and under similar
circumstances. But their period of duration in the new world may have
been prolonged to dates of a subsequent time, since the Pachyderms of
the United States, as well as those of the Pampas of Brazil, are much
more perfect; and, in many cases, possess characters ascribed to bones
in a recent state. Alligators and crocodiles, moreover, continue to
exist in latitudes where they endure a winter state of torpidity beneath
ice, as an evidence that the great Saurians in that region have not yet
entirely worked out their mission; whereas, on the old continent they
had ceased to exist in high latitudes long before the extinction of the
great Ungulata."[5]

Flint implements of the European "drift type," however, are by no
means scarce in North America, although they cannot (thus far) be
referred to any particular period, but must be classed with the other
chipped and ground implements in use among the North American
aborigines during historical times.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

In the first place I will mention certain leaf-shaped flint implements
which have been found in mounds and on the surface, as well as in
deposits below it. They are comparatively thin, of regular outline,
and exhibit well-chipped edges all around the circumferences. On the
whole, they are among the best North American flint articles which
have fallen under my notice. The specimens found by Messrs. Squier and
Davis in a mound of the inclosure called Mound City, on the Scioto
River, some miles north of Chillicothe, Ohio, belong to this class.
Most of them were broken, but a few were found entire, one of which is
represented in half-size by Fig. 100 on page 211 of the "Ancient
Monuments of the Mississippi Valley." This specimen measures four
inches in length and about three inches across the broad rounded end.
I have a still larger one, consisting of a reddish mottled flint,
which was found on the surface in Jefferson County, Missouri. The
annexed full-size drawing, Fig. 2, shows its outline. The edge on the
right side is a little damaged by subsequent fractures, but for the
sake of greater distinctness I have represented it as perfect. The
finest leaf-shaped implements which I have had occasion to examine,
are in the possession of Mr. M. Cowing, of Seneca Falls, New York. The
owner told me he had more than a hundred of them, which were all
derived from a locality in the State of New York, where they were
accidentally discovered, forming a deposit under the surface. Mr.
Cowing, who is constantly engaged in collecting and buying up Indian
relics, refused to give me any information concerning the place and
precise character of the deposit, basing his refusal on the ground
that a few of these implements were still in the hands of individuals
in the neighborhood, and that he would reveal nothing in relation to
the deposit until he had obtained every specimen originally belonging
to it. I am, therefore, unable to give any particulars, and must
confine myself to the statement that the specimens shown to me present
in general the outline of the original of Fig. 2, though they are a
little smaller; and that they are thin, sharp-edged, and exquisitely
wrought, and consist of a beautiful, variously-colored flint, which
bears some resemblance to chalcedony.

Concerning the use or uses of North American leaf-shaped articles, I
am hardly prepared to give a definite opinion, though I think it
probable that they served for purposes of cutting. They were certainly
not intended for spear-heads, their shape being ill-adapted for that
end; nor do I think that they were used as scrapers, as other more
massive implements of a kindred character probably were, of which I
shall speak hereafter.

The aborigines were in the habit of burying articles of flint in the
ground, and such deposits, sometimes quite large, have been discovered
in various parts of the United States. These deposits consist of
articles representing various types, among which I will mention the
leaf-shaped implements in the possession of Mr. Cowing; the
agricultural tools found at East Saint Louis, Illinois, of which I
have given an account in the Smithsonian report for 1868; and the rude
flint articles of an elongated oval shape, which were found about 1860
on the bank of the Mississippi, between Carondelet and Saint Louis,
Missouri, and doubtless belonged to a deposit. I have described them
in the above-named Smithsonian report, (p. 405,) and have also given
there a drawing of one of the specimens in my possession. This drawing
has been reproduced by Mr. E. T. Stevens, on page 441 of his valuable
work entitled "Flint Chips," (London, 1870,) with remarks tending to
show that the specimen does not represent an unfinished implement, as
I am inclined to believe, but a complete one. I must admit that my
drawing is not a very good one. It gives the object a more definite
character than it really possesses, the chipping appearing in the
representation far less superficial than it is in the original, which,
indeed, has such a shape that it could easily be reduced to a smaller
size by blows aimed at its circumference. I have myself scaled off
large flat flakes from similarly-shaped pieces of flint, using a small
iron hammer and directing my blows against the edge, and have thus
become convinced that the further working of objects like that in
question could offer no serious difficulties to a practised
flint-chipper. My collection, moreover, contains several smaller flint
objects of similar shape, which are undoubtedly the rudiments of arrow
and spear-heads, and I may add that I obtained a few from places where
the manufacture of such weapons was carried on.

Yet the most important deposit of flint implements resembling certain
types of the European drift, is that discovered by Messrs. Squier and
Davis during their researches in Ohio. They have described this
interesting find in the "Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley,"
and a _resume_ of their account was given by me in the Smithsonian
report for 1868, (p. 404.) The implements in question, I stated,
occurred in one of the so-called sacrificial mounds of Clark's Work,
on North Fork of Paint Creek, Ross County, Ohio. This flat, but very
broad mound contained, instead of the hearth usually found in this
class of earth-structures, an enormous number of flint discs, standing
on their edges and arranged in two layers, one above the other, at the
bottom of the mound. The whole extent of these layers has not been
ascertained, but an excavation six feet long and four broad disclosed
upward of six hundred of those discs, rudely blocked out of a superior
kind of dark flint. I had occasion to examine the specimens from this
mound, which were formerly in the collection of Dr. Davis, and have
now in my collection a number that belonged to the same deposit. They
are either roundish, oval, or heart-shaped, and of various sizes, but
on an average six inches long, four inches wide, and from
three-quarters to an inch in thickness. These flint discs are believed
to have been buried as a religious offering, and the peculiar
structure of the mound which inclosed them rather favors this opinion,
while their enormous number, on the other hand, affords some
probability to the view that they constituted a depot or magazine.
Many of them are clumsy, and roughly chipped around their edges; and
hence it has been suggested that they are no finished implements, but
merely rudimentary forms, destined to receive more symmetry of outline
by subsequent labor. Many of the discs under notice bear a striking
resemblance to the flint "hatchets" discovered by Boucher de Perthes
and Dr. Rigollot in the diluvial gravels of the valley of the Somme,
in Northern France. The similarity in form, however, is the only
analogy that can be claimed for the rude flint articles of both
continents, considering that they occurred under totally different
circumstances. The drift implements of Europe represent the most
primitive attempts of man in the art of working stone, while the Ohio
discs, if finished at all, are certainly very rough samples of the
handicraft of a race that constructed earthworks of astonishing
regularity and magnitude, and was already highly skilled in the art of
chipping flint into various shapes.

On page 214 of the "Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley," a
group of the flint articles from Clark's Work is represented. The
drawing exhibits pretty correctly the irregular outline and general
rudeness of these specimens; yet Mr. Stevens states (Flint Chips, p.
440) that "the representations are not at all satisfactory." The only
fault, I think, that can be found with these drawings is their small
scale, a fault which is very excusable, considering that at the period
when Messrs. Squier and Davis published their work, (1848,) flint
articles of such shape were no objects of particular attention; for
just then the results of the researches of Boucher de Perthes were
first laid before the scientific world, which, it is well known,
ignored for a long time the significance of the rude flint tools
discovered by the indefatigable and enthusiastic French savant in the
diluvial gravel-beds of the Somme. It is true, however, that some of
the flint discs of Clark's Work are wrought with more care than those
represented in the "Ancient Monuments." This fact may be ascribed to a
whim of the worker or workers, who gave some of the articles a greater
degree of regularity by some additional blows. Mr. Stevens has only
seen specimens of this better class, for such were those which Dr.
Davis sold to the Blackmore Museum among his collection of Indian
relics, and hence the author of "Flint Chips" seems to attribute to
them a better general character than they really possess. I learn,
however, that Mr. Blackmore, during a recent visit to Ohio, has
succeeded in recovering a considerable number of the implements of
Clark's Work, and thus an opportunity will be afforded again to
investigate the true nature of these relics of a bygone people.

The objects in question consist of the compact silicious stone of
"Flint Ridge," in Ohio, a locality described on page 214 of the
"Ancient Monuments."[6] A careful comparison has established this fact
beyond any doubt. The flint or hornstone which occurs in that region,
is a beautiful material of a dark color, resembling somewhat the real
flint found in nodules in the cretaceous formations of Europe. It is
occasionally marked with darker or lighter concentric stripes or
bands, the centre of which is formed by a small nucleus of blue
chalcedony; and this internal structure appears particularly distinct
in specimens which, by exposure, have undergone a superficial change
of color. The stone, in general, possesses peculiarities by which it
can be recognized at once, even when met in a wrought state far from
its original site. According to Mr. Squier, arrow-heads made of this
hornstone have been found in Kentucky, Indiana, Illinois, and
Michigan. That they occur in Illinois, I can attest from personal
experience.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

A few years ago, when treating of the flint implements of Clark's
Work, I was not prepared to express a definite opinion concerning the
manner in which they were used. In the mean time, however, I have
obtained additional information in relation to the class of implements
under notice, which enables me, as I think, to point out the purposes
for which those of Clark's Work, as well as similar ones from other
localities, were designed. In the summer of 1869, some children, who
were amusing themselves near the barn on the farm of Oliver H. Mullen,
in the neighborhood of Fayetteville, Saint Clair County, Illinois, dug
into the ground and discovered a deposit of fifty-two disc-shaped
flint implements, which lay closely heaped together. Several of them
came into my possession through the assistance of Dr. Patrick, of
Belleville, in the same county. They consist, like those of Clark's
Work, of the peculiar stone of Flint Ridge. This I noticed at first
sight, and so did Messrs. Squier and Davis, to whom I showed them.
They resemble, in general shape, the objects of Clark's Work, but are
somewhat smaller and of perfectly symmetrical outline, having a
well-chipped, though strong edge; in one word, they are highly
finished implements, far superior to those of Clark's Work. In Fig. 3
I give a full-size drawing of one of my specimens from Fayetteville,
which is twenty millimeters thick in the middle. The slight
irregularities observable in the circumference are owing to later
accidental fractures. In this specimen, as in the others from the same
find, the edge is produced by small, carefully-measured blows. The
edges of my specimens from Fayetteville, moreover, exhibit traces of
wear, being rubbed off to a small degree, and this circumstance, in
connection with their shape, induces me to believe that they were used
as _scraping_ or _smoothing implements_. The aborigines, it is well
known, hollowed their canoes and wooden mortars with the assistance of
fire, and the implements just described, were, as I presume, employed
for removing the charred portions of the wood. They are well adapted
to the grasp of the hand, and, indeed, of the most convenient form and
size to serve in that operation. Probably they were likewise used in
cleaning hides, and for other purposes. The tools of Fayetteville,
however, are much more handy than those of Clark's Work.

The fact that implements made of the hornstone of Flint Ridge are
found in Illinois--a distance of about four hundred miles
intervening--is of particular interest, as it shows that the material
was quarried for exportation to remote parts of the country. It
doubtless formed an article of traffic among the natives, like copper,
sea-shells, and other natural productions which they applied to the
exigencies of common life or used for personal adornment.

Concerning North American flint implements of the European drift type
in general, Mr. Stevens expresses himself thus: "The legitimate
conclusion at which we may at present arrive, is that implements, in
form resembling some of the European palaeolithic types, were made by
the aborigines of America at a comparatively late period, and that the
people usually termed the 'mound-builders,' were, probably, the makers
of these implements." (p. 443.)

There is no sufficient ground, I think, for attributing these
implements exclusively to the mound-builders, considering that they
occur on the surface, and in deposits below it, in regions where the
people designated as the mound-builders are not supposed to have left
their traces. In the States of New York and New Jersey, for instance,
such articles repeatedly have been met. I will only refer to the
leaf-shaped implements in possession of Mr. Cowing, which were found
in New York, and are the finest specimens of that kind ever brought to
my notice. That the people who erected the mounds made and used tools
resembling the palaeolithic types of Europe, is proved by the
occurrence of those tools in the mounds; but it follows by no means
that they are to be considered as the sole makers of that class of
implements. Supposing that the mound-builders really were a people
superior in their attainments to the aborigines found in possession of
the country by the whites, it is certainly very difficult to draw a
line of demarcation between the manufactures of the ancient and those
of the more recent indigenous inhabitants of North America. The
mound-builders--to preserve the adopted term--certainly did not stow
away all their articles of use and ornament in the mounds, but
necessarily left a great many of them scattered over the surface,
which became mingled with those of the succeeding occupants of the
soil. Both the mound-builders and the later Indians lived in an age of
stone, and as their wants were the same, they resorted to the same
means to satisfy them. Their manufactures, therefore, must exhibit a
considerable degree of similarity, and hence the great difficulty of
separating them.

Yet Mr. Stevens goes in this respect farther than any one before him.
He is particularly orthodox in the matter of pipes. Those who have
paid some attention to the antiquities of North America, are aware of
the fact that Messrs. Squier and Davis found in the mounds of Ohio,
especially in one mound near Chillicothe, a number of stone pipes of
peculiar shape, which they have described in the "Ancient Monuments of
the Mississippi Valley." In these pipes the bowl rises from the middle
of a flat and somewhat curved base, one side of which communicates by
means of a narrow perforation, usually one-sixth of an inch (about
four millimeters) in diameter, with the hollow of the bowl, and
represents the tube, or rather the mouth-piece of the pipe, while the
other unperforated end forms the handle by which the smoker held the
implement and approached it to his mouth. In the more elaborate
specimens the bowl is formed, in some instances, in imitation of the
human head, but generally of the body of an animal--mammal, bird, or
reptile. These pipes, then, were smoked either without any stem, which
seems probable, or by means of a very diminutive tube of some kind,
the narrow bore of the base not allowing the insertion of anything
like a massive stem. The authors of the "Ancient Monuments" called
these pipes "mound-pipes," merely to designate that particular class
of smoking utensils; it was not their intention to convey the idea
that the mound-builders had been unacquainted with pipes into which
stems were inserted. On the contrary, they distinctly assign a
beautiful pipe of the latter kind, representing the body of a bird
with a human head,[7] to the mound-builders, though this specimen was
not found in a mound, but within an ancient inclosure twelve miles
below the city of Chillicothe. Referring to this pipe, Mr. Stevens
says: "Squier and Davis consider that this object is a relic of the
mound-builders; but it does not appear that any pipe of similar form,
or indeed _any_ pipe intended to be smoked by means of an inserted
stem, has been found in any of the Ohio mounds." Upon inquiry I
learned from Dr. Davis that mounds had been leveled by the plough
within the inclosure where the pipe in question was found, which, he
is convinced, belonged to the original contents of one of those
obliterated mounds. In the Smithsonian report for 1868, I published
(on page 399) the drawing of a pipe then in possession of Dr. Davis.
Its shape is that of a barrel somewhat narrowing at the bottom, and
its material an almost transparent rock-crystal. The two hollows, one
for the reception of the smoking material, and the other for
inserting a stem, meet under an obtuse angle. This pipe was taken from
a mound near Bainbridge, Ross County, Ohio. Mr. Stevens suggests it
had been associated with a secondary interment, (p. 524.) Dr. Davis,
however, who is acquainted with the circumstances of its discovery,
told me that it belonged, with various other objects, to the _primary_
deposit of the mound. Thus it would seem that the mound-builders
confined themselves by no means to the use of one particular class of
pipes.

Those who advocate a strict classification of North American relics
according to earlier or later periods, should bear in mind that
mound-building was still in use--if not in Ohio, at least in other
parts of the present United States--when the first Europeans arrived,
though the practice seems to have been abandoned soon after the
colonization of the country by the whites. Yet, even in comparatively
modern times, isolated cases of mound-building have been recorded,[8]
which fact would indicate, perhaps, a lingering inclination to
perpetuate an ancient, almost forgotten custom. Many of the earthworks
in the Southern States doubtless were built by the race of Indians
inhabiting the country when the Spaniards under De Soto made a vain
attempt to take possession of that vast territory, then comprised
under the name of Florida. For this we have Garcilasso de la Vega's
often-quoted statement relating to the earth-structures of the
Indians. The Floridians, we also know, erected at the same period
mounds to mark the resting-places of their defunct chieftains. Le
Moyne de Morgues has left in the "Brevis Narratio" a representation
and description of a funeral of this kind. When the mound was heaped
up, the mourners stuck arrows in the ground around its base, and
placed the drinking vessel of the deceased, made of a large sea-shell,
on the apex of the pile.[9] But even without such historical
testimony, the continuance of mound-building might be deduced from the
fact that articles of European origin are met, though rarely, among
the primary deposits of mounds. The following interesting
communication, for which I am indebted to Colonel Charles C. Jones,
will serve to illustrate one case of mound-burial that can be referred
with certainty to a period posterior to the European occupation of the
country:

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

"I have found in several mounds," says my informant, "glass beads and
silver ornaments, and, in one instance, a part of a rifle-barrel,
which were evidently buried with the dead. These, however, were
secondary interments, the graves being upon the top, or sides, or near
the base of the mound, and only a few feet deep. Never but in one case
have I discovered any article of European manufacture interred with
the dead in whose honor the mound was clearly erected. Upon opening a
small earth-mound on the Georgia coast, a few miles below Savannah, I
found a clay vessel, several flint arrow-heads, a hand-axe of stone,
_and a portion of an old-fashioned sword_ deposited with the decayed
bones of the skeleton. This tumulus was conical in shape, about seven
feet high, and possessed a base diameter of some twenty feet. It
contained only one skeleton, and that lay, with the articles I have
enumerated, at the bottom of the mound, and on a level with the plain.
The oaken hilt, most of the guard, and about seven inches of the blade
of the sword still remained. The rest of the blade had perished from
rust. Strange to say, the oak had best resisted the 'gnawing tooth of
time.' This mound had never been opened or in any way disturbed,
except by the winds and rains of the changing seasons. I have no doubt
but that the interment was primary, and that all the articles
enumerated were deposited with the dead before this mound-tomb was
heaped above him. This, within the range of my observation, is an
interesting and exceptional case. I am persuaded that mound-building,
at least upon the Georgia coast, was abandoned by the natives very
shortly after their primal contact with the whites."

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

From mound-building I turn again to North American flint implements.
Mr. Stevens refers in his work to the absence of flint scrapers in the
series from the United States exhibited in the Blackmore Museum.
Scrapers of the European spoon-shaped type, however, are not as scarce
in the United States as Mr. Stevens seems to suppose. The collection
of the Smithsonian Institution contains a number of them; and I found
myself two characteristic specimens in the Kjoekkenmoedding at Keyport,
New Jersey, described by me in the Smithsonian report for 1864. They
lay upon the shell-covered ground, a short distance from each other,
and were perhaps made by the same hand. In Fig. 4 I give a full-size
drawing of one of my specimens, both of which consist of a brown kind
of flint, such as probably would be called jasper by mineralogists.
The figured specimen, it will be seen, possesses all the
characteristics of a European scraper. Its lower surface is formed by
a single curved fracture. The rounded head is somewhat turned toward
the right, a feature likewise exhibited in the other specimen, which
is a little larger, but not quite as typical as the original of Fig.
4. As the peculiar curve of the broad part is observable in both
specimens, it must be considered as having been produced
intentionally. Indeed, I have among my flint scrapers from the
pilework at Robenhausen one which is curved in the same direction. In
fashioning their implements in this particular manner, the Indian and
the ancient lake-man possibly had the same object in view.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

There is, however, another somewhat different class of North American
flint articles, which, as I believe, were employed by the aborigines
for scraping and smoothing wood, horn, and other materials in which
they worked, or perhaps, also, in the preparation of skins. They
resemble stemmed arrow-heads, which, instead of being pointed,
terminate in a semi-lunar, regularly chipped edge. It is probable that
they were partly made from arrow-heads which had lost their points.
Schoolcraft gives in Fig. 3, of Plate 18, in the first volume of his
large work, the drawing of an object of this class, calling it "the
blunt arrow or _Beekwuk_, (Algonkin,) which was fired at a mark." It
is likely enough that these articles served in part the purpose
assigned to them by Mr. Schoolcraft. Yet, I have in my collection
several in which the rounded edge is worn and polished, while the
remaining part retains its original sharpness of fracture, a
circumstance that can only be ascribed to continued use, and therefore
leads me to believe that they were employed in the manner already
indicated. These implements hardly could be used without handles. Fig.
5 represents, in natural size, one of my specimens, which was found on
the surface near West Belleville, Saint Clair County, Illinois. The
material is a yellowish-brown flint. The edge, it will be seen, is
perfectly scraper-like. Inserted into a stout handle, this object
would make an excellent scraper. The edge of this specimen is not
polished, but it seems as if small particles of the edge had been
scaled off by the pressure exerted in the use of the implement. In the
original of the above full-size representation, Fig. 6, on the
contrary, the curved edge is rubbed off to a considerable extent and
perfectly polished, while the portion opposite the edge bears not the
slightest trace of friction. This specimen, which consists of a
whitish flint, was found in Saint Clair County, Illinois. In Fig. 7,
lastly, I represent, in natural size, a fine large specimen, which I
class among the implements under notice. I formerly supposed it to be
a tool destined for cutting purposes, but the condition of the edge,
which is rather blunt and hardly fit for cutting, afterward induced me
to change my opinion. Originally, perhaps, one of those unusually
large spear-heads, which are occasionally found, it may have been
reduced subsequently, after having lost the point, to its present
shape. Yet, it may never have possessed a form different from that
which it now exhibits. This specimen is chipped from a fine reddish
flint which contains encrinites. I obtained it from quarrymen near
West Belleville, who found it in the earth while they were engaged in
baring the rock for extending the quarry. In conclusion, I will state
that, since writing the preceding pages, I received a number of stone
implements from Muncy, Lycoming County, Pennsylvania, among which
there are some large scrapers of the European type. Their material,
however, is not flint, but either graywacke or a kind of tough slate.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Koch, in Transactions of the Academy of Science of Saint Louis,
vol. i, (1860,) p. 61, &c.

[2] I am well aware that the reality of Dr. Koch's discovery has been
doubted by some, although it is difficult to perceive why he should
have made those statements, if not true, at a time when the antiquity
of man was not yet discussed, either in Europe or here, and he,
therefore, could expect nothing but contradiction, public opinion
being totally unprepared for such revelations. Not being a scientific
palaeontologist, he certainly made some mistakes in putting together
the bones of the animals exhumed by him; but these failings, in my
opinion, have no bearing on his observations relative to the
co-existence of man with extinct animals in North America. Only a
short time ago some remarks tending to depreciate Dr. Koch's account
were made by Dr. Schmidt, in an article on the antiquity of man in
America, published in vol. v, of the _Archiv fuer Anthropologie_. I may
state here that I was personally acquainted with Dr. Koch, whom I saw
repeatedly at the meetings of the Academy of Science of Saint Louis.

[3] Prehistoric Times, 1st ed., p. 236.

[4] Geological Survey of Illinois, by A. H. Worthen, vol. i, (1866,)
p. 38; quoted in Transactions of the Academy of Science of Saint
Louis, vol. ii, (1868,) p. 567.

[5] The Natural History of the Human Species, London, 1852, p. 89. The
comparative freshness of the bones of extinct North American animals
was noticed by Cuvier.

[6] More particularly in Squier's "Aboriginal Monuments of New York,"
Buffalo, 1851, p. 126.

[7] Fig. 147 on p. 247 of the "Ancient Monuments;" Fig. 106 on p. 509
of "Flint Chips."

[8] Squier, Aboriginal Monuments of New York, p. 112, &c.

[9] Le Moyne, in De Bry, vol. ii, Francoforti ad Moenum, 1591, pl. XL.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note:

Obvious typographical errors repaired.

Illustrations have been moved to paragraph breaks.





End of Project Gutenberg's North American Stone Implements, by Charles Rau

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH AMERICAN STONE IMPLEMENTS ***

***** This file should be named 39686.txt or 39686.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/6/8/39686/

Produced by K Nordquist, JoAnn Greenwood, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
