The Project Gutenberg EBook of Juvenile Styles, Volume 4, by Mary Hoyer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Juvenile Styles, Volume 4
       Original Designs for Infants and Juveniles

Author: Mary Hoyer

Release Date: May 23, 2012 [EBook #39773]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUVENILE STYLES, VOLUME 4 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Katie Hernandez, Betsie Bush
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note: In this text version the instructions for designs,
which were split over intermittent pages, have been presented in one
place for easier following.




  [Illustration: Original Designs _for_ Infants _and_ Juveniles

  _by Mary Hoyer_

  Directions on page 9

  VOLUME NO. 4 ... TWENTY FIVE CENTS]




  [Illustration: _Dress Your Child in_ ORIGINAL STYLES _by_ Mary Hoyer]

  _Dedicated to those who Knit "Smartly...."_

      Here are new worlds for you to conquer ... in a book
          that meets the needs of both beginner and expert in
      the art of knitting and crocheting. Here are complete
          instructions that can be followed with the utmost
      confidence. Explore this treasury of ORIGINAL DESIGNS.
          Your needles will experience new thrills. You'll have
      lots of fun. And your children will look smarter than
          ever before. This book is _yours_!


  Copyrighted 1941 by Mary Hoyer
  Printed by Juvenile Styles Publishing Company,
  1008 Penn St., Reading, Pa.




  A PUBLICATION DEVOTED TO ORIGINAL AND
  DISTINCTIVE KNITTED AND CROCHETED GARMENTS

  Juvenile Styles

  MARY HOYER, EDITOR AND DESIGNER      VOLUME 4     NUMBER 7

  [Illustration]


  _Mothers of All Young Americans_

The season of 1946-47 promises to be the biggest of all seasons in
knitting--you'll be knitting for the boys at camp--and in your spare
time for the young Americans who are at the Fireside with you.
So--Mothers, get out your knitting needles or crocheting hooks and relax
in a nice big chair, turn on your radio to some soothing music, unwind
your yarn--and in the pages of this book will be enough inspiration to
make Mr. and Miss Young America the world's best dressed Children. There
are Infants and Juvenile Styles cleverly and colorfully designed--and
the Smart Young Miss has her day too, for there are some Garments that
will be sure to meet with her approval and needs.

We sincerely hope that this book will be of invaluable use to those who
"Knit Smartly".

    Mary Hoyer

  If You Are Unable To Obtain Our Style Books At Your Local Yarn Shop,
  Send 30c In Coin To The Following Address

  PUBLISHED BY ...
  JUVENILE STYLES PUBLISHING COMPANY
  1008 PENN STREET, READING, PA.




_A Convalescing Jacket Ensemble_

No. 800

     _Needles_--_1 Pair Bone Nos. 3 and 7 American Standard._

     _Material_--_8 one ounce balls, pink Saxony, Mother's. 2--one ounce
           balls, pink Saxony, Baby's. One-half ounce contrasting shade,
           Saxony._

     _Scale_--_13 sts to 2 inches, No. 7 needles. Size 34 mother's, 3
           months, baby's._


MOTHER'S JACKET

_Back_--With No. 7 needles, cast on 135 sts, *K 3, sl 1 st, repeat from
*across row, ending with K 3, P back. Repeat these 2 rows for 8 inches.
Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next 2 rows for underarm (127 sts). K 2 tog
at beg of the next 8 rows (119 sts). Continue in pattern for 2 more
inches. Change to No. 3 needles, on right side, *P 2, K 1, repeat from
*across row, ending with P 2. On next row, K 2, P 1 across row. Repeat
these 2 rows, for 5 inches. Bind off 7 sts at beg of the next 10 rows,
bind off remaining 49 sts for back of neck.

_Right Front_--With No. 7 needles, cast on 71 sts, work in pattern for
81/2 inches. Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next row at underarm, P 2 tog
at beg of the next 4 rows at underarm. Work even for 2 more inches. At
beg of the next row at front, bind off 4 sts. Change to No. 3 needles
and repeat yoke pattern (P 2, K 1) for 3 inches, bind off 10 sts at beg
of the next row at neck edge. Now K 2 tog at beg of every row at neck
edge, until 39 sts remain. Bind off 7 sts at beg of every row at
shoulder, 5 times and continue to K 2 tog at neck edge, until all sts
are bound off. Work left front to correspond.

_Sleeves_--With No. 3 needles, cast on 65 sts, work in pattern, P 2, K
1, ending with P 2. Next row, K 2, P 1, ending row with K 2, repeat
these 2 rows for 3 inches. Work 1 more row and inc 1 st at beg and end
of row. Change to No. 7 needles and work in pattern, K 3, slip 1 st, end
row with K 3. P back. Continue to work in pattern and inc 1 st at beg
and end of every 6th row until you have 107 sts. Work even until sleeve
measures 20 inches from cuff or desired length to underarm. Bind off 3
sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then bind off 2 sts at beg of the next 2
rows. Now K 2 tog at beg and end of every K row until 53 sts remain,
bind off. Sew up seams at underarm and shoulder, sew up sleeves and
insert into armhole gathering at top a little. Hem the 4 bound off sts
at front. Work 2 rows of s c around yoke and neck working 3 loops for
buttonholes on right side of yoke, on first row. With contrasting shade
start smocking on right hand side at bottom of yoke. Sew the first 2 K
sts tog, then the next 2 K sts, leave the thread loose between the 2
smocked sts. Repeat across row. Start 2nd row, turn, skip first K st and
work back in same manner. Work fronts and 5 rows of smocking on cuffs in
same manner. Sew on buttons.


BABY'S JACKET

_Back_--With No. 7 needles, cast on 91 sts, *K 3, sl 1 st, repeat from
*across row, ending with K 3, P back. Repeat these 2 rows for 4 inches.
Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next 2 rows (83 sts). Work in pattern for
3/4 inch more. With No. 3 needles, *P 2, K 1 (right side), repeat from
*across row, ending with P 2. Next row, K 2, P 1, repeat these 2 rows
for 21/4 inches. Bind off 6 sts at beg of the next 8 rows, bind off
remaining 35 sts for back of neck.

_Right Front_--With No. 7 needles, cast on 47 sts, work in pattern for 4
inches, bind off 4 sts at beg of the next row at underarm, K back. Purl
2 sts tog at underarm, work pattern for 3/4 inch more. Bind off 4 sts at
beg of the next row at front edge (hem). With No. 3 needles, *P 2, K 1,
repeat from *across row, next row K 2, P 1, across row. Repeat these 2
rows for 11/2 inches. At beg of next row at front edge, bind off 6 sts,
then K 2 tog at beg of every row at neck edge, until you have 27 sts
left. Bind off 6 sts at beg of the next 4 rows at shoulder edge and
continue to K 2 tog at neck edge, until all sts are bound off. Work left
front to correspond.

_Sleeves_--With No. 3 needles, cast on 44 sts, P 2, K 1, across row.
Next row, K 2, P 1, repeat these 2 rows for 1 inch. With No. 7 needles,
K 3, slip 1 st, ending with K 3 (K last 2 sts tog), P back. Work in
pattern, increasing 1 st at each end, every inch, until sleeve measures
4 inches (51 sts). Work 1 inch even. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2
rows. K 2 tog at beg of every row, until you have 35 sts left, bind off.
Sew up seams at underarm and shoulder, sew up sleeves and insert into
armhole gathering at top a little. Hem the 4 bound off sts at front.
Work 2 rows of s c around yoke and neck working 2 loops for buttonholes
on right side of yoke, on first row. With contrasting shade start
smocking on right hand side at bottom of yoke. Sew the first 2 K sts
tog, then the next 2 K sts, leave the thread loose between the 2 smocked
sts. Repeat across row. Start 2nd row turn, skip first K st and work
back in same manner. Work fronts and 3 rows of smocking on cuffs in same
manner. Sew on buttons.


BOOTIES

With No. 3 needles, cast on 47 sts, *K 3, sl 1 st, repeat from *across
row, ending with K 3, P back. Repeat these 2 rows for 4 inches. On right
side, K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row, P back. K 15, then P
2, K 1, for 17 sts, turn, K 2, P 1 for 17 sts. Repeat these 2 rows on 17
sts for 26 rows, break thread. Holding right side toward you, pick up 12
sts on side of instep, K across front of instep, pick up 12 sts on other
side of instep, K on last 15 sts. K 7 rows even. *On next row dec 1 st
at each end and 4 sts spaced at equal distances apart. K 3 rows even,
repeat from *2 times, bind off. Sew seam at sole and back. With 2
strands of yarn, ch 90 sts. Tape thru beading. Sew 1/2 inch hem in top
of bootie.

[Illustration: No. 800

The very smartest thing for the convalescing mother and child is this
matching ensemble in shell pink with Turquoise smocking. Mother wears a
jacket--and baby too wears a jacket with booties to match.

_Detailed illustration of Booties on Page 5._

_Directions on opposite page._]




_His Majesty_

No. 801

[Illustration]

KNITTED INFANT SET

Size--Infant

     _Needles_--_1 Pair American Standard No. 3 (or Circular)._

     _Material_--_Saxony--3 fold. Sacque--2 one ounce balls. Cap--1 one
           ounce ball. Booties--One-half ounce._

     _Gauge_--_8 sts to one inch._


SACQUE

Starting at neck, cast on 78 sts. K 3 rows. Row 1--K 3, *Y O, K 2 tog,
repeat from *across row, ending with Y O, K 2 tog, K 1. Row 2--K 1 row.
Row 3--*K 3, inc in next st, repeat from *across row, do not inc in
last 4 sts thruout yoke. Rows 4-5-6-7--K. Repeat from Row 1 to 7, 3 more
times. P 1 row, K 1 row, for 6 rows, keeping first and last 3 sts K on
purled rows for border. K 1 row on purled side. Repeat Row 3. K 3 rows.
Repeat rows 1 to 5 inclusive (282 sts). K 100 sts, K back on 58 sts for
sleeve. *P 1 row, K 1 row for 6 rows on sleeve. K 6 rows (3 ribs),
making a dec at beg and end of first K row, repeat from *2 times. P 1
row, K 1 row for 6 rows, on 6th row, *K 3, K 2 tog, repeat from *across
row. K 6 rows. Repeat rows 1 and 2. K 4 rows, bind off loosely on wrong
side. K across back and 2nd sleeve (140 sts), K back on 58 sts for
sleeve. Work sleeve same as other sleeve. Fasten thread and K over front
42 sts. K back having all sts on needle. *P 1 row, K 1 row for 6 rows,
always keeping first and last 3 sts K on purled rows for border. K 6
rows (3 ribs). Repeat from *2 times. K 1 row, P 1 row for 6 rows. K 4
rows, bind off loosely on wrong side. With double strands of yarn, chain
100 sts, tape thru beading at neck. Sew up sleeve seams.


CAP

With No. 1 Needles, cast on 92 sts, K 2, P 2 for 3/4 of an inch. Change
to No. 3 needles, *P 1 row, K 1 row for 6 rows. K 6 rows (3 ribs),
repeat from *3 more times. P 1 row, K 1 row for 6 rows. On next K row,
bind off 31 sts loosely, K 30, bind off 31 sts, loosely. Fasten thread
at beginning of the 30 sts and work in garter st for 1 inch. On next
row, *dec 5 sts at equal distances apart. Work 1 inch even, repeat from
*once, work 1/2 inch even. Sew sides to back piece. With No. 1
needles, pick up (on right side) 80 sts across bottom of cap and K 2, P
2 for 4 rows. Next row, K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row. K
2, P 2 for 6 more rows, bind off loosely. Make a chain of s c about 21
inches long with 2 strands of yarn, tape thru beading.

[Illustration: No. 801

Picture the king or queen of your household be-decked in this Saxony
Cap, Sacque, and Bootie ensemble. The young Heir surely deserves to look
his--or her--best at all times.

Smocked booties are detail of Booties Style 800. Directions on Page 2.]


KNEE BOOTIE

With No. 3 needles, cast on 48 sts, K 1, P 1, ribbing for 6 rows. K 1,
*Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row. Continue to K 1, P 1, for 6
rows.

To start knee shaping: K 31, turn, K 14, turn, K 15, turn, K 16, turn.
Continue to K 1 st more on every row for 20 rows, then K 2 sts more on
every row until all 48 sts are on needle. *Work 1 inch even, dec 1 st at
beg and end of next row, repeat from *until back seam measures 41/2
inches from ribbing (40 sts). Beading: K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from
*across row. K 3 ribs. Now K across 27 sts, turn, K 14 sts, turn, on
these 14 sts, K 24 rows (12 ribs), for instep. Break thread. Holding
right side toward you, pick up 12 sts on side of instep. Continue across
front of instep, pick up 12 sts on other side of instep, K on last 13
sts (64 sts). K 7 rows even. *On next row, dec 1 st at each end and 4
sts spaced at equal distances apart. K 3 rows even, repeat from *2
times. Bind off, sew seam at sole and back. With 2 strands of yarn, Ch
90 sts. Tape thru beading.


SHORT BOOTIES

With No. 3 needles, cast on 40 sts loosely. K 5 rows (3 ribs). On next
row, K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row. *K 3 ribs. K 1 row, P
1 row for 6 rows, repeat from *once. K 3 ribs. Next row, K 1 *Y O, K 2
tog, repeat from *across row. K 3 ribs. Now K across 27 sts, turn, K 14
sts, turn, on these 14 sts, K 24 rows (12 ribs) for instep.

Break thread. Holding right side toward you, pick up 12 sts on side of
instep. Continue across front of instep, pick up 12 sts on other side of
instep, K on last 13 sts (64 sts). K 7 rows even. *On next row, dec 1 st
at each end and 4 sts spaced at equal distances apart. K 3 rows even,
repeat from *2 times. Bind off, sew seam at sole and back. With 2
strands of yarn, Ch 90 sts. Tape thru beading.




_Baby's Three-Piece Crocheted Set_

No. 802

[Illustration]

Size 6 months

     _1 Bone Crochet hook, size 3._

     _Material_--_Baby Zephyr Pompadour. 3 one ounce balls pink. 1 one
           ounce ball, blue. For Sacque, Cap and Booties._


SACQUE

_Row 1_--With pink, ch 62 sts (to measure 91/2 inches, loosely), work 1
s c in 2nd ch from hook, 1 s c in next st, 2 s c in next ch, 1 s c in
each of the next 2 ch, *skip 1 s c, 1 s c in each of the next 2 ch, 2 s
c in next st, 1 s c in each of the next 2 ch, repeat from *across row,
ending with 3 s c (10 points).

_Row 2_--Ch 1, turn, work 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts (picking up
back loop only), 2 s c in next st, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts,
*skip 1 s c, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, 2 s c in next st, 1 s c in
each of the next 2 sts, repeat from *across row, ending with 3 s c, do
not break thread.

_Row 3_--With blue, ch 1, turn, repeat row 2 for 2 rows of blue.
Alternate pink and blue every 2 rows, until you have 18 rows.

_Row 19_--Ch 1, turn, follow pattern for 3 points and end with 3 s c (19
s c for shoulder) work on these 19 sts for 9 rows. Ch 12 sts loosely at
neck edge. S c in 2nd ch from hook, s c in next st, *2 s c in next st,
1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, skip 1 st, 1 s c in each of the next 2
sts, repeat from *across row, ending with 3 s c (5 points). Work on
these 5 points for 15 rows, break thread. With blue, attach yarn at neck
edge and work over 3 points, ending with 3 s c. Work to correspond to
other front. The front just completed will have 1 more row than the
other side. Continue with pink, ch 4, turn, *skip 2 sts, work 4 d c in
next st, picking up both threads, skip 3 sts, 1 d c in next st, 1 d c in
last st just skipped (making an X), repeat from *across front, ending
with 4 d c in last st, ch 10, work 4 d c in first st on back, skip 3
sts, 1 d c in next st, 1 d c in st just skipped, repeat between
**across back, ending with a shell. Ch 10 for underarm and continue
across front, beg with a shell ending row with 1 d c in last st. Ch 4,
turn, *skip 2 d c, d c in next st, d c in st just skipped, 4 d c between
the X pattern, repeat from *across front. Skip 1 ch, work 4 d c in next
ch, skip 3 ch, d c in next ch, d c in st just skipped. Skip 2 ch, 4 d c
in next ch. Follow pattern across back, underarm and front; end row with
1 d c in ch 3 at beg of row. Ch 4, work remainder of sacque same as last
2 rows for 8 more rows. Break thread.

[Illustration: No. 802

Baby Graduates with highest honors from Style 801 to this set for that
afternoon stroll with mother. Just the thing to wear to get those
beneficial sunrays. Made in delicate pink and blue of Baby Zephyr
Pompadour.]

_Scallop_--With blue, fasten thread at left hand corner, ch 1, *work 6 d
c in center of X pattern, s c in center of next pattern, repeat from
*end row with a shell and s c in corner.

With pink, fasten thread at front edge on right side and s c up front,
then ch 3 at neck edge, *skip 1 st, d c in next st, repeat from *around
neck, s c down left front. Work picot on bottom as follows: *ch 1,
loosely, sl st into next st, repeat from *around bottom, break thread.

_Sleeves_--With pink fasten thread at underarm, work 1 s c around
armhole. Row 1--Ch 4, *skip 2 s c, work 4 d c in next st, skip 3 s c, d
c in next st, d c in st just skipped, repeat from *around row, ending
with d c in same st as ch at beg of row (8 shell, 8 X patterns), sl st
in 3rd ch. Sl st 3 more sts, ch 4. Row 2--Work 4 d c between next X
pattern, continue pattern around row and end row same as Row 1. Work 11
more rows in same manner. On 14th row, work 3 d c in X pattern and an X
pattern in each shell.

_Cuff_--Work 2 rows of s c with pink (decreasing every 5th st on first
row). Work 2 rows of blue. Sl st at end of last row, Ch 1.

_Scallops_--With blue, *skip 2 s c, work 6 d c in next st, skip 2 s c, s
c in next st, repeat from *around row. With Pink, *ch 1, loosely, sl st
into next st, repeat from *around row, break thread.

_Cord_--With 1 strand of pink and blue, make a ch 22 inches in length,
tape thru beading. Make a ch 9 inches long tape thru end of yoke.


CAP

Ch 3, join, work 7 s c in ring, then work 2 s c in each st, until there
are 24 sts around. Inc in every 5th st, until there are 45 sts around.
Now inc in every 10th st, until there are 73 sts around, sl st in next
st. To start pattern: Row 1--Ch 4, *skip 1 s c, work 5 d c in next st,
skip 2 s c, d c in next st, d c in last st just skipped (making an X
pattern), repeat from *around row ending with 1 d c in same st at beg
of ch 3, join in 3rd st of ch at beg of row. (15 shell, 15 X patterns).
Sl st over 3 sts of first shell at beg of row, ch 4. Row 2--*Work 5 d c
between X of row below, 1 d c between 3rd and 4th d c of next shell, 1 d
c between 2nd and 3rd d c of same shell (making an X), repeat from
*around row, ending with 1 d c in same st at beg of row. Sl st in 3rd ch
at beg of row, sl st over 3 d c, ch 4. Row 3--Work 5 d c in center of X
pattern, work an X in next shell, continue around row, ending with sl st
in ch 3 at beg of row, sl st over 3 d c, ch 4. Row 4--Repeat row 2. Row
5--Make an X in next shell of row below, work in pattern around row for
13 shells, 12 X patterns, end row with 1 d c in 2nd d c of next shell,
ch 4, turn. Row 6--make an X pattern in first shell, continue pattern
around row, ending with X pattern in last shell, make 1 d c in 3rd ch at
beg of row, ch 3, turn. Work 7 more rows in this manner.

_Band_--Ch 1, turn, *work 1 s c in each of the first 2 sts, 2 s c in
next st, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, skip 2 sts, repeat from
*across row, end with 3 s c, ch 1, turn. Row 2--*1 s c in each of the
first 2 sts, picking up back thread only, 2 s c in next st, 1 s c in
each of the next 2 sts, skip 1 st, repeat from *across row, ending with
3 s c. With contrasting shade work 2 rows. Alternating 2 rows of each
color once more. With 1 strand of pink, 1 strand of blue work 2 rows of
s c around back of cap, skipping a few sts in each row to fit nape of
neck.

_Ties_--At end of last row, ch 48 sts, sl st in 4th ch from hook, ch 4,
sl st in same st. Make 2 more ch 4 loops, break thread, fasten thread at
other side of cap and work in same manner.


BOOTIES

_Instep_--With Pink, ch 13, work 1 sc in 2nd ch from hook, 1 s c in next
st, 2 s c in next st, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, skip 1 st, 1 s c
in each of the next 2 sts, 2 s c in next st, 1 s c in each of the last 3
sts. Ch 1, turn. Row 2--Work 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts (picking up
back st), 2 s c in next st, 1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, skip 1 st,
1 s c in each of the next 2 sts, 2 s c in next st, 1 s c in each of the
last 3 sts, do not break thread. Work 2 rows of contrasting shade,
alternating 2 rows of each color, until you have 10 rows. With pink, ch
28 sts loosely and sl st to other end. S c in each st around instep and
chs, for 5 rnds. Work 5 more rnds, decreasing 3 sts to each rnd, do not
have decreases come over those of previous rnd, break thread and sew
seam of sole. Work 2 rows of s c around top of bootie, decreasing 3 sts
in each rnd, join with a sl st. Ch 4, skip 1 st, work *1 d c in next st,
ch 1, repeat from * (19 d c), join with a sl st. Ch 3, skip ch 3 of row
below. *Work 4 d c between next 2 d c, skip 1 d c, d c between next 2 d
c, d c between last 2 d c just skipped (an X pattern), repeat from
*around row, end row with 1 d c in same st as ch 3 at beg of row, sl st
in 3rd ch. Sl st over 3 sts, ch 4, work 4 d c between first X pattern,
make an X pattern over next shell, end row same as first row. Work 3
more rows in same manner. With blue, work scallops as follows: Sl st
over 3 sts, ch 1, *work 6 d c in X pattern, s c in center of next
scallop, repeat from *around bootie; sl st in same st at beg of row.
With pink, *ch 1, loosely, sl st in next st, repeat from *around row.
With 1 strand of pink, 1 blue, ch 74 sts, tape thru bootie and tie.




_Royal Highness_

No. 803

CAPE AND HOOD IN "SUMMER SKY BLUE"

Size--6 months to 1 year

     _Needles_--_1 pair American Standard No. 2. 1 Circular No. 4._

     _Material_--_Paradise Zephyr 10 ounces._

     _Gauge_--_6 sts to 1 inch._


CAPE

Starting at neck, with No. 2 needles, cast on 76 sts, K 1, P 1, for 3
rows. Beading: K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row. K 1, P 1
for 3 rows, cast on 2 sts. Change to No. 4 circular needle.

_Yoke_--Work in garter st (K each row). Row 1--K 8, *inc 1 st, K 5,
repeat from *across row to within last 8 sts, K 8. Do not inc in first
and last 8 sts thruout yoke. Cast on 2 sts. Row 2--K 1 row. Row 3--On
next row, K back to within last 4 sts, bind off 2 sts for buttonhole, K
2. On next row, cast on 2 sts over those bound off, K across row.
*Repeat Row 1 (but do not cast on the 2 sts). K 3 rows even. Repeat from
*until you have 182 sts, working 2 more buttonholes, 1 inch apart. On
next row, K 24 sts, *slip 1 st, K 18 sts, repeat from *to within 25 sts,
slip 1 st, K 24. On next row, K 3, P to within last 3 sts (Purling the
sl st), K 3, repeat these 2 rows for 1 inch. On next K row, K 3, inc 1
st, K 9, inc 1 st, K 10, sl 1 st, continuing pattern across row, making
an inc in center of each gore. Inc in 4th to last st same as beg of row.
Work even for 1 inch. Inc in same manner every inch, until cape measures
11 inches from end of yoke. K 12 rows, 6 ribs, bind off loosely on wrong
side.

_Cord_--Ch 3, join, work 5 s c in ring. Work 2 s c in each st, until you
have 12 s c. Work even until you have 5 rows. Fill with cotton. S c
around decreasing a few sts in each row to close opening. Ch 24 inches.
Make another ball in same manner and attach to 2nd end.

[Illustration: No. 803

Even the baby is thought of when it comes to knitting--perhaps more so
than the adult--for here is baby's early fall cape and hood for those
evenings when it is just a bit too cool for baby to be without some sort
of covering. Here is a practical answer, and an answer soft and
alluring. The embroidery on the cape and hood has that "smart touch"
that gives the garment a look of regality--for his--or her--_Royal
Highness_--the Baby.]


HOOD

Starting at first half of neck edge, with No. 2 needles, cast on 42 sts,
K 1, P 1 for 4 rows. Change to No. 4 needles. *K 1 row, P 1 row for 1
inch always knitting first 4 sts on Purled rows for border at front. Now
K 2 sts tog at back edge, repeat from *until piece measures 5 inches,
37 sts (measuring after the K 1, P 1 edge). Work 1 inch even. To start
peak at top: _Row 1_--K 30 sts, turn. _Row 2_ and all even rows, P back,
slipping first st. _Row 3_--K 24, turn. _Row 5_--K 18, turn. _Row 7_--K
12, turn. _Row 9_--K 6, turn.

All sts are now on left hand needle (this completes half of hood). On
next row starting at back, K 9, turn. Following row: K 15, turn. Next
row K 21, turn. Continue in this manner, increasing 6 sts every other
row, until you have 33 sts on right hand needle, turn. P back and on
next row, K 37. Work other half to correspond increasing 1 st every inch
at back edge. Fold in half and sew seam. Sew hood to cape, starting
about 2 inches from beading at beg of cape, gathering across leaving 2
inches at end.




_Linda_

No. 804

COAT AND BONNET

Size 2-4 years

     _Needles_--_Bone American Standard No. 5. 1 Bone Crochet Hook, size
           5._

     _Material_--_Knitting Worsted, 4 Fold. Coat--10 ounces. Bonnet--3
           ounces. 5 yards of Hat Cord. 4 Wooden Buttons._

     _Gauge_--_6 sts to 1 inch K. 5 sts to 1 inch Cr._


COAT

_Back_--Cast on 108 sts (116 sts, size 4), work in garter st (K each
row), for 1 inch. P 1 row, K 1 row, for 2 inches, 3 inches from bottom.
On next K row, dec 4 sts as follows: K 2 tog, K 33, K 2 tog, K 34, K 2
tog K 33, K 2 tog (104 sts). Work 1 inch even. K 2 tog, K 32, K 2 tog, K
32, K 2 tog, K 32, K 2 tog (100 sts). Work 1 inch even. Make another dec
in same manner, having decreases come directly above those of previous
rows, every inch until you have 9 inches, 80 sts. Work 2 inches even or
desired length to underarm. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows for
under arm, then K 2 tog at beg of the next 4 rows (70 sts). Work 4 rows
even. On next K row, *K 3, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row but do not
K last 2 sts tog. Yoke is worked in garter st for 3 inches (31/2
inches, size 4). Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next 8 rows, bind off
remaining sts for back of neck.

_Left Front_--Cast on 58 sts (60 sts, size 4), work in garter st for 1
inch. K 5 sts for border, P across, K 1 row, P 1 row for 2 inches always
K 5 sts on purled rows at front for border. On next K row, dec 2 sts as
follows: K 2 tog, K 24, K 2 tog, K 30 (56 sts). Work 1 inch even. K 2
tog, K 23, K 2 tog, K 29 (54 sts). Work 1 inch even. Make another dec in
same manner, having decreases come directly above those of previous row,
every inch, until you have 9 inches, 44 sts. Work 2 inches even or
desired length to underarm. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next row that
begins at underarm, then K 2 sts tog at beg of every row at underarm, 3
times (38 sts). Work 3 rows even. On next K row, *K 2 tog, K 2 repeat
from *across row, K last 5 sts. Work yoke in garter st for 2 inches
(21/2 inches, size 4). Bind off 7 sts at neck edge, then K 2 sts tog at
beg of every row at neck edge, until you have 20 sts. Bind off 4 sts on
next 4 rows that begin at armhole and dec 1 st on every row that begins
at neck edge.

_Right Front_--Work to correspond until piece measures 8 inches,
measuring on border at front. Work buttonholes as follows: K 3 sts on
border side, bind off 2 sts for buttonhole, K across. On next row, cast
on 2 sts over those bound off on previous row. Continue same as left
side and continue buttonholes 11/2 inches apart.

_Sleeves_--Cast on 32 sts, (36 sts, size 4), work in garter st for 2
inches (21/2 inches, size 4). On next row, *K 2, inc 1 st repeat from
*across row (42 sts). *K 1 row, P 1 row for 1 inch, inc 1 st at each end,
repeat from *until sleeve measures 6 inches from bottom (50 sts). Work
2 inches even, or desired length to underarm. Bind off 3 sts at beg of
the next 2 rows, then 2 sts (5 sts off on each side). K 2 sts tog at beg
and end of every 4th row, until you have 28 sts, bind off.

_Pockets_--Cast on 14 sts, P back. Inc in first and last st on K rows,
until you have 18 sts. K 1 row, P 1 row, until piece measures 21/4
inches. *K 1, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row. K in garter st for 3/4
inch, bind off loosely. Sew fronts and back tog, sew sleeves tog and
insert into armholes with seams meeting at underarm. Sew on buttons.

_Collar_--Holding wrong side toward you, skip 3 sts, pick up 47 sts to
within last 3 sts. K first 3 sts, P to within last 3 sts, K 3 sts. On
next row, inc in every 4th st across row. Work 1/2 inch even. Inc in
every 5th st across. Work 1/2 inch even. Inc in every 6th st. Work 5
rows in garter st, bind off on wrong side. Sew pockets and embroider as
shown on illustration.

[Illustration: No. 804

A welcome addition to any young lady's wardrobe. Notice particularly the
treatment of the hat--decidedly new and very young ladyish with hand
embroidered grosgrain ribbon on the brim and on the pockets. Just the
thing for those cool evenings in Summer or Fall.]


BONNET

_Crown_--Ch 3, join, work 7 s c in ring, work 2 s c in each st until
there are 24 sts around. Now inc 1 st in every 5th st, until there are
50 sts around, then every 15th st until there are 100 sts. Work even
until crown measures 5 inches from center to edge. Dec 3 sts to each rnd
but do not have decreases over those on previous rows, until crown
measures 51/2 inches from center to edge or desired headsize. Ch 1,
turn, work 1 row of s c around bonnet to within 20 sts at beg of row.
*Ch 1, turn, work 1 row of s c in each st across row to within ch 1, at
beg of row, repeat from *6 more times. On next row, sew cord at beg of
row, *s c over cord increasing every 4th st. Adjust cord at end of each
row, ch 1, turn, repeat from *for 1 more row. On next 2 rows inc in
every 12th st. On next 2 rows inc in every 20th st. On last 2 rows, work
even. Cut cord and sew. Work 1 row of s c over ends of brim and back of
cap. Block lightly. Embroider flowers on grosgrain ribbon and sew on
sides and front of brim. Sew grosgrain ribbon in same manner on back of
brim. Turn back 5 rows without cord and attach bows on each side as
shown on illustration.




_Bonnie Annie Laurie_

ILLUSTRATION ON FRONT COVER

No. 805

PLAID COAT AND BONNET IN ROYAL BLUE

Size 4 to 6 years

     _Needles_--_1 Pair American Standard No. 5._

     _Material_--_Knitting Worsted, 3 four ounce skeins. Sports Yarn
           (for embroidering) Red, Yellow, Green. 16-inch zipper open._

     _Gauge_--_51/2 sts to 1 inch._


COAT

_Back_--Starting at bottom, cast on 102 sts, (108 sts, size 6), K 8 rows
(4 ribs). P 1 row, K 1 row for 21/2 inches. Now dec 4 sts as follows: K
2 tog, K 31, K 2 tog, K 32, K 2 tog, K 31, K 2 tog (98 sts). Work 1 inch
even. Make another dec: K 2 tog, K 30, K 2 tog, K 30, K 2 tog, K 30, K 2
tog (94 sts). *Work 1 inch even and make another dec in same manner,
having decreases come directly above those of previous decreases, repeat
from *until piece measures 11 inches (66 sts). Work 1 inch even (3
inches, size 6). *Now inc 1 st on each side, work 1 inch even, repeat
from *once. Work even until back measures 17 inches or desired length
to underarm. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at
beg of the next 6 rows (6 sts off on each side). Work even until armhole
measures 5 inches (51/2 inches, size 6), measuring straight up from
where the 3 sts were bound off. Bind off 5 sts at beg of the next 6
rows, bind off remaining sts loosely for back of neck.

_Left Front_--Cast on 52 sts (56 sts, size 6). K 8 rows (4 ribs). P 1
row, K 1 row for 21/2 inches, always keeping first 3 sts K on purled
rows for border at front. Now dec 2 sts as follows: K 2 tog, K 23, K 2
tog, K 25 (50 sts). Work 1 inch even and *make another dec in same
manner, work 1 inch even. Repeat from *until piece measures 11 inches
(34 sts). Work 1 inch even (3 inches, size 6). *Now inc 1 st at seam
end, work 1 inch even, repeat from *once. Work even until front
measures 17 inches or desired length to underarm. Bind off 4 sts at beg
of next row for underarm, then K 2 tog at beg of every row at underarm 3
more times. Work even until armhole measures 31/2 inches from where the
4 sts were bound off (4 inches, 6 years). On next row that begins at
neck edge, bind off 6 sts. P 2 sts tog at beg of every row at neck edge,
until 18 sts remain. Bind off 5 sts at beg of the next 3 rows at
shoulder and continue to P 2 tog at neck, until all sts are bound off.
Work Right Front to correspond.

[Illustration: No. 805

Smart, colorful and easy on the eye is this two-piece ensemble for the
young lady. The coat is first knit and then the plaid is embroidered in
green, yellow and red. The only note of contrasting plainness is in the
collar of the coat and the back of the bonnet. The coat closes with a
convenient Zipper.]

_Sleeves_--Cast on 38 sts (42 sts, size 6), K 8 rows (4 ribs). Now P 1
row, K 1 row for 21/2 inches, *inc 1 st on each end, work even for 1
inch, repeat from *until sleeve measures 10 inches from beginning (54
sts). Work 1 inch even or desired length to underarm. Bind off 3 sts at
beg of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at beg and end of every K row,
until 18 sts remain. Work other sleeve in same manner.

Embroidering (see swatch).

Fold back in half at neck edge, place a marker. Count 7 sts on left side
of marker. With red yarn insert tapestry needle from wrong side to right
side. *Now insert needle over 1 thread and down 1 thread, bringing
needle from wrong to right side 2 threads below, repeat from *to bottom
of coat. Count 7 sts to right of marker, with red, make another row in
same manner. Fasten ends securely. Count 14 sts on either side of these
2 rows and make 1 more row with red, in same manner. With yellow work 1
row on next thread to right side of each red row. Measure 2 inches from
bottom of back, with red make a running st, inserting needle over 1
thread and under 2 threads across row, do not pull too tightly. *Skip 17
rows of knitting and on 18th row, make another running st with red,
repeat from *to top of coat. With green make 1 row below red in same
manner.

_Fronts_--On 5th row from shoulder edge, with red, work from top to
bottom same as back. Count 14 rows, with red, make another row in same
manner. Measure 2 inches from bottom, work running sts with red and
green to match back.

_Sleeves_--Make same st from top of sleeve to bottom starting in center
of sleeve, with red and yellow. Skip 14 rows on either side make one
more row, with red and yellow. Work running sts with red and green
starting 2 inches from bottom of coat, every 18th row to top of sleeve.
Sew shoulder seams.

_Collar_--Holding wrong side of coat toward you, pick up 52 sts. P 1
row, K 1 row, knitting first and last 3 sts on P rows for border for 1/2
inch. Inc in every 6th st across row. Work 1/2 inch even. Inc in every
7th st across. Work 1/2 inch even. Inc every 8th st across. Work 1/2
inch even. Work 3 ribs in garter st, bind off loosely on wrong side.

Sew Back to Fronts and sew up sleeves, insert into armholes, having
seams meet at underarm. Make two small inverted pleats at top of
sleeves. Insert zipper.


BONNET

Starting at side of front. With No. 5 needles, cast on 20 sts, P 1 row,
K 1 row for 3 rows, inc 1 st at beg of next row (place marker, this is
back edge). Work 3 rows even. Inc 1 st at beg of next row, continue to
inc 1 st at beg of every 4th row, until you have 29 sts. Work even until
piece measures 8 inches from beg. Now dec 1 st at back edge every 4th
row, until you have 20 sts. Work 3 rows even, bind off.

_Back_--Cast on 32 sts. P 1 row, K 1 row, for 1 inch. *On next row, inc
1 st at beg and end, work 1 inch even, repeat from *until piece
measures 4 inches, 40 sts. *Now work 3 rows even, dec 1 st at beg and
end of next K row, repeat from *2 more times (34 sts). K 2 tog at beg
and end of every row, until 26 sts remain. Fold front piece of cap in
half crosswise, place marker. Count 9 sts on each side of marker. With
red yarn make a running st inserting needle over one thread and under 2
threads across row, do not pull too tightly. Skip 9 sts from other side
of marker, work another row in same manner. Work 2 more rows, 18 rows
from each side of rows just finished. With green work one more row in
same manner 1 st above. Count 8 rows from straight end of piece, work
yarn lengthwise with red as follows: *Insert needle over one thread and
down one thread bringing needle from wrong to right side 2 threads
below. Repeat from *to end of piece. Count 14 rows (about 21/2 inches
from end of piece), with red make another row in same manner. With
yellow make another row in same manner one thread above.

Sew 1/2 inch hem on straight end of front piece; sew other end to back
piece (place marker at center of each piece first). Work 2 rows of s c
around bottom of cap. Attach small bows made of grosgrain ribbon leaving
ends to tie. Attach feather as shown on illustration.


PURSE

_Purse_--Cast on 26 sts, P 1 row, K 1 row for 4 inches or enough rows to
make a perfect square. Work another piece in same manner. Embroider
stripes same as in coat about 3/4 inch from sides. Sew 2 sides tog s c
around other 2 sides. Strap--Ch 4, work 1 s c in 2nd ch from hook, 1 s c
in each of the next 2 sts. *Ch 1, turn, work 1 s c in each of the 3 sts,
repeat from *until piece measures 8 inches. Sew ends to top of squares.
Insert 2 four inch zippers (or 1 zipper if preferred). Attach tassels on
zipper ends, made with a few strands of yarn.




_Sunny_

No. 806

SLIP-OVER-CARDIGAN-PANTIES

Size--6 Months to one year

     _Needles_--_No. 3 American Standard._

     _Material_--_Kashmir Fleece--5 one ounce balls._

     _1/2 yard of Elastic._

     _13 Pearl Buttons._

     _Gauge_--_8 sts to 1 inch._


SLIP-OVER

_Back_--Starting at bottom, cast on 76 sts (80 sts, size 1), K 1, P 1
for 2 inches. K 1 row, P 1 row for 41/2 inches, (5 inches, size 1).
Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at beg of the
next 4 rows (64 sts). Work even for 3 inches (31/2 inches, size 1). K 6
rows (3 ribs). On next row K 20, bind off 24 sts loosely, K 20. On these
20 sts, P 1 row, K 1 row for 4 rows, K 2 rows, bind off loosely. Fasten
thread at beg of the other shoulder and work in same manner.

[Illustration: No. 806

The suit consists of slip-over cardigan and panties and is just the
thing for a One Year Old to wear when welcoming his--or her--First
Birthday Party guests. The king of the house will do justice to this
handsome suit.]

_Front_--Work front same as for back to underarm. Bind off 4 sts at beg
of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at beg of the next 4 rows (64 sts). On
next purled row, P 31, K 2, P 31. K back. On next purled row, P 25, K 2,
P 4, K 2, P 4, K 2, P 25. K back. Continue pattern in this manner 6 more
sts in pattern on each side, on purled rows, until all sts are in
pattern. Work in pattern until armhole measures same as for back, having
last 3 ribs K in garter st. On next row, K 20, bind off 24 sts loosely,
K 20. On these 20 sts, K 4 rows (2 ribs), on next row, work buttonholes
as follows: K 4 sts at shoulder edge, bind off 2, K 4, bind off 2, K 4,
bind off 2, K 2. On next row, cast on 2 sts over those bound off. K 2
more rows, bind off. Work other shoulder to correspond. Fold shoulders
tog, having buttonholes overlap the stockinette st band. When picking up
sleeve sts, pick up sts thru both pieces at top of shoulder.

_Sleeves_--Pick up 58 sts, starting after the 6 bound off sts, to 6
bound off sts at other end. P back, pick up 2 sts at each end of every
row, until all sts are picked up (70 sts). *Work 1/2 inch or 4 rows, K 2
tog at beg and end of next row, repeat from *until sleeve measures 6
inches (46 sts). K 1, P 1 (ribbing), for 1 inch, bind off loosely. Sew
on buttons with tape on shoulder piece. Boat is worked in cross stitch
as shown on illustration.


CARDIGAN

_Back_--Starting at bottom, cast on 76 sts (80 sts, size 1), K 1, P 1
for 2 inches. K 1 row, P 1 row for 5 inches (51/2 inches, size 1). Bind
off 4 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at beg of the next 4
rows (64 sts). Work even for 3 inches (31/2 inches, size 1). K 6 rows
(3 ribs). On next row K 20, bind off 24 sts loosely, K 20. On these 20
sts, P 1 row, K 1 row for 4 rows. (Put other 20 sts on st holder). Now
inc 1 st at beg of every K row at neck edge, until you have 30 sts. Cast
on 5 sts at neck edge. P 1 row, K 1 row always keeping last 5 sts K on
purled rows for border. Work 11/2 inches from beginning of border, then
inc 1 st at end of K rows, 2 times at underarm, then cast on 4 sts at
underarm. Work even for 5 inches continuing border. K 1, P 1 ribbing for
2 inches, bind off loosely, K 1, P 1. Work right front to correspond.
Start buttonholes 1 inch from beg of border as follows: K 3, bind off 2,
P across. On next row, cast on 2 sts over those bound off. Continue 5
more buttonholes 11/2 inches apart.

_Band at Neck_--Pick up 82 sts, K 1, P 1 ribbing for 1 row, on next row,
K 1, P 1, K 1, bind off 2 sts, K 1, P 1 across row. On next row cast on
3 sts over those bound off. K 1, P 1 for 2 more rows, bind off, K 1, P
1.

_Sleeves_--Pick up 58 sts, starting after the 6 bound off sts, to 6
bound off sts at other end. P back. Pick up 2 sts at each end of every
row, until all sts are picked up (70 sts). *Work 1/2 inch or 4 rows, K 2
tog at beg and end of next row, repeat from *until sleeve measures 6
inches (46 sts). K 1, P 1 (ribbing), for 1 inch, bind off loosely. Sew
up side seams and sleeves. Sew on buttons with ribbon on wrong side.


PANTIES

Cast on 76 sts, loosely (80 sts, size 1), K 1, P 1 for 6 rows. Next row,
K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row. K 1, P 1 for 6 more rows.
K 1 row, P 1 row for 7 inches from start (71/2 inches, size 1). To
start shaping of crotch; K 36, inc in next st, K 2, inc in next st, K
36, P back. K 36, inc in next st, K 4, inc in next st, K 36, P back. K
36 sts and inc in same manner, having 2 more sts between increases until
you have 6 sts between increases. Bind off 4 sts at beg of each row
(continue to inc for crotch in same manner), until all sts are bound off
on each side of crotch (24 sts). K 1 row, P 1 row on these 24 sts
(crotch) for 11/2 inches. Cast on 4 sts at end of every row and dec in
same manner as you increased, thus having 2 sts less on each K row,
between crotch. K 1 row, P 1 row on 76 sts, for 61/2 inches (7 inches,
size 1). K 1, P 1, for 6 rows. Next row, K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from
*across row. K 1, P 1 for 6 more rows, bind off loosely. Pick up 80 sts
around each leg, K 1, P 1, ribbing for 1 inch, bind off loosely. Fold
tog on wrong side easing longer side in for back. Tape with elastic.

[Illustration]




_Land of Nod_

No. 807

FIVE-PIECE ENSEMBLE WITH CARRIAGE ROBE

Size 6 Months to 1 Year

     _Needles_--_1 Pair American Standard No. 2 and 4. 4 Double point,
           No. 4. (For Mitts)._

     _Material_--_Jacket--5 ounces (Germantown 4-Fold used in complete
           ensemble). Leggins--5 ounces. Hood--2 ounces. Mitts--1 ounce.
           Shoes--1 ounce. Afghan--12 ounces. Imported Angora--2 Balls.
           Zipper._

     _Gauge_--_6 sts to 1 inch._


JACKET

_Back_--With No. 4 needles, cast on 58 sts. (64 sts, size 1). *P 4 sts,
K 2, repeat from *across row, ending with P 4. K next row (right side).
Repeat these two rows for 6 inches. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2
rows, then K 2 sts tog at beg of the next 6 rows (46 sts). Work even for
4 inches (41/2, size 1), measuring straight up from where the 3 sts
were bound off. Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next 6 rows, bind off
remaining sts for back of neck.

_Left Front_--Cast on 30 sts (32 sts, size 1). *P 4, K 2, repeat from
*across row, ending with K 2. K next row. Repeat these 2 rows for 6
inches. On the P 2 gore, bind off 4 sts for underarm, then K 2 sts tog
at beg of every row at underarm 3 times (7 sts off). Work even for 3
inches (31/2 size 1). On next row that begins at neck edge, bind off 5
sts, follow pattern across. P 2 sts tog at beg of every row that begins
at neck edge until 14 sts remain. Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next 3
rows that begin at shoulder and continue to K 2 sts tog at neck edge,
until all sts are bound off.

_Right Front_--Work right front to correspond having K 4 gores meet for
zipper.

_Sleeves_--Cast on 34 sts (38 sts, size 1), P 4, K 2 across row, K back.
Work in pattern for 2 inches. Inc 1 st on each side every inch until
sleeve measures 61/2 inches from start. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the
next 2 rows, then bind off 2 sts at beg of the next 2 rows (5 sts off on
each side). Now K 2 sts tog at beg and end of every 4th row, until 20
sts remain, bind off. Sew up seams at underarm and shoulders. Sew
sleeves tog, insert sleeves into armholes.

_Collar_--With wrong side towards you pick up 52 sts. *P 4, K 2, repeat
from *across row ending with P 4. K back. Work 4 more rows in pattern.
On wrong side make an inc in each K 2 gore. Work in pattern until collar
measures 2 inches, bind off loosely. Work 1 row of s c around collar and
fronts. Sew on zipper.


LEGGINS

_Cuff_--With No. 2 needles, cast on 40 sts (46 sts, size 1), K 1, P 1
for 14 rows. Change to No. 4 needles, K 1, P 1 for 3 more rows. K next
row, increasing every 6th st across row. P 1 row, K 1 row, increasing
every 6th row at beg and end, until you have 62 sts. Now inc in every
4th row, until you have 68 sts. Inc in every 2nd row until you have 78
sts (86 sts, size 1), or desired length to crotch. Work 2 rows even. *On
next K row, bind off 2 sts, K to end of row. On next purled row, P 2 sts
tog (place marker for back) repeat from *once. Work 2 rows even, dec 1
st at beg and end of next 2 K rows. Now dec 1 st every 6th row at front
edge, 6 times, meanwhile dec every 8th row at back edge, 2 times. Work 6
rows even (10 rows, size 1). On next purled row, P 28, turn, slip first
st. K to back edge, P 22, K back, P 16. K back, P 10, K back, P 5, K
back. P across all sts. Change to No. 2 needles, K 1, P 1 for 4 rows. On
next row, K 2, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row. K 1, P 1 for 4
more rows, bind off loosely, K 1, P 1. Work other leg to correspond. Sew
each leg tog up to crotch; sew front and back seams. Ch 160 sts, insert
thru beading.


HOOD

Starting at first half of neck edge, cast on 44 sts (48 sts, size 1),
work in garter st (K each row), for 4 inches. To start peak at top: *dec
1 st by knitting the 2nd and 3rd sts tog, place marker, this side will
be referred to as back. Inc in 3rd st at front edge. K 4 rows (2 ribs),
repeat from *once (5 inches) from start. Now bind off 10 sts at beg of
front edge and K 2 tog at beg of next row at back edge. Continue to K
2nd and 3rd sts tog at beg of every row at back edge and K 2 tog at beg
and end of every row at front edge, until you have 16 sts. Continue in
same manner at back edge and work even at front, until you have 10 sts.
Now inc in first st at beg of front edge and bind off 2 sts at beg of
every row at back edge, until you have 4 sts, bind off. Work another
piece in same manner and sew tog.

_Band at Neck_--Cast on 4 sts, work in garter st for 20 inches, bind
off. Sew band to bottom of hood gathering hood to fit snug, leave ends
to tie.

_Pompom_--With a small card board, 11/4 inches in width, wrap yarn
around cardboard 36 times, sew at one end, cut at other. Make 2 more in
same manner, sew 3 pieces together, trim.


MITTS

Cast 10 sts on first needle, 10 sts on 2nd needle, 10 sts on 3rd needle,
with 4th needle K 1, P 1 for 6 rows. *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *for 1
round. K 1, P 1 for 6 rows. Remainder of mitten is K. Inc 1 st on each
needle 33 sts. Work 2 inches even. (21/2 inches, size 1). *K 3, K 2
tog, repeat from *for 1 round. Work 4 rows even. *K 2, K 2 tog, repeat
from *for 1 round. *Work 1 round even. K 1, K 2 tog, repeat from *until
10 sts remain. Weave sts tog or bind off, fold and sew. Ch 80 sts,
tape thru beading of cuff. Put ends of ch thru cuff of sweater and tie.


SHOES

Cast on 8 sts, K back. K 3, inc in each of the next 2 sts, K 3. K 2
rows. K 4, inc in each of the next 2 sts, K 4. K 2 rows. Continue in
this manner, until you have 24 sts. K 9, Y O, K 2 tog, K 3, Y O, K 2
tog, K 8. K 4 rows. K 8, put on st holder, bind off 8, K 8. K back on 8
sts, cast on 4, K back. On next row, *K 7, Y O, K 2 tog, K 3. K 3 rows,
repeat from *5 times, put on st holder. Work other side to correspond.
Pick up 60 sts. *P back. K next row and dec 1 st at beg and end and 3
sts in center, spaced at equal distances apart, repeat from *2 times.
Weave these sts tog or bind off and sew. Weave back sts tog or bind off
and sew. Ch 80 sts, tape thru beading.


CARRIAGE ROBE

24 inches width.

32 inches length.

     _Gauge_--_5 sts to 1 inch._

     _Pattern_--_Multiple of 11, plus 10 sts._

With No. 5 needles, cast on 142 sts, *K 10, sl 1 st, repeat from *across
row, end row with K 10. Next row, P back, purling the sl st. Repeat
these 2 rows for 32 inches. With Angora or contrasting shade of yarn,
embroider as follows: Insert needle from wrong side to right side, on
left side at the sl st. *Skip 1 sl st, insert needle from right to left,
thru next sl st, repeat from *to length of robe. Do not break thread,
insert needle from right to left working from bottom to top (Making
an X). Work 3 rows of s c around robe, working 3 sts in corners.

[Illustration: No. 807

Five Piece Ensemble, with Carriage Robe for a tiny Baby. What a pleasure
you will have in fondling the well dressed baby who has the foresight to
have in his wardrobe this five piece suit, consisting of leggings, cap,
jacket, mittens and shoes. The jacket has a convenient Zipper front. To
finish, you may trim with angora or a contrasting shade of yarn may be
used.]




_A Sailor's Sweetheart_

No. 808

CROCHETED JACKET

Size 4 to 6 years

     _1 Bone Crochet Hook, size 3._

     _Material_--_Cashmere Sports, 4 two ounce balls. One-half ounce
           ball white and red. 6 gold buttons._


_Back_--Ch 68 (to measure about 12 inches). (72 chs, size 6). Work 1 s c
in 2nd ch from hook, s c in each ch. Ch 1, turn, work 12 rows of s c. On
13th row, inc in every 7th st across row (76 s c). Next row, ch 2, turn,
insert hook in 2nd ch from hook, draw yarn thru, insert needle in first
s c, wrap, draw thru 2 loops, wrap thru 2 more (same as d c). *Insert
needle in large loop of st, draw thru, insert needle in next s c,
complete same as d c, repeat from *across row (right side). Ch 1, turn,
s c in each st across row. Repeat these 2 rows for 8 inches. On next s c
row, s c to within last 3 sts, ch 2, turn, follow pattern across row to
within last 3 sts. Ch 1, turn, s c across row; do not s c in last 2 sts,
ch 2, follow pattern across row, do not work in last 2 sts. Follow
pattern across for the next 6 rows and do not work in last st of each
row (8 sts off on each side). Work in pattern for 51/2 inches, or
desired length to shoulder. On next s c row, *s c to within last 6 sts,
ch 1, turn, s c to within last 6 sts at other end, (remainder of back is
worked in s c rows), repeat from *2 more times, break thread.

[Illustration: No. 808

This young lady is wearing one of the most colorful of jackets.
Crocheted in Royal Blue, with a white sailor collar that has a touch of
red--so three cheers for the Red, White and Blue. An added bit of
glamour is the gold buttons down the front. Ship ahoy!]

_Left Front_--Ch 34, (36 chs, size 6) work 1 s c in 2nd ch from hook,
work 1 s c in each ch across row. Ch 1, turn, work 12 rows of s c. On
13th row, inc in every 7th st across row. Work same as back to underarm.
On next s c row, work to within last 3 sts of underarm. Ch 2, follow
pattern across row. On next row, s c to within last 2 sts, *ch 2. Follow
pattern across row, on next row, s c to within last st, repeat from *3
times. (9 sts off at underarm). When piece measures about 11/2 inches
from underarm work pocket as follows: Work over 6 sts from underarm
side. Pocket: With another strand of yarn, ch 17 sts loosely, work in
pattern for 2 inches, break thread, insert pocket. Continue pattern on
pocket for 16 sts and skip 16 on sweater; continue across front. Follow
pattern until front measures 101/2 inches from bottom at front edge,
dec 2 sts at front edge (by not working in last s c and the turning cr).
Work even at armhole edge, and do not work in last st of every row at
neck edge, until you have 20 sts. When piece measures same as back to
shoulder, s c to within last 6 sts at shoulder edge, 2 times (same as
back), and continue to dec at neck 2 more times. Work right front to
correspond, omitting pocket.

_Sleeves_--Ch 41 sts (to measure about 6 inches), (45 chs, size 6). Work
1 s c in 2nd ch from hook, s c in each ch to end of row. Ch 1, turn,
work 10 rows of s c. On 11th row inc 4 sts across row at equal distances
apart. Work in pattern same as for back for 1 inch. On next row, inc 1
st on each side. Continue to inc 1 st on each side every inch until you
have 60 sts across row. Work even until sleeve measures 10 inches from
bottom of cuff or desired length to underarm. *On next row work to within
3 sts at end of row, repeat from *once. On next row work to within 2 sts
at end of row, repeat from *once (50 sts). Now work to within 1 st of
each row until you have 28 sts left. Sew shoulder scams and sides. Sew
sleeves and insert into armholes making a small inverted pleat at top.

Starting at right front, work 1 row of s c completely around fronts and
neck. Work 3 more rows of s c on left front, break thread. Work 1 row of
s c on right front making ch 3 loops for buttonholes about 2 inches
apart. Work 2 more rows of s c over chains. Work 2 rows of s c of red on
pocket, 2 rows of white, sew ends.

_Collar_--Ch 49 sts, work 1 s c in 2nd ch from hook, s c in each ch
across row. Work in pattern for 3 inches. Work over 12 sts. Dec 1 st (by
not working in last st) at end of every s c row on outer edge of collar
until you have 2 sts. Work other side of collar to correspond. Work 1
row of s c around outside edge of collar, increasing 2 sts in each
corner. Work 2 rows of blue, 2 rows of red. Sew to jacket.




_Tyrol_

No. 809

KNITTED JACKET AND HAT

Size 8 to 10 years

     _Needles_--_American Standard No. 11._

     _Material_--_Knitting Worsted, 31/2 four ounce skeins, for both
           Jacket and Hat. Seven Wooden Buttons._

     _Scale_--_4 sts to 1 inch._


JACKET

_Back_--With No. 11 needles and 2 strands of yarn cast on 42 sts (size
10, 46 sts), *K 2, P 2 across row. Next row, P 2, K 2, repeat from *for
91/2 inches. Bind off 2 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at
beg of the next 4 rows, 34 sts remaining. Work even for 51/2 inches (6
inches, size 10). Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 6 rows, bind off
remaining 16 sts for back of neck.

_Left Front_--Cast on 26 sts (size 10, 28 sts) *K 2, P 2 across row to
within last 4 sts, K last 4 sts (border). Next row, K 4, P 2, K 2 across
row, ending with P 2. Repeat from *until piece measures 3 inches. *Next
row, on right side, K 2, P 2, K 2, P 2, K 6, P 2, K 2, P 2, K 2, K 4.
Next row, K 4, P 2, K 2, P 2, K 2, P 6, K 2, P 2, K 2, P 2. Repeat from
*until piece measures 91/2 inches. Bind off 2 sts at beg of next row
at underarm, then K 2 tog at beg of next 2 rows at underarm (22 sts).
Work even for 4 inches, (41/2 inches, size 10). Now bind off 4 sts at
border edge and dec 1 st at beg of every row at neck edge, until 12 sts
remain. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 3 rows at shoulder and
continue to dec at neck edge, 3 more times.

_Right Front_--Cast on 26 sts. K 4, *K 2, P 2, repeat from *across row.
Next row, P 2, K 2 to within last 4 sts. K last 4 sts. Repeat these 2
rows for 1 inch. Then work buttonhole as follows: P 2, K 2 across row to
within 4 sts, bind off 2, K 2. Next row, K 2, cast on 2 sts over those
bound off, continue pattern across row. Continue same as left front
working buttonholes every 2 inches.

_Sleeves_--Cast on 24 sts, K 2, P 2, ribbing for 2 inches. Inc 1 st on
each side and inc 1 st on each side every 2 inches, until sleeve
measures 12 inches (34 sts). Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows,
then K 2 tog at beg of the next 2 rows (26 sts). K 2 tog at beg and end
of every 4th row, until you have 16 sts, bind off. Sew shoulder seams.

_Band at neck_--Pick up 46 sts and K 2, P 2, across row. *On next row,
dec 1 st at beg and end of every row, repeat from *until you have 32
sts, bind off. Sew seams at underarm and sleeves, insert sleeves into
armholes, gathering a little at top of sleeve. Embroider heart in center
of panel with rust. The center 2 flowers with brown (Yellow centers).
Top and bottom flowers with orange (brown centers). Work stems with
green. Sew on buttons.

[Illustration: No. 809

An authentic style note emphasized by the embroidery in gay colors down
the panels in the front, which may be easily applied. There is a hat to
match. We used Beige complemented with contrasting colors.]


HAT

With No. 11 needles, 2 strands of yarn, cast on 64 sts. K 2, P 2 for 2
inches. Next row, K 2 tog (P 2, K 2) for 30 sts, (continue with half of
hat) turn, *K 2 tog at beg and end of every row at center back and K 2
tog at beg of every 4th row at front edge until you have 16 sts left.
Bind off 4 sts at beg of every row at back edge until all sts are bound
off. Work other side to correspond. Sew up back of cap. S c around
entire cap. With contrasting yarn (2 strands) chain 24 inches, break
thread, tape thru front. Make 2 small pompoms. Make pompom of 3
different shades, sew tog, trim. Sew on ends of cord, tie in 1 knot.
Embroider as shown on illustration.




_Goldilocks_

No. 810

LITTLE PRINCESS AND HER DOLLY

Size 4-6 years

     _Needles_--_1 Circular Needle, No. 3. 1 Pair American Standard No.
           1._

     _Material_--_Kashmir Sports Yarn; 8 ounces, size 4; 10 ounces, size
           6. 22-inch zipper._

     _Gauge_--_71/2 sts to 1 inch._


DRESS

Starting at bottom, with No. 3 circular needle, cast on 375 sts, size 4
(427 sts, size 6), do not join. K in garter st for 9 rows, 5 ribs.

_Size 4_--Work as follows: P 31, *K 3, P 59, repeat from *4 times, K 3,
P 31. K back. Repeat these 2 rows for 1 inch. First dec: K 13, K 2 tog,
K 12, K 2 tog, K 7, *K 2 tog, K 16, K 2 tog, K 15, K 2 tog, K 16, K 2
tog, K 7, repeat from *4 times, dec last panel same as first panel.
*Work 1 inch even. Make another dec in same manner having decreases come
directly above previous decreases. (24 sts less after each decreased
row). Repeat from *until you have 159 sts. Work even until piece
measures 12 inches or desired length to waist line.

_Size 6_--K 9 rows for border same as size 4. P 37, *K 3, P 67, repeat
from *4 times, K 3, P 37. K back, repeat these 2 rows for 1 inch. First
dec: K 16, K 2 tog, K 15, K 2 tog, K 7, *K 2 tog, K 18, K 2 tog, K 19, K
2 tog, K 18, K 2 tog, K 7, repeat from *4 times, dec last panel same as
first panel. Work 1 inch even. Make another dec in same manner every
inch, until you have 163 sts. Work even until piece measures 14 inches
or desired length to waist line. *K 16 (size 6, K 18) (including 3 K
sts), with No. 1 needles, K 1, P 1, for 49 sts, continue with circular 3
needle, K 29 (back gore), with No. 1 needles, K 1, P 1, for 49 sts.
Continue with No. 3 circular needle, K 16 (size 6, K 18). P back
following pattern, repeat from *for 11/2 inches. On right side of work
continue on No. 3 circular needle same as before without ribbing for
23/4 inches. (31/4 inches, size 6). Size 4 and 6--From now on continue
fronts and back for size 6 same as size 4 only you will have 1 more st
on each front and 2 more sts in back. K 37 to underarm, put on st
holder. Bind off 7. K 71 sts for back, put other front on st holder, P 2
sts tog at beg of the next 4 rows (67 sts). Work even following pattern
for 41/2 inches (5 inches size 6). Bind off 5 sts at beg of the next 8
rows, bind off remaining 27 sts for back of neck. Continue on left
front, bind off 7 sts for underarm, following pattern, K 2 tog at
underarm 3 more times (34 sts) work even for 1 inch more (11/2 inches,
size 6). On wrong side, P 13, K 15 (border for top of pocket), P 6
across. K back, repeat these 2 rows for 4 more rows. On next row, P 13,
bind off 15 sts for pocket edge, P across. With separate yarn, cast on
15 sts, K 1 row, P 1 row for 21/2 inches, put on st holder. K 6 sts, K
the 15 sts from st holder for pocket, K across. P 1 row, K 1 row for 1
inch. Now P 2 tog at beg of every row at neck edge until 23 sts remain.
Bind off 5 sts at beg of the next 4 rows at shoulder and continue to P 2
tog at neck edge, until all sts are bound off. Work Right Front to
correspond.

_Sleeves_--With No. 1 needles, cast on 48 sts (size 6, 52 sts), K 1, P
1, for 3/4 inch. Change to No. 3 needles, K 1 row, next row, P 16, K 3,
P 10, K 3, P 16. K back. K these last 2 rows and inc 1 st at each end
every 4th row, until sleeve measures 2 inches from beginning, 54 sts.
Now inc 2 sts in center gore as follows: *K to first gore and K 4 sts
after gore, inc 1 st, K to within 5 sts of 2nd gore, inc 1 st, K across.
Continue to inc at seam ends every 4th row and 2 sts between gores every
6th row, repeat from *until piece measures 3 inches, 62 sts. Bind off 3
sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at beg and end of next K
row, now K 2 tog at beg and end of every 4th row (continue to inc 2 sts
between gores every 6th row) until you have 50 sts. Now K 2 tog at beg
and end of every K row (do not inc in center gores), until you have 44
sts. Now K 1, P 1 ribbing between gores and continue to K 2 tog at beg
and end of every K row, until ribbing measures 3/4 inch, bind off.

[Illustration: No. 810

Fit for a Princess too!--though she doesn't have to be of Royal Lineage.
Any charming young lady can wear this type of knitted dress and
feel--well--_like a Princess_. The dress has a zipper closure and a
modish flared skirt--and a Sailor collar. The Princess is holding a
doll--wearing a duplicate of her Dress.]

_Collar_--With white, cast on 56 sts, K 4 rows, 3 ribs. K 1 row, P 1
row, always knitting first and last 3 sts on purled rows (border).
Continue these 2 rows for 4 inches. K 16, bind off 24 sts, K 16. Work 3
rows even on last 16 sts, keeping K 3 border on outer edge. Now dec 1 st
every 4th row on neck edge and dec 1 st on outer edge (by knitting 4th
and 5th st tog) every 8th row, until you have 2 sts, bind off. With red
and royal blue, embroider 2 rows around collar as illustrated. Sew
shoulder seams. Sew up sleeve seams, sew into armhole having fullness at
top of sleeve. Sew pockets on inside of dress (do not stitch thru on
right side). Sew on collar. Insert Zipper.

     _Instructions for the knitted doll dress and beret for Style No.
     810 as shown in illustration, will be found in "Mary's Dollies,
     A Doll Booklet," Vol. 5._




_Boy Blue_

No. 811

FOUR-PIECE BOY'S ENSEMBLE

Size 3 to 5 years

     _Needles_--_1 pair American Standard No. 3._

     _Material_--_6 two ounce balls Kashmir Sports for complete outfit.
           Separate pieces require the following: Slip-over--2 two ounce
           balls. Jacket--3 two ounce balls. Pants--11/2 ounces.
           Beret-1/2 ounce. Zipper--12 inch separating._

     _Gauge_--_71/2 sts to 1 inch._


JACKET

_Back_--Cast on 83 sts (86 sts, size 5). Row 1--*P 3, K 2, repeat from
*across row, ending with P 3. Row 2--K back (right side). Repeat these 2
rows for 2 inches, K 1, P 1 for 18 sts, following pattern across row to
within last 18 sts, K 1, P 1 for 18 sts. K 1, P 1 ribbing for 18 sts on
each side for 1 inch. Now work in pattern, until piece measures 8 inches
from start. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows for underarm. Then
K 2 tog at beg of the next 4 rows at underarm (73 sts). Work even until
armhole measures 4 inches, from where the 3 sts were bound off. Bind off
6 sts at beg of the next 8 rows, bind off remaining 25 sts for back of
neck.

[Illustration: No. 811

Consists of pants, slip-over, jacket and beret. The ideal thing for cool
Summer nights or early Fall. You will notice, particularly, the jacket,
which has side ties and slanted pockets just like Dad's--and a zipper
closure in the front to make putting on or taking off a delight and a
definite accomplishment for a _very young man_. We used _king's blue_.

Note the _white anchor_ on the slip-over.]

_Left Front_--Cast on 43 sts (45 sts, size 5). K 3 (border), *P 3, K 2
repeat from *across row, ending with K 2. K next row. Repeat these 2
rows for 2 inches. On next row at seam end, K 1, P 1, for 18 sts, follow
pattern across row. Continue pattern with K 1, P 1 ribbing for 18 sts at
seam end for 1 inch. Continue same as for back to underarm. Bind off 4
sts at beg of next row at underarm, then K 2 sts tog at beg of every row
at underarm, 4 times, 35 sts. Work even for 3 inches, measuring straight
up from where the 4 sts were bound off. Bind off 4 sts at beg of next
row at neck edge, then K 2 sts tog at beg of every row at neck edge,
until 27 sts remain. Bind off 6 sts at beg of shoulder edge, 4 times
and continue knitting 2 sts at neck edge until all sts are bound off.
Work Right Front to correspond.

_Sleeves_--Cast on 40 sts (43 sts, size 5). *Work in pattern for 3/4
inch, inc 1 st at both ends, repeat from *until sleeve measures 8
inches (60 sts) or desired length to underarm. Bind off 2 sts at beg of
the next 4 rows (52 sts), then K 2 sts tog at beg and end of every 4th
row, until 38 sts remain. Now K 2 tog at beg and end of every row until
34 sts remain, bind off.

Sew fronts and back together and sew up sleeve and insert into armholes
having seams meet at underarm. Sew shoulder seams.

_Collar_--Skip 3 sts (border), on each side, with wrong side toward you,
pick up 54 sts, P 1 row, K 1 row, knitting first and last 3 sts on
Purled rows, for 1/2 inch. Inc 1 st in every 6th st across. Work 1/2
inch even. Inc in every 7th st across. Work 1/2 inch even. Inc in every
8th st across. Work 1/2 inch even. Work 1/2 inch in garter st, bind off
loosely on wrong side of collar.

_Tabs on sides_--Cast on 10 sts, K 1, P 1, for 41/2 inches. K 2 tog at
beg and end of every row, until you have 2 sts, draw thru. Work 3 more
pieces in same manner.

_Pockets_--Cast on 17 sts, *K 2, P 3, repeat from *across row, K back.
Work pattern for 1 inch. K 1 row, P 1 row for 11/2 inches. K 2 tog at
beg and end of every row, until 8 sts remain, bind off. Work 1 row of s
c around edge. Sew on pockets as shown on illustration. Sew on tabs at K
1, P 1 border, tie in knots. Sew in zipper.


SLIP-ON

_Back_--Cast on 83 sts, (86 sts, size 5). Row 1--*P 3, K 2, repeat from
*across row, ending with P 3. Row 2--K back (right side), repeat these
2 rows for 2 inches. K 1 row, P 1 row, for 7 inches, from start. Bind
off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, for underarm, then K 2 sts tog at
beg of the next 6 rows at underarm (71 sts). Work even until armhole
measures 4 inches, measuring straight up from where the 3 sts were bound
off. K 19, bind off 33 K 19. Bind off 4 sts at beg of the next 4 rows at
shoulder edge and K 2 tog at neck edge, until all sts are bound off.
Work other shoulder to correspond.

_Front_--Work same as back until piece measures 21/2 inches above
underarm, K 28 sts, bind off center 15, K 28, P back on 28 sts, K 2 sts
tog at beg of every row at neck edge, until 19 sts remain. Bind off 4
sts at beg of the next 4 rows that beg at shoulder and continue to K 2
tog at neck edge, until all sts are bound off. Work other side to
correspond.

_Front band at neck_--On right side, pick up 63 sts, P 3, K 2 across,
ending with P 3, K back. Repeat these 2 rows for 3/4 inch.

_Back band at neck_--Pick up 43 sts. Work same as front.

Sew shoulder seams and pick up 56 sts for sleeves, starting after 6
bound off sts to within 6 bound off sts at end of armhole. Pick up 2 sts
at beg of every row, until you have 68 sts. *Work 3 rows even. On next K
row, dec 1 st at each end, repeat from *until sleeve measures 3 inches,
56 sts. Dec 6 sts across row. Now work in pattern for 3/4 inch, bind
off. Sew up seams at underarm and sleeves. Embroider anchor as shown on
illustration.


PANTS

With No. 3 needles, cast on 84 sts (88 sts, size 5), K 1, P 1 ribbing
for 6 rows. Next row, K 1, *Y O, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row.
Continue ribbing for 6 more rows. Now shape back as follows: K 4, turn,
(slip the first st when purling back), P back, K 8, turn, P back, K 12,
turn, P back. Continue in this manner, working 4 more sts every K row
until there are 44 sts, then P back and on 84 sts, K 1 row, turn, P 40,
K 4, P 40, repeat these 2 rows for 21/2 inches (3 inches, size 4). Now
inc 1 st at each end every 6th row, 5 times, then every 4th row 2 times,
continuing to K center 4 sts to hem. (98 sts). Dec 1 st at each end
every other row 7 times. Work even for 1 inch. P 1 row on K side. P 1
row, K 1 row for 6 rows, bind off loosely. Make other leg to correspond,
starting shaping of back on opposite side as follows: P 4, turn, K back.
P 8, turn, K back and continue in this manner until there are 44 sts,
then K back and continue same as other leg. Sew up seams and turn back
hem. Press creases back and front.


BERET

With No. 3 needles, cast on 8 sts, P back. Row 2--Inc in each st (16
sts), P back. Row 4--*Inc 1 st, K 1 st, repeat from *across row (24
sts). P back. Row 6--*Inc 1 st, K 2 sts, repeat from *across row.
Continue in this manner having 1 more st between each increase, until
you have 19 sts between each increase. K 1 row, P 1 row without
increasing, for 6 rows. Now dec in same manner as you increased. *K 2
sts tog, K 18, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row, P back. Dec in this
manner having 1 st less between each dec for 6 more K rows. K 1 row on
purled side (hem), then K 1 row, P 1 row for 1/2 inch, bind off loosely.
Turn back 1/2 inch hem and sew. Block flat.




_Majorette_

No. 812

KNITTED JACKET AND HAT

6-8 years

     _1 Pair Bone Needles, American Standard No. 5._

     _Material_--_Knitting Worsted, 10 ounces, Royal Blue. Sports yarn,
           1 ounce, gold. 6 buttons._

     _Gauge_--_51/2 sts to 1 inch._


JACKET

_Back_--Cast on 66 sts (70 sts, size 8), K 3 rows. Now P 1 row, K 1 row,
for 6 rows, K 4 rows (2 ribs), (this completes border) P 1 row, K 1 row
for 9 inches (10 inches, size 8) measuring from bottom. Bind off 3 sts
at beg of the next 2 rows, K 2 sts tog at beg of the next 4 rows (5 sts
off on each side). Work even for 51/2 inches (6 inches, size 8),
measuring straight up from where the 3 sts were bound off. Bind off 6
sts at beg of the next 6 rows, place center 20 sts on st holder.

_Left front_--Cast on 38 sts, K 3 rows. *K 2, P 4, K 2 (border), P
across. K next row, repeat these 2 rows for 9 inches, working border on
bottom same as for back. Bind off, 3 sts at beg of the next row that
begins at underarm, then K 2 sts tog at beg of every row at underarm
until you have 7 sts off. Work even until armhole measures 3 inches. K 8
sts (border), place on st holder, then K 2 sts tog at beg of every row
at neck edge until 18 sts remain. Bind off 6 sts at beginning of
shoulder 3 times, work even at neck edge.

_Right Front_--Work to correspond, working first buttonhole 1 inch from
bottom as follows: Work 3 sts, bind off 3, follow pattern across. Cast
on 3 sts over those bound off on previous row. Work buttonholes every 2
inches after first buttonhole (5 buttonholes).

[Illustration: No. 812

This season, more than in many recent seasons, the military motif is
getting quite a play. The classical "_blue and gold_" is carried out to
singular effect with this jacket of blue trimmed with gold buttons
and--no less--epaulettes on the shoulders, the fringe of which is 2 ply
sports yarn. The hat repeats the color theme of the jacket with striking
effect.]

_Sleeves_--Cast on 38 sts, K 3 rows, P 1 row, K 1 row for 6 rows, K 4
rows. P 1 row, K 1 row for 2 inches, *inc 1 st at each end, work 1 inch
even, repeat from *until piece measures 12 inches from bottom (58
sts). Work 1 inch even. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then
bind off 2 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, (48 sts). Now K 2 sts tog at
beg and end of every 4th row, until 32 sts remain. Now K 2 tog at beg
and end of every row until 26 sts remain, bind off.

_Epaulets_--Epaulets are K in garter st. Cast on 14 sts, K 1 row. Now
inc 1 st at beg of every row, until you have 18 sts. Work even for 3
inches. Bind off 9 sts, K 9. K back on 9 sts and K 2 tog at beg of every
row that begins in center of piece, bind off last 2 sts. Sew shoulder
seams.

_Band at neck_--Place epaulets at center of shoulder seam with the
points overlapping back and the bound off sts over fronts. Pick up 8 sts
from st holder at front, pick up sts around neck, picking up epaulets
with neck sts, K off back. Continue other side and front in same manner
(68 sts), K 1 row. Work buttonholes as follows: K 3, bind off 3, K
across. On next K row, cast on 3 sts over those bound off. K 1 row, P 1
row for 4 rows always K first and last 2 sts on purled rows for edge. K
3 rows, bind off loosely on wrong side.

Sew back to fronts and sew up sleeve seams, insert sleeves into
armholes, having fullness at top. Stitch end of epaulets at shoulder.
Sew on buttons.

_Fringe_--With two ply Gold yarn, cut fringe 4 inches in length. With
two strands, tape thru each stitch around epaulets as shown on
illustration, trim.


HAT

With No. 5 needles, cast on 8 sts, P back. Row 2--Inc in each st (16
sts). P back. Row 4--*Inc 1 st, K 1 st, repeat from *across row (24
sts), P back. Row 6--*Inc 1 st, K 2 sts, repeat from *across row.
Continue in this manner having 1 more st between each inc, until you
have 11 sts between each inc (104 sts). Now K each row back and forth
until piece measures 3 inches, from K rows. Bind off loosely on wrong
side.

Wrap contrasting shade of light weight yarn one yard long, 15 times, cut
at both ends. With main color, wrap 8 times, cut at both ends. Twist
each of these ends as tightly as possible. Now twist the two pieces
together. Make a large knot, leaving ends for tassel, cut evenly.




_Swiss Shalet_

No. 813

CROCHETED COAT AND HAT IN "MORNING GLORY BLUE"

8 to 10 years

     _1 Afghan Hook, Size 4 or 5, 14 inch._

     _Material_--_Knitting Worsted. Coat--5 four ounce skeins. Hat-2
           ounces. 6 buttons._

     _Gauge_--_5 sts to 1 inch. 4 rows 1 inch._


COAT

_Back_--Chain 102 sts (to measure 23 inches) for bottom of coat, (108
sts, size 10). Row 1--Skip 1 ch, *draw up a loop in next ch; repeat from
*across foundation ch (102 loops on hook). Wrap, draw thru 1 loop,
*wrap, draw thru 2 loops; repeat from *across row. This completes first
row. Row 2--*Bring yarn to front of work, insert hook under vertical
loop, hold yarn with left thumb on right side of work, draw up a loop;
repeat from *across row (102 loops). Always wrap and take off the loops
same as first row to complete row. Repeat row 2 for border until border
measures 1 inch. Remainder of back is worked in plain afghan st. Row
1--Insert needle in 2nd vertical loop, draw up all vertical loops across
row. Row 2--Wrap, draw thru 1 loop, *wrap, draw thru 2 loops; repeat
from *across row. Repeat these 2 rows for 2 inches. Make first dec as
follows: Draw 1 loop thru first 2 vertical loops (a dec). Draw up 30
loops, make another dec in same manner, draw up 33 loops, make a dec,
draw up 30 loops, dec last 2 loops. (98 loops). *Work 1 inch even. Dec 4
more loops in same manner having decreases come directly above those on
previous decreases. Repeat from *8 more times (62 sts, 12 inches). Work
4 inches even (5 inches, size 10). Now inc 1 st at beg and end of next
row as follows: *Y O hook (inc) work across row to within last loop, Y O
hook (inc) pick up last st. Work 1 inch even, repeat from *2 more
times. Work 1 inch even (20 inches, 68 sts), or desired length to
underarm. Sl st over 4 loops for underarm. Work across row to within 4
loops. Now dec 1 st at beg and end of each row, 3 times (54 sts). Work
even until armhole measures 6 inches measuring straight up from 4 slip
sts. *Sl st over 4 sts, work across row to within 4 loops, repeat from
*3 more times. Sl st remaining 22 sts for back of neck.

[Illustration: No. 813

A practical coat crocheted in an Afghan stitch that will survive many
seasons of wear. The Peter Pan collar preserves that "Little Girl" look,
while the wooden buttons impart a note of sweet sophistication.]

_Front_--Chain 50 sts to measure 11 inches (53 sts, size 10). Work 1
inch of border same as back. Work in plain afghan st for 2 inches. On
next row make a dec as follows: Make a dec, draw up 24 loops, make
another dec, draw up 21 loops. Work 1 inch even. Dec 2 sts every inch 9
more times (30 sts, 12 inches). Work 4 inches even. Now inc 1 st at seam
end every inch, 3 times. Work 2 inches even, or desired length to
underarm. Sl st over 4 loops, work across row, work back. Dec same as
for back until you have 9 sts off altogether. Work 4 inches even from
armhole. Pick up 10 loops make a dec (pick up 2 loops tog), pick up 12
loops, work back. Work 3 rows even, pick up 9 loops, make a dec, pick up
9 loops, skip last loop for neck edge. Continue to skip last st at neck
edge every row, until 19 loops remain. Slip over 4 sts at beg of the
next 4 rows for shoulder, and continue to slip last st at neck edge,
slip st over last 4 sts. Work other side to correspond.

_Sleeves_--Ch 34 sts, to measure 61/2 inches (38 sts, size 10). Work
border for 1 inch. Work in plain afghan st for 2 inches. Inc 1 st at
each end every inch until sleeve measures 11 inches, 52 sts. Work 1 inch
even or desired length to underarm. Sl st over 3 loops, work across row
to within 3 loops, work back. Sl st over 2 loops, work across row to
within 2 loops, work back. *Work 1 row even. Sl st over 1 loop, work row
to within 1 loop, work back, repeat from *until 22 loops remain, bind
off.

_Bands at Front--_Starting at neck edge on left front (work border same
as border on bottom), *pick up 10 sts (1 st in each row) now inc 1 st by
picking up 1 st between next row, repeat from *for (112 sts) or
complete length of coat, for 5 rows. On right front starting at bottom,
work 2 rows even make buttonholes on next row as follows: pick up 56
loops, *sl st over 2 loops, pick up 8 loops, repeat from *to end of
row. Work back chaining 2 sts over those bound off. Work 2 more rows. Sl
sts off on 5th row.

_Collar_--Ch 49, work in afghan st always working first and last 3 sts
in border st same as bottom of coat. On next row, pick up 3 loops *inc,
pick up 7 loops, repeat from *5 more times, inc, pick up last 3 loops.
Continue to inc inside of borders every row and above previous increases
every other row, thruout collar, until you have 10 rows. Work 3 rows
even in border st, bind off on 3rd row. S c up front of collar.

Sew up seams at underarm and sleeve seams. Sew shoulder seams and insert
sleeves into armholes making 2 small pleats on top of sleeve. Sew on
collar starting after border and ending before border. Sew on buttons.


HAT

_Piece at back_--Ch 26 sts. Row 1--Skip 1 ch, *draw up a loop in next
ch; repeat from *across foundation ch (26 loops on hook). Wrap, draw
thru 1 loop, *wrap, draw thru 2 loops; repeat from *across row. This
completes first row. Work 2 more rows in same manner. Row 4--Make a dec
as follows: Draw 1 loop thru first 2 vertical loops (a dec) draw up each
loop across row, dec last 2 loops. Repeat these 4 rows 5 more times (14
loops on needle). Work 4 more rows, decreasing 1 st at beg and end of
every row. *Pick up 1 loop, sl st, repeat from *until all loops are
off. Break thread, ch 10, draw up a loop in each ch (10 loops on hook).
Complete row. Work 2 more rows. Row 4--Inc 1 st at beg of next row as
follows: Y O hook (an inc); pick up each loop across row to within last
loop, wrap (an inc), pick up last loop. Repeat these 4 rows, until you
have 26 loops. Work even on 26 loops until piece measures 12 inches. Now
dec 1 loop on each end. Continue to dec 1 loop on each end every 4th
row, until you have 10 loops. Work 3 rows even. Sew these ends tog. Fold
back piece in half, mark the center of wide end. Fold long piece in
half, mark center. Have markers meet and sew tog. Tack grosgrain ribbon
around to fit headsize and make small tailored bow with 2 inch
streamers.




_Colleen_

No. 814

JERKIN, SOCKS AND BEANIE IN RED SPORTS YARN

Size 12

     _Needles_--_1 pair American Standard No. 4._

     _Material_--_Kashmir Sports--4 two ounce balls. Beanie--one ounce.
           7 buttons._

     _Gauge_--_7 sts to 1 inch._


JERKIN

_Back_--Starting at bottom, cast on 104 sts, *K 2, P 4, repeat from
*across, ending row with K 2. Next row, right side, K back. *Repeat
these 2 rows for 1 inch. Dec 1 st at each end, repeat from *5 times, 6
inches (92 sts). Work 2 inches even. *Inc 1 st at each end, work 1 inch
even, repeat from *for 5 times, 13 inches, 104 sts. Work 1/2 inch even.
Bind off 7 sts at beg of the next 2 rows for underarm (90 sts). K 2
sts tog at beg of the next 12 rows (78 sts). Work even until armhole
measures 8 inches, measuring straight up from where the 7 sts were bound
off. On next K row, K 13 sts, K 1, P 1 ribbing to within last 13 sts.
Bind off 5 sts at beg of the next 8 rows, continue to follow K 1, P 1
sts for back of neck, bind off remaining 38 sts.

_Front_--Work same as for back until piece measures 5 inches (having
decreases and increases same on sides as back). On next row on right
side, K 3, K 1, P 1 for 30 sts (border for pocket), K 28, P 1, K 1, for
30 sts (border for pocket), K 3. Follow pattern across row and, K 1, P
1, for pocket borders, for 1 inch. On next row, follow pattern to pocket
borders, bind off K 1, P 1 borders, loosely in K 1, P 1.

_Pockets_--Cast on 30 sts. K 2, P 4 across row, ending P 4. K back.
Continue pattern for 5 inches, put sts on st holder. Make another pocket
with K 2 border, on opposite edge. Put on st holder also. On wrong side,
follow pattern for 2 sts, insert 30 sts for pocket (following pattern),
continue across row, inserting 2nd pocket. Continue same as for back,
until piece measures 3 inches above armhole. Now work in pattern on
first 13 sts for 5 inches, bind off 5 sts at armhole edge, 2 times, then
bind off 3 remaining sts. Work last 13 sts in same manner.

_Band at neck_--Holding right side of work toward you, pick up 55 sts
along left side of neck, K across 52 sts (center front), pick up 55 sts
along right side. K 1, P 1, decreasing 2 sts at each corner, every row
(always have decreases over previous decreases). On 4th row, inc 1 st at
beg and end of row. When border measures 1 inch, bind off in K 1, P 1.
Sew shoulder seams. Pick up 116 sts around armholes, K 1, P 1 for 1
inch, bind off K 1, P 1. Sew up right side seams. On left front, pick up
122 sts, K 1, P 1 for 3 rows. On next row, K 8, *bind off 4 sts for
buttonhole, K 13, repeat from *5 times, bind off 4 for buttonhole, K 8.
On next row, cast on 4 sts over those bound off. Work 4 more rows, bind
off K 1, P 1 loosely. Work left back to correspond omitting buttonholes.
Work 1 row of s c around bottom or turn under 1/2 inch. Sew pockets; do
not have sts showing on right side. Sew on buttons.


BEANIE

With No. 4 needles, cast on 8 sts, P back. Row 2--Inc in each st (16
sts), P back. Row 4--*Inc 1 st, K 1 st, repeat from *across row (24
sts). P back. Row 6--*Inc 1 st, K 2 sts, repeat from *across row.
Continue in this manner, having 1 more st between each increase, until
you have 18 sts between each increase. K 1 row, P 1 row without
increasing, for 6 rows. Now decrease in same manner as you increased. *K
2 sts tog, K 18, K 2 tog, repeat from *across row, P back. Decrease in
this manner having 1 st less between each decrease for 5 more K rows. K
1 row on purled side (hem), then K 1 row, P 1 row for 1/2 inch, bind off
loosely. Turn back 1/2 inch hem and sew.


SOCKS--No. 814

_Needles_--_1 set No. 12 steel._

_Material_--_Kashmir Sports--4 ounces._

_Gauge_--_9 sts to 1 inch. Size 9._

Cast on 84 sts (30-30-24), K 1, P 1 for 11/2 inches. K in pattern (K 4,
P 2 for 1 rnd. K next rnd), until work measures 61/2 inches from beg. K
first 2 sts of first needle on 3rd needle. Dec 1 st at beg of first
needle and 1 st at end of 3rd needle. Continue decreasing in this manner
every 1/2 inch, 8 more times (66 sts). K even until work measures 111/2
inches from beg or desired length.

_Heel_--K 15, slip last 15 sts of rnd on same needle (30 sts). Divide
remaining sts evenly on 2 needles for instep. Work 21/2 inches in
stockinette st (K) on 30 heel sts, knitting the first and last st of
every row, end with purled row.

_To shape Heel_--K 19, sl 1 st, K 1, p.s.s.o., turn, P 9, P 2 tog, turn.
*K 9, sl 1 st, K 1, p.s.s.o., turn, P 9, P 2 tog, turn. Repeat from
*until all sts are worked. K back 5 sts, this completes heel. Slip all
instep sts on 1 needle. With another needle, K remaining 5 heel sts and
pick up 16 sts along side of heel. With another needle, pick up 16 sts
along other side of heel and K 5 remaining heel sts. Work 1 rnd even,
keeping instep sts in pattern.

_Instep_--First needle: K to last 3 sts. K 2 tog, K 1. 2nd needle, work
in pattern. 3rd needle, K 1, P 2 tog thru back of sts. K to end of
needle. K 3 rnds even. Continue to dec in this manner every 4th rnd 3
more times (17 sts remaining on each of the first and 3rd needles).
Continue to work even until foot measures 51/2 inches from where sts
were picked up at heel.

_To shape Toe_--First rnd: (K 8, K 2 tog) 7 times. K 2 rnds even. 4th
rnd: (K 7, K 2 tog) 7 times; continue decreasing 7 sts every 3rd rnd in
above manner, until there are 14 sts remaining, break thread, draw thru
remaining sts, fasten securely. Weave elastic thread into wrong side of
cuff with a tapestry needle.

[Illustration: No. 814

A neat combination that can be worn for either sports or school. The
Jerkin has a square neckline that is different and the stitch of the
Jerkin is repeated in the socks. Notice the buttons on the sides of the
Jerkin.

_Detailed illustration of Socks on Page 27._

_Directions on opposite page._]




_Spiral Socks and Slip-Over_

No. 815

Size 10

     _Needles_--_1 Pair American Standard No. 2 and No. 3._

     _Material_--_Kashmir Sports--4 two ounce balls._

     _Gauge_--_71/2 sts to 1 inch--Waist 24 inches--Chest 26 inches._


SLIP-OVER

_Back_--With No. 2 needles, cast on 84 sts, K 2, P 2 ribbing for 3
inches. Change to No. 3 needles. Row 1--K 1 (K 4, P 4, 5 times), K 2 (P
4, K 4, 5 times), P 1.

_Row 2_--K 1 (P 4, K 4, 5 times), P 2, (K 4, P 4, 5 times), K 1.

_Row 3_--Same as Row 1.

_Row 4_--Same as Row 2.

_Row 5_--(K 4, P 4, 5 times), K 4 (P 4, K 4, 5 times).

_Row 6_--(P 4, K 4, 5 times), P 4 (K 4, P 4, 5 times).

_Row 7_--Same as Row 5.

_Row 8_--Same as Row 6.

_Row 9_--K 3, P 4 (K 4, P 4, 4 times), K 6 (P 4, K 4, 4 times), P 4, K
3.

_Row 10_--P 3, K 4 (P 4, K 4, 4 times), P 6 (K 4, P 4, 4 times), K 4, P
3.

_Row 11_--Same as Row 9; increasing in first and last st.

_Row 12_--(P 4, K 4, 5 times), P 6 (K 4, P 4, 5 times).

_Row 13_--K 3, P 4 (K 4, P 4, 4 times), K 8, (P 4, K 4, 4 times), P 4, K
3.

_Row 14_--P 3, K 4 (P 4, K 4, 4 times), P 8, (K 4, P 4, 4 times), K 4, P
3.

_Row 15_--Same as Row 13.

_Row 16_--Same as Row 14.

_Row 17_--K 2, P 4 (K 4, P 4, 4 times), K 10 (P 4, K 4, 4 times), P 4, K
2.

_Row 18_--P 2, K 4 (P 4, K 4, 4 times), P 10 (K 4, P 4, 4 times), K 4, P
2.

_Row 19_--Same as Row 17.

_Row 20_--Same as Row 18.

_Row 21_--Inc first st (P 4, K 4, 5 times), P 1, K 2, P 1 (K 4, P 4, 5
times), inc last st.

_Row 22_--P 2 (K 4, P 4, 5 times), K 1, P 2, K 1 (P 4, K 4, 5 times), P
2.

_Row 23_--K 2 (P 4, K 4, 5 times), P 1, K 2, P 1 (K 4, P 4, 5 times), K
2.

_Row 24_--Same as Row 22.

_Row 25_--K 1 (P 4, K 4, 5 times), P 2, K 2, P 2 (K 4, P 4, 5 times), K
1.

_Row 26_--P 1 (K 4, P 4, 5 times), K 2, P 2, K 2 (P 4, K 4, 5 times), P
1.

_Row 27_--Same as Row 25.

_Row 28_--Same as Row 26.

_Row 29_--(P 4, K 4, 5 times), P 3, K 2, P 3 (K 4, P 4, 5 times).

_Row 30_--(K 4, P 4, 5 times), K 3, P 2, K 3 (P 4, K 4, 5 times).

_Row 31_--Same as Row 29.

_Row 32_--Same as Row 30.

Continue moving pattern over 1 st every 4 rows in above manner always
working 2 stockinette sts in center of piece and increasing 1 st at each
end every inch until you have 92 sts. Continue even until work measures
101/2 inches from beginning. Bind off 5 sts at beg of the next 2 rows.
Dec 1 st at beg of the next 8 rows, (74 sts). Work even until armhole
measures 7 inches measuring straight up from where the 5 sts were bound
off. Work in pattern for 21 sts, bind off 32 sts, work remaining 21 sts.
Bind off 7 sts at beg of shoulder edge, 3 times. Work other shoulder to
correspond, joining yarn at inside of neck.

[Illustration: No. 815

This stocking is knit spirally and regardless which way you pull on the
stocking you automatically get a heel and toe--so you see--mothers, this
is a boon to leisure moments when you ordinarily would be darning. You
will notice that the spiral stitch is repeated diagonally in the sweater
and is very smart--especially for the young fellows who want to make
_That Impression_.]

_Front_--Work same as for back until piece measures 131/2 inches from
beginning (3 inches above armhole). Work 32 sts in pattern, Bind off 10
sts for neck. Work 32 sts, K 2 sts tog at beg of every row at neck edge,
until 21 sts remain. Work even until armhole measures 7 inches,
measuring from 5 bound off sts. Bind off 7 sts at beg of shoulder, 3
times. Work other shoulder to correspond.

_Sleeves_--With No. 2 needles, cast on 60 sts, K 2, P 2 for 3 inches.
Change to No. 3 needles and work in pattern, working first row as
follows: K 1, P 4 (K 4, P 4, 3 times), K 2 (P 4, K 4, 3 times), P 4, K
1. Continue in pattern increasing 1 st on each end every inches until
piece measures 15 inches, 90 sts or desired length to underarm. Bind off
3 sts at beg of next 2 rows. Bind off 2 sts at beg of next 2 rows. Now
dec 1 st at beg of every row until 40 sts remain, bind off.

_Band at neck_--Front--With No. 2 needles, holding right side toward
you, pick up 76 sts across front, K 2, P 2 for 1 inch. Bind off loosely
in K 2, P 2.

_Band at back_--Pick up 40 sts K 2, P 2 for 1 inch. Sew shoulder seams
and band at neck. Sew seams at underarm. Insert sleeves into armholes,
having seams meet.


SOCKS

_Spiral ribbed socks, without heels._

No. 815

     _Needles_--_1 set No. 12 steel._

     _Material_--_Heather sports yarn--4 ounces. Red, Yellow and Royal
           blue 1/8 ounce each. 1 spool elastic thread._

     _Gauge_--_9 sts to 1 inch._

With heather cast on 72 sts (24 sts on each of 3 needles). Work in
ribbing (K 2, P 2) for 8 rnds. Attach yellow yarn and K 1 rnd, K 2, P 2
for 1 rnd. With heather, K 1 rnd K 2, P 2 for 2 rnds. With red, K 1 rnd,
K 2, P 2 for 2 rnds. With heather, K 1 rnd, K 2, P 2 for 2 rnds. With
royal blue, K 1 rnd, K 2, P 2 for 5 rnds. With heather K 1 rnd, K 2, P 2
for 2 rnds. With red, K 1 rnd; K 2, P 2 for 2 rnds. With heather K 1
rnd, K 2, P 2, for 2 rnds. With yellow K 1 rnd; K 2, P 2 for 1 rnd. With
heather K 1 rnd; K 2, P 2 for 13 rnds. Join elastic thread, K 1 rnd; *K
4, P 4 for 3 rnds. 4th rnd, K 4, P 4 to last st. Put this st on next
needle. 5th rnd (first needle) K 4, P 4 to last st. Put this st on next
needle. (2nd needle), same as first needle. (3rd needle), K 4, P 4 to
end. This moves pattern over forming a spiral. Repeat from *, until work
measures 22 inches from beginning, or desired length; after 2 patterns
have been completed with elastic thread, continue with yarn for 2
patterns, then work 2 more patterns with elastic. Join yarn and
complete.

_Toe_--P 7, P 2 tog for 1 rnd. P 2 rnds even. P 6, P 2 tog for 1 rnd. P
2 rnds even. Continue decreasing in this manner, purling 2 rnds even
after every decrease rnd, 5 times more. Break thread and run through
remaining sts. Fasten off.




_QUEEN OF HEARTS_

No. 816

SIX PIECE ENSEMBLE IN "RED AND WHITE"

Size 10 to 12 years

     _Needles_--_1 pair bone needles, size 3. 1 Circular needle size 3,
           24-inch._

     _Material_--_Cashmere Sports Yarn. Jacket--5 two ounce balls White.
           Skirt--4 two ounce balls Red. Cap--1 two ounce ball White._

     _Gauge_--_71/2 sts to 1 inch._


JACKET

_Back_--Cast on 92 sts (96 sts, size 12). K 1 row, P 1 row for 3/4 inch.
P 1 row on K side, to turn for hem. Continue to K 1 row, P 1 row, until
work measures 13/4 inches from start. Dec 1 st on each side (90 sts).
*Work 1 inch even, dec 1 st on each side, repeat from *once (86 sts).
Work 2 inches even. Now inc 1 st on each side. *Work 1 inch even, inc 1
st on each side, repeat from *until piece measures 93/4 inches from
start (96 sts). Work 1 inch even (2 inches, size 12). Bind off 3 sts on
each side for underarm, then K 2 sts tog at beg of the next 8 rows (82
sts). Work even for 6 inches (61/2 size 12) measuring straight up from
where the 3 sts were bound off. Bind off 5 sts at beg of next 10 rows,
bind off remaining 32 sts for back of neck.

[Illustration: No. 816

The answer to any problem that would arise in regard to a skating
costume. The very essence of smartness that may be used as a Spring,
Fall or Winter ensemble. Jacket, by the way, closes with a Zipper, and
the heart motif is repeated on cap, jacket and mitts.]

_Front_--Cast on 3 sts, P back. Inc in each st, P back. Inc in first and
last 2 sts in every K row, until you have 28 sts. Cast on 5 sts at beg
of the next 2 rows (38 sts). On next K row, cast on 10 sts (place
marker), this will be seam end. K 1 row, P 1 row for 1 inch. *Dec 1 st
at seam end, work 1 inch even, repeat from *once. Work 2 inches even.
*Now inc 1 st on seam end. Work 1 inch even, repeat from *until piece
measures 9 inches from marker (50 sts). Work 1 inch even. Bind off 4 sts
at seam end for underarm, then K 2 sts tog at beg of every row at
underarm, 5 times (41 sts). Work even for 4 inches (41/2 size 12). Bind
off 6 sts at neck edge, then K 2 sts tog at beg of every row at neck
edge, until 28 sts remain. Bind off 5 sts at beg of every row that
begins at shoulder and continue to K 2 sts tog at neck edge, until all
sts are bound off.

_Sleeves_--Cast on 56 sts, P 1 row, K 1 row for 3/4 inches. P 1 row on K
side (to turn for Hem), continue to K 1 row, P 1 row for 2 inches. *Inc
1 st at each end. Work 1 inch even, repeat from *, until sleeve measures
153/4 inches (86 sts), work 1/2 inch even or desired length to
underarm. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then 2 sts at beg of
the next 2 rows. K 2 sts tog at beg and end of every K row, until you
have 44 sts, bind off. On fronts at bottom, pick up 48 sts on right
side, P 1 row, K 1 row, decreasing 1 st on K rows at point, for 6 rows,
bind off.

_Collar_--Holding wrong side toward you, pick up 72 sts, cast on 4 sts
at beg of next 2 rows for hem. K 4, P across to within last 4 sts, K 4.
K 1 row, P 1 row for 2 rows. *K 5, inc 1 st, repeat from *across row,
work 3 rows even. *K 6, inc 1 st, repeat from *across row, work 3 rows
even. *K 7, inc 1 st, repeat from *across row, work 3 rows even.

*K 8, inc 1 st, repeat from *across row. Work 6 rows even. Bind off 8
sts, P 1 row on K side. Bind off 8 sts at beg of next row, P 1 row, K 1
row for 4 more rows, bind off loosely.

_Finishing_--Sew up seams at underarm and sleeve seams, insert sleeves
into arm holes, having seams meet at underarm. Turn under hems and sew.
Work 1 row of s c up each side at fronts.

_Heart_--With red yarn, cast on 2 sts, P back. K next row, increasing in
each st. P back (when increasing, inc on 2nd st from ends). Inc at beg
and end of every row until you have 20 sts. Inc at beg and end of K rows
only until you have 24 sts. Work 4 rows even. Now dec 2 sts on every K
row same as you increased, until you have 20 sts. P back. K over 10 sts,
P back. Now K 2 tog every K row at beg and end until you have 4 sts,
bind off. Work other 10 sts to correspond. Work 1 row of s c around
heart, pin heart into shape desired, block and sew on jacket as shown on
illustration.


SKIRT

With No. 3 circular needle, cast on 480 sts. Join being careful not to
twist sts. K 1 row, P 1 row, for 6 rows for border (3 ribs). *P 2, K 78,
repeat from *for 1 rnd. K next rnd. Repeat these 2 rnds for 1 inch. On
next rnd, make a decreased row as follows: *P 2, K 2 sts, K 2 tog, K 70,
K 2 tog, K 2, repeat from *for 1 rnd (468 sts). Work in pattern for 1
inch. Make another decreased rnd as follows: *P 2, K 2 sts, K 2 tog, K
33, K 2 tog, K 33, K 2 tog, K 2, repeat from *for 1 rnd (450 sts). Work
in pattern for 1 inch. Continue to dec 18 sts (3 sts in each gore, 1 dec
on each side of gore, on 3rd and 4th sts, 1 st in center of each gore),
until skirt measures 17 inches, 180 sts, (26 waist). Work 1/2 inch even.
Now dec 12 sts to the rnd, omitting center decreases 168 sts (24 waist).
Work 1/2 inch even or desired length to waist line. P 1 row, K 1/2 inch
even, bind off loosely. Insert elastic and turn for hem.


CAP

_Side of Cap_--With No. 3 needle, cast on 28 sts, *K 1 row. On next row,
K 4, (border), P back, repeat from *for 1 inch. Now inc 1 st at end of
next row and continue to K 4 on purled rows for border. Work 1 inch
even. Inc 1 st every inch on same side, until you have 35 sts, 7 inches.
Work 2 inches even. Now dec 1 st every inch same as you increased, 28
sts, work 1 inch even, bind off.

_Back of Cap_--Cast on 24 sts, *K 1 row, P 1 row for 3 rows, inc 1 st at
beg and end of next row, repeat from *until you have 36 sts, 3 inches.
Work 1/2 inch even, now dec 1 st on each end and dec 1 st on each end
every 4th row, until you have 28 sts, P 1 row, K 1 row, bind off.

Fold front piece in half, mark center of cap at opposite edge from
border. Place mark in center of bound off sts on back of cap. Sew center
back to front piece having markers meet. Block seam lightly on right
side of cap. With red work scallops around seam of cap, as follows:
holding back of cap toward you, fasten yarn at bottom, ch 1, *skip a
space, work (1 h d c, 3 d c, 1 h d c) in next st, skip a space, s c in
next space, repeat from *around back of cap about 20 scallops.

_Ties_--Ch 70, work 1 s c around bottom of cap (continuing with same
thread), skipping about 10 sts, ch 70 sts. Work 1 row of s c over chains
and back of cap. Block lightly into shape.

_Hearts_--With red, cast on 2 sts, P 2 sts. K increasing in each st, P
back. *On next row inc in first 2 sts and last 2 sts, P back, repeat
from *once. K 1 row, P 1 row even for 4 rows. K 2 tog, K 4, turn, P 2
tog, P 3, K 2 tog, K 2 turn. P 2 tog, P 1, bind off 2 sts, break thread.
Work other 6 sts to correspond and work 1 row of s c around heart. Sew
hearts on each side of cap as shown on illustration.


SLIP-OVER NO. 816

Size 10 to 12 years

     _Needles_--_1 Pair Bone size 1 and 3._

     _Material_--_4 one ounce balls Kashmir fleece._

     _Gauge_--_8 sts to 1 inch--No. 3 needles._

_Back_--With No. 1 needles, cast on 104 sts (size 12, 108 sts), K 1, P 1
for 5 inches. Change to No. 3 needles, K 1 row, P 1 row, until piece
measures 11 inches. Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows for
underarm, then K 2 tog at beg of the next 6 rows (92 sts). Work even
until armhole measures 51/2 inches, measuring straight up from where
the 3 sts were bound off. On next K row, K 29, put remainder of sts on
st holder. P back on 29 sts. On next row, bind off 5 sts at beg of every
row at armhole edge, 5 times and P 2 tog at beg of every row at neck
edge. Work other 29 sts to correspond.

_Neck Band_--With No. 1 needles, pick up 50 sts, K 1, P 1 ribbing for 1
inch, bind off, K 1, P 1.

_Front_--Cast on 104 (size 12, 108), K 1, P 1 for 5 inches. Change to
No. 3 needles. On next row, K 26, K 1, P 1 for 52 sts, K 26. On next row
P 27, P 1, K 1, for 50 sts, P 27. Next row, K 28, K 1, P 1, for 48 sts,
K 28. Next row, P 29, P 1, K 1, for 46 sts, P 29. Continue in this
manner having 2 sts less in pattern on every row, until all sts are K. P
1 row, K 1 row until piece measures same as for back. Bind off 3 sts at
beg of the next 2 rows, then K 2 tog at beg of the next 8 rows (90 sts).
Work even until armhole measures 2 inches (21/2 inches, size 12). K 44,
K 1, P 1, K 44. Next row, P 43, P 1, K 1, P 1, K 1, P 43. Next row, K 42
(K 1, P 1, 3 times), K 42. Next row, P 41 (P 1, K 1, 4 times), P 41.
Continue in this manner having 2 more sts in pattern every row, until
you have 28 sts in pattern. K 31, put remainder of sts on st holder. P
back. P 2 tog at beg of every 4th row, at neck edge until 25 sts remain.
Bind off 5 sts at beg of every row at armhole edge, 5 times, work even
at neck edge. Work other side to correspond, (Put 28, K 1, P 1) on st
holder. Band at neck. Pick up 23 sts, K 1, P 1 following pattern across
front, pick up 23 sts on other side. K 1, P 1 for 1 inch, bind off K 1,
P 1.

_Sleeves_--With No. 1 needles, cast on 66 sts. K 1, P 1 for 21/2
inches. Change to No. 3 needles, K 20, K 1, P 1 for 26 sts, K 20. Next
row, P 21, P 1, K 1, for 24 sts, P 21. K 22, K 1, P 1 for 22 sts, K 22.
P 23, P 1, K 1 for 20 sts, P 23. Continue in this manner having 2 sts
less in pattern every row, until all sts are K, inc 1 st on each end and
continue to inc 1 st on each end every 4th row, until sleeve measures
41/2 inches (72 sts). Bind off 3 sts at beg of the next 2 rows, then 2
sts at beg of the next 2 rows (62 sts). K 2 tog at beg and end of every
4th row until you have 40 sts, bind off.

Sew up shoulder seams, sew back and front together. Sew sleeve seams and
insert into armhole.


MITTENS

No. 816

Size 6 to 8, 10 to 12

     _Needles_--_1 set of bone, No. 5._

     _Material_--_21/2 oz. knitting worsted._

     _Gauge_--_5 sts to 1 inch._

_Cuff_--Cast on 44 sts, 16 sts on each 2 needles, 12 on 3rd needle, *P 4
rnds. K 4 rnds, repeat from *2 more times. K 2, P 2 around row for 3
inches (size 6 to 8), 4 inches (size 10 to 12). Put next 12 sts on st
holder and cast on 4 sts. Continue to K 2, P 2 for 21/2 inches (size 6
to 8), 31/2 inches (size 10 to 12). On next rnd, K 2 tog, P 2 tog for 1
rnd. K 1, P 1 for 4 rnds. K 2 tog until you have 9 sts, draw through and
sew.

_Thumb_--Pick up 12 sts from st holder, pick up 4 sts from hand. K 2, P
2 for 11/2 inches, size 6 to 8 (13/4 inches, size 10 to 12), then P
the 2 P sts tog for 1 rnd. Next rnd K the 2 K sts tog for 1 rnd (8 sts),
draw through and sew.

With red sports yarn make 2 small hearts as follows: With No. 2 needles,
cast on 2 sts, P 2 sts, K increasing in each st. P back. *Inc in first
and last st, P back, repeat from *once. K 1 row, P 1 row. K 2 tog, K 2,
turn, P back. K 1, K 2 tog, bind off. Work other 4 sts to correspond.
Make another heart in same manner. Sew 2 pieces tog and fill with red
yarn. Make 3 more hearts in same manner. With 2 strands of sports yarn,
ch 52 sts, sew heart on each end, tie a bow and sew on mitts as shown on
illustration. These can easily be removed when washing.

_Directions for socks on page 22._




_Aloha_

No. 817

HERRINGBONE COAT AND HAT IN "SHARK BLUE"

Size 12

     _Needles_--_1 Pair American Standard No. 4._

     _Material_--_Heather Knitting Worsted. Coat--6 four ounce skeins.
           Hat--1 four ounce skein._

     _Gauge_--_2 Patterns to 3 inches, (Coat); 5 sts to 1 inch, (Hat)._

     _Pattern Stitch_--_Multiple of 9, plus 1 St._

     _Bust Measure_--_30 inches._


SWATCH

_Swatch_--Cast on 19 sts, Row 1, P. Row 2-K 4 sts, *inc in next st by
knitting 1 st in next st of row below in back, then K the next st, K 3
sts, K 2 tog, K 3, repeat from *across row, ending with K 2 tog. Row
3--P. Row 4--*K 2 sts tog, K 3 sts, inc 1 st (same as Row 2), K 3 sts,
repeat from *across row, ending K 4.

[Illustration: No. 817

The young lady who has a "_Know_" in style will immediately sense the
style value of this swagger-style coat. The patch pockets relieve the
plain front and give it an air of distinction. Notice particularly the
herring-bone stitch giving the garment the Tailored effect. The coat can
be finished with machine stitching--or by hand. The accompanying beret
is finished in Red, White and Blue Ribbon. Notice too the emblem on the
beret.]


COAT

_Right Half of Back_--Cast on 64 sts, P back. Row 2K 4, *inc 1 st (same
as swatch) K 3, K 2 tog, K 3, repeat from *across row, ending with K 2
tog, P back. Row 4--*K 2 tog, K 3, inc 1 st, K 3, repeat from *ending
with K 4. Repeat these 4 rows for 3 inches (Place marker for side seam).
Make first dec (on side seam), on 2nd row of pattern as follows: K 2
tog, K 2, *inc 1 st, K 3, K 2 tog, K 3, repeat from *across row, ending
with K 2 tog, P back. (Always dec on 2nd row of pattern when decreasing
thruout coat). Next row, K 2 tog, K 2, *inc 1 st, K 3, K 2 tog, K 3,
repeat from *across row, ending with K 4. P back. *K 3, inc 1 st, K 3,
K 2 tog, repeat from *across row ending with K 2 tog. P back. Repeat
last 4 rows for 2 inches. 2nd dec: K 2 tog K 1, *inc 1 st, K 3, K 2 tog,
K 3, repeat from *across row, ending with K 2 tog. On next Purled row
make a dec at center seam, P 2 tog, continue purling across. K 2 tog, K
1, *inc 1 st, K 3, K 2 tog, K 3, repeat from *ending with K 3, P back.
K 2, *inc 1 st, K 3, K 2 tog, K 3, repeat from *across row, ending
with K 2, K 2 tog, P back. Repeat these last 4 rows, for 2 inches. Make
another dec on seam end, K 2 tog, *inc 1 st, K 3, K 2 tog, K 3, repeat
from *ending with K 2, K 2 tog, P back. K 2 tog, *inc 1 st, K 3, K 2
tog, K 3, repeat from *ending with K 3, P back. K 1, inc 1 st, *K 3, K
2 tog, K 3, inc 1 st, repeat from *ending with K 2, K 2 tog, P back.
Repeat these last 4 rows for 2 inches. Dec in this manner, Knitting 2
sts tog at side seam, every 2 inches, and P 2 tog at center seam every 4
inches, until piece measures 27 inches from bottom. Work even for 2
inches or desired length to underarm (45 sts). Bind off 4 sts at beg of
next row at underarm, K 2 sts tog at beg of the next 4 rows at underarm
(37 sts). Work even for 63/4 inches. Bind off 6 sts at beg of the next
4 rows, bind off remaining 13 sts for neckline. Work other half of back
to correspond.

_Left Front_--Cast on 82 sts, work in pattern same as for back for 3
inches. Now dec 1 st at seam end. Work 2 inches even. Make a dec at seam
end every 2 inches until piece measures 27 inches, meanwhile dec 1 st at
front edge every 4 inches (63 sts). Work even to underarm 29 inches or
desired length to underarm. Bind off 5 sts at beginning of the next row
at underarm. Continue to K 2 sts tog at underarm until you have 53 sts.
Work even at underarm and dec every 2 inches at front edge, until piece
measures 41/2 inches above the 5 bound off sts (51 sts). Bind off 15
sts at beg of next row at neck edge. Now K 2 sts tog at beg and end of
every row at neck edge, until 30 sts remain. Bind off 6 sts at beg of
the next 4 rows at armhole and continue to dec at neck edge, in same
manner. Work right front to correspond, until you have 20 inches from
bottom. K 8 sts, bind off 5 sts for buttonhole continue pattern across
row, P back and cast on 5 sts over those bound off. Continue same as
left front working buttonholes 4 inches apart.

[Illustration]

_Sleeves_--Cast on 55 sts, work in pattern for 11/2 inches. Now inc 1
st at each end. Continue to inc 1 st at each end every 11/2 inches,
until sleeve measures 161/2 inches (77 sts). Work even until sleeve
measures 18 inches or desired length to underarm. Bind off 4 sts at beg
of the next 2 rows. Bind off 2 sts, at beg of the next 2 rows (65 sts).
Now K 2 sts tog at beg and end of every K row, until 33 sts remain, bind
off.

_Collar_--Cast on 70 sts, P back. K next row, increasing 1 st at beg and
end (Inc 1 st at beg and end of every other K row thruout collar). K 1
row, P 1 row for 5 rows. On next row, inc in every 6th st across row.
Work 5 rows even, make another inc in same manner 2 more times, having
increases come directly above those of previous increases. K 1 row, P 1
row, bind off 8 sts, K across on P side (hem line). Then bind off 8 sts,
K across. P 1 row, K 1 row for 3 more rows, bind off loosely.

_Pockets_--Cast on 19 sts. Work in pattern for 4 rows. Cast on 9 sts.
Work back. Cast on 9 more sts. Work in pattern for 51/2 inches. Bind
off 9 sts at beg of the next 2 rows. Work even on 19 sts for 4 rows,
bind off.

Block all pieces before hemming. Sew backs tog. Sew fronts to side seams
of back. Sew shoulder seams. Sew 3/4 inch hem on fronts, bottom of coat
and sleeves. Sew hem in collar and pockets. Sew pocket to coat as shown
on illustration. Sew collar to neck edge about 1 inch from fronts after
hem on fronts. Sew sleeve seams and insert into armhole having two small
inverted pleats at top of sleeve. Sew on buttons. Insert shoulder pads.


HAT

Ch 4, join, work 7 s c in ring, 2 s c in each st, until you have 28 sts
around. Now inc in every 5th st, until you have 60 sts around, then in
every 15th st, until there are 100 sts around. Inc in every 20th, until
there are 160 sts around. Work 2 rnds even, break thread. This will be
center back. Count 48 sts on each side of center back, place 2 markers,
holding right side toward you, s c from marker to marker, break thread.
2nd short row: Count 45 sts from center back and s c to within 45 sts
from center back on other side, decreasing 3 sts spaced at equal
distances apart. Work 10 more short rows in same manner as 2nd row
(working 3 sts more on each side toward center back). Work 7 more rows
in same manner, decreasing 5 sts to the rnd. Work 7 rows even or dec to
fit headsize. Tack grosgrain ribbon around band, sew on emblem.




ABBREVIATIONS USED IN KNITTING AND CROCHET INSTRUCTIONS


The following abbreviations are used throughout the book.

  K          Knit
  P          Purl
  ch         Chain
  h d c      Half double crochet
  cr         Crochet
  sl st      Slip stitch
  rnd        Round
  beg        Beginning
  tr cr      Triple crochet
  s c        Single crochet
  d c        Double crochet
  tog        Together
  st         Stitch
  sts        Stitches
  y o        Yarn over
  p          Picot
  P.s.s.o    Pass slip stitch over


*(asterisk). When this symbol appears, continue working until
instructions refer you back to this symbol.

_Even_ means that a row must be worked without increasing or decreasing.

_Work_ means to continue with the stitch as described.

_Half Double Crochet_--Yarn over, draw up a loop in st, yarn over and
draw through all 3 loops on hook.

_Slip Stitch_--Insert hook in next st, yarn over and draw through both
loops on hook.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Blocking_--Pin the garment, with rust proof pins, wrong side out, on a
pressing board in exactly the measurements desired. Place a damp cloth
over garment and with a moderately hot iron, press lightly, allowing the
steam to go through. Lay on a flat surface until thoroughly dry.

_Needle Gauge_--When making a garment--work a swatch, using the needles
called for to determine whether or not your work measures the same
number of stitches to the inch as given in the scale. Change size of
needles accordingly.

_When Using Colors_--In changing color always K the first row on right
side regardless of pattern.


       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: _Get these 5 other editions

... own the complete Juvenile Styles Library_]


  YOU WILL WANT THESE OTHER POPULAR EDITIONS OF JUVENILE STYLES by
  MARY HOYER

Little wonder that so many Mothers have collected all these editions of
JUVENILE STYLES. These four books comprise a modern library of Knitting
and Crocheting for Infants thru 'teen age ... a wealth of easy-to-follow
instructions for a few well invested pennies. Complete your JUVENILE
STYLES library today. MARY'S DOLLIES is a companion book containing
instructions for Dollies' garments. You'll enjoy knitting and crocheting
distinctively styled Garments truly worthy of your Time and Talent.

_If your local store cannot supply our books, send direct to_

  JUVENILE STYLES PUBLISHING COMPANY
  1008 PENN STREET READING, PENNSYLVANIA
  (Include 5c extra to cover mailing costs)


       *       *       *       *       *




America's Biggest Doll Value

"_Miss Victory_"

Exclusive creation of your Favorite Designer

MARY HOYER

with Instructions for 6 Lovely Knitted and Crocheted Costumes


This gorgeous, exclusive doll positively represents "the _most value_
for _your money_" ... and also, "the _most thrills_ for _your daughter_"
(or any other good little girl you know.) It is built as sturdily as the
finest quality pre-war dolls! and "Miss Victory" has a hair coiffure
designed by Mary Hoyer, who has designed the six charming costumes
illustrated in Volume 9 of "Mary's Dollies." You get Volume 9 FREE with
your purchase of this 14" doll--both at the bargain price of only $2.50
postpaid. Simply send check or money order for one or more dolls, and
state your preference in hair color: Blonde, Medium or Dark Brown.

[Illustration: _Free_ with PURCHASE OF DOLL -> MARY'S DOLLIES]

IMPORTANT--the six costumes and their instructions are EASY-TO-FOLLOW.
You will truly ENJOY knitting these little outfits yourself, from
odds-and-ends of yarn in your basket. No expense--and very, very little
time involved. Just "happy moments of knitting." Remember, Volume 9 is
_FREE_ WITH THE DOLL; you can also purchase the two previous volumes of
"Mary's Dollies" at the same time for 15c each.

[Illustration: As Advertised in McCall's

6 New Costumes

STILL AVAILABLE

For only 15c each

VOLUMES FIVE & SIX]


MAIL YOUR ORDER TODAY

  _Don't Delay_

  ORDER THIS DOLL
  AND THESE BOOKS TODAY

  _from_

  Juvenile Styles Publishing Company

  1008 Penn Street
  Reading, Pa.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Juvenile Styles, Volume 4, by Mary Hoyer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUVENILE STYLES, VOLUME 4 ***

***** This file should be named 39773.txt or 39773.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/7/7/39773/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Katie Hernandez, Betsie Bush
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

