                               A PRELUDE




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.



Title: A Prelude
Author: Francis Sherman
Release Date: June 02, 2013 [EBook #39797]
Language: English
Character set encoding: US-ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PRELUDE ***




Produced by Al Haines.


                               A PRELUDE


                            Francis Sherman



                          _Privately Printed_
                             _at Christmas_
                                 _1897_




                               A Prelude


    Watching the tremulous flicker of the green
    Against the open quiet of the sky,
    I hear my ancient way-fellows convene

    In the great wood behind me.  Where I lie
    They may not see me; for the grasses grow
    As though no foot save June's had wandered by;

    Yet I, who am well-hidden, surely know,
    As I have waited them, they yearn for me
    To lead them whither they are fain to go.

    Weary as I, are they, O Time, of thee!
    Yea, we, who once were glad only of Spring,
    Gather about thy wall and would be free!

    With wounded feet we cease from wandering,
    And with vain hands beat idly at thy gate;
    And thou,--thou hast no thought of opening,
    And from thy peace are we still separate.


    Yet, comrades, though ye come together there,
    And search across the shadows for my face,
    Until the pines murmur of your despair,

    I think I shall not tell my hiding-place,
    For ye know not the path ye would pursue,
    And it is late our footsteps to retrace.

    Too weak am I, and now not one of you--
    So weary are ye of each ancient way--
    Retaineth strength enough to seek a new;

    And ye are blind--knowing not night from day;
    Crying at noontime, "Let us see the sun!"
    And with the even, "O for rest, we pray!"

    O Blind and fearful!  Shall I, who have won
    At last this little portion of content,
    Yield all to be with you again undone?

    Because ye languish in your prisonment
    Must I now hearken to your bitter cry?
    Must I forego, as ye long since forewent,

    My vision of the far-off open sky?
    Nay!  Earth hath much ungiven she yet may give;
    And though to-day your laboring souls would die,
    From earth my soul gaineth the strength to live.


    O covering grasses!  O Unchanging trees!
    Is it not good to feel the odorous wind
    Come down upon you with such harmonies

    Only the giant hills can ever find?
    O little leaves, are ye not glad to be?
    Is not the sunlight fair, the shadow kind,

    That falls at noon-time over you and me?
    O gleam of birches lost among the firs,
    Let your high treble chime in silverly

    Across the half-imagined wind that stirs
    A muffled organ-music from the pines!
    Earth knows to-day that not one note of hers

    Is minor.  For, behold, the loud sun shines
    Till the young maples are no longer gray,
    And stronger grow their faint, uncertain lines

    Each violet takes a deeper blue to-day,
    And purpler swell the cones hung overhead,
    Until the sound of their far feet who

    About the wood, fades from me; and, instead,
    I hear a robin singing--not as one
    That calls unto his mate, uncomforted--
    But as one sings a welcome to the sun.


    Not among men, or near men-fashioned things,
    In the old years found I this present ease,
    Though I have known the fellowship of kings

    And tarried long in splendid palaces.
    The worship of vast peoples has been mine,
    The homage of uncounted pageantries.

    Sea-offerings, and fruits of field and vine
    Have humble folk been proud to bring to me;
    And woven cloths of wonderful design

    Have lain untouched in far lands over-sea,
    Till the rich traffickers beheld my sails.
    Long caravans have toiled on wearily--

    Harassed yet watchful of their costly bales--
    Across wide sandy places, glad to bear
    Strange oils and perfumes strained in Indian vales,

    Great gleaming rubies torn from some queen's hair,
    Yellow, long-hoarded coin and golded dust,
    Deeming that I would find their offerings fair.

    --O fairness quick to fade!  Ashes and rust
    And food for moths!  O half-remembered things
    Once altar-set!--I think when one is thrust

    Far down in the under-world, where the worm clings
    Close to the newly-dead, among the dead
    Not one awakes to ask what gift she brings.

    The color of her eyes, her hair outspread
    In the moist wind that stifles ere it blows,
    Falls on unwatching eyes; and no man knows
    The gracious odors that her garments shed.


    And she, unwearied yet and not grown wise,
    Follows a little while her devious way
    Across the twilight; where no voice replies

    When her voice calls, bravely; and where to-day
    Is even as yesterday and all days were.
    Great houses loom up swiftly, out of the gray.

    Knocking at last, the gradual echoes stir
    The hangings of unhaunted passages;
    Until she surely knows only for her

    Has this House hoarded up its silences
    Since the beginning of the early years,
    And that this night her soul shall dwell at ease

    And grow forgetful of its ancient fears
    In some long-kept, unviolated room.
    And so the quiet city no more hears
    Her footsteps, and the streets their dust resume.


    But what have I to do with her and death
    Who hold these living grasses in my hands,--
    With her who liveth not, yet sorroweth?

    (For it shall chance, however close the bands
    Of sleep be drawn about her, nevertheless
    She must remember alway the old lands

    She wandered in, and their old hollowness.)
    --Awaiting here the strong word of the trees,
    My soul leans over to the wind's caress,

    One with the flowers; far off, it hears the sea's
    Rumor of large, unmeasured things, and yet
    It has no yearning to remix with these.

    For the pines whisper, lest it may forget,
    Of the near pool; and how the shadow lies
    On it forever; and of its edges, set

    With maiden-hair; and how, in guardian-wise,
    The alder trees bend over, until one
    Forgets the color of the unseen skies

    And loses all remembrance of the sun.
    No echo there of the sea's loss and pain;
    Nor sound of little rivers, even, that run

    Where with the wind the hollow reeds complain;
    Nor the soft stir of marsh-waters, when dawn
    Comes in with quiet covering of rain:

    Only, all day, the shadow of peace upon
    The pool's gray breast; and with the fall of even,
    The noiseless gleam of scattered stars--withdrawn
    From the unfathomed treasuries of heaven.


    And as the sea has not the strength to win
    Back to its love my soul, O Comrades, ye--
    In the wood lost, and seeking me therein--

    Are not less impotent than all the sea!
    My soul at last its ultimate house hath won,
    And in that house shall sleep along with me.

    Yea, we shall slumber softly, out of the sun,
    To day and night alike indifferent,
    Aware and unaware if Time be done.

    Yet ere I go, ere yet your faith be spent,
    For our old love I pass Earth's message on:
    "In me, why shouldst thou not find thy content?

    "Are not my days surpassing fair, from dawn
    To sunset, and my nights fulfilled with peace?
    Shall not my strength remain when thou art gone

    "The way of all blown dust?  Shall Beauty cease
    Upon my face because thy face grows gray?
    Behold, thine hours, even now, fade and decrease,

    "And thou hast got no wisdom; yet I say
    This thing there is to learn ere thou must go:
    _Have no sad thoughts of me upon the way_

    "_Thou takest home coming; for thy soul shall know_
    _The old glad things and sorrowful its share_
    _Until at last Time's legions overthrow_
    _The House thy days have builded unaware._"


    Now therefore am I joyful who have heard
    Earth's message plain to-day, and so I cry
    Aloud to you, O Comrades, her last word,

    That ye may be as wise and glad as I,
    And the long grasses, and the broad green leaves
    That beat against the far, unclouded sky:

    _Who worships me alway, who alway cleaves_
    _Close unto me till his last call rings clear_
    _Across the pathless wood,--his soul receives_
    _My peace continually and shall not fear._




                      A PRELUDE WRITTEN BY FRANCIS
                    SHERMAN IS PRIVATELY PRINTED FOR
                      HIM AND FOR HERBERT COPELAND
                    AND F. H. DAY AND THEIR FRIENDS
                        CHRISTMAS M D CCC XCVII






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PRELUDE ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/39797

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works to protect the
Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away - you may do practically _anything_ with public
domain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs
1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
